JLJBRARY 

UJMl VARSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA 
DAVIS 


THE  CONNOISSEUR'S  FEDERAL  EDI 
TION  OF  THE  WORKS  OF  ALEXANDER 
HAMILTON  IS  LIMITED  TO  FOUR  HUN 
DRED  SIGNED  AND  NUMBERED  SETS  OF 
WHICH  THIS  IS  NUMBER  _^£^ 

f>T£  tust*ta**^as(hrH>4 


ure 


xrf 


Thomas  Jefferson 

After  the  painting  by  Gilbert  Stuart 


fir* 


xrf 


The  Works  of 

Alexander  Hamilton 


Edited  by 

Henry  Cabot   Lodge 


"  The  sacred  rights  of  mankind  are  not  to  be  rummaged  for  among  old  parchments  or 
musty  records.  They  are  written,  as  with  a  sunbeam,  in  the  whole  volume  of  human  nature, 
by  the  hand  of  the  Divinity  itself,  and  can  never  be  erased  or  obscured  by  mortal  power." 

[HAMILTON—  The  Farmer  Refuted^  1775,  ^Et.  i8.J 

"  We  are  laboring  hard  to  establish  in  this  country  principles  more  and  more  national, 
and  free  from  all  foreign  ingredients,  so  that  we  may  be  neither  *  Greeks  nor  Trojans,'  but 
truly  Americans." — [HAMILTON  TO  KING,  1796,  /Et.  39.] 


Volume  IV 


G.  P.  Putnam's  Sons 

New  York  and  London 
ttbe  fsntcfcerbocher  prees 

1904 


LIBRARY 

UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA 
DAVIS 


TTbc  fmfcfeerbocfeer  pre«8»  flew  J2orfc 


CONTENTS 


COINAGE  AND  THE  MINT: 

HAMILTON  TO  JEFFERSON           ....  3 

ON  THE  ESTABLISHMENT  OF  A  MINT           .        .  3 

HAMILTON  TO  JEFFERSON 58 

HAMILTON  TO  WASHINGTON       ....  59 
INDUSTRY  AND  COMMERCE: 

FISHERIES.     HAMILTON  TO  GOODHUE        .         .  67 

MANUFACTURES 70 

IRON 164 

COPPER 169 

LEAD 170 

FOSSIL  COAL 171 

WOOD 172 

SKINS 172 

GRAIN 174 

FLAX  AND  HEMP 178 

COTTON 181 

WOOL 187 

SILK 188 

GLASS 189 

GUNPOWDER 190 

PAPER 190 

PRINTED  BOOKS  ......  191 

REFINED  SUGARS  AND  CHOCOLATE      .         .  192 

HAMILTON  TO  JEFFERSON 199 

COMMERCIAL  RELATIONS: 

OUTLINE   OF   SMITH'S   SPEECH   ON   MADISON'S 

RESOLUTIONS  OF  JANUARY  3,  1794      .         .  205 


iv  Contents 

PAGE 

FOREIGN  RELATIONS: 

SPEECH  ON  THE  TREATY  OP  PARIS  .  .  .  227 
LETTERS  FROM  PHOCION.  LETTER  i  .  .  230 
LETTERS  FROM  PHOCION.  LETTER  2  .  .  250 
SPEECH  ON  THE  REPEAL  OF  ALL  ACTS  INCON 
SISTENT  WITH  THE  TREATY  OF  PARIS  .  .  291 
HAMILTON  TO  WILLIAM  SHORT  ....  294 
HAMILTON  TO  WASHINGTON  ....  296 
HAMILTON  TO  WILLIAM  SHORT  ....  302 
HAMILTON  TO  WASHINGTON  .  .  .  .313 
HAMILTON  TO  JEFFERSON  .....  345 
WASHINGTON  TO  THE  PRESIDENT  OF  THE  NA 
TIONAL  ASSEMBLY  OF  FRANCE  .  .  .  349 

HAMILTON  TO  JEFFERSON 351 

HAMILTON  TO  WASHINGTON       ....  354 

HAMILTON  TO  JEFFERSON 354 

JEFFERSON  TO  HAMILTON 358 

HAMILTON  TO  JEFFERSON 359 

HAMILTON  TO  WASHINGTON       ....  362 

WASHINGTON  TO  HAMILTON       ....  366 

CABINET  OPINION 368 

HAMILTON  TO  WASHINGTON       ....  369 

HAMILTON  TO  JEFFERSON 417 

HAMILTON  TO  WASHINGTON       .         .         .         .418 
JEFFERSON  TO  WASHINGTON      .         .         .         .421 

HAMILTON  TO  WASHINGTON       ....  426 

HAMILTON  TO  JEFFERSON 428 

HAMILTON  TO  WASHINGTON       .        ,        ,        .431 

PACIFICUS                   , 432 


COINAGE  AND  THE  MINT 


VOL.  1V.-I. 


COINAGE  AND  THE  MINT 


HAMILTON    TO   JEFFERSON 

June  13,  1790. 

HPHE  Secretary  of  the  Treasury  has  the  honor  to  ac- 
*  knowledge  the  reception  of  the  Report  of  the  Sec 
retary  of  State  on  the  subject  of  measures,  weights, 
and  coins.  There  is  no  view  which  he  has  taken  of 
the  matter  which  stands  opposed  to  the  alteration 
of  the  money  unit  as  at  present  contemplated  by  the 
regulations  of  Congress,  either  in  the  way  suggested 
in  the  Report  or  in  that  mentioned  in  the  note  of 
yesterday.  And  there  are  certainly  strong  reasons 
to  render  a  correspondency  desirable.  The  idea  of 
a  general  standard  among  nations,  as  in  the  proposal 
of  the  Bishop  d'Autun,  seems  full  of  convenience  and 
order. 


ON   THE   ESTABLISHMENT   OF   A   MINT1 
Communicated  to  the  House  of  Representatives,  January  28,  1791. 

The  Secretary  of  the  Treasury  having  attentively 
considered  the  subject  referred  to  him  by  the  order 

1  The  chief  interest  of  this  very  able  report  centres  in  the  discussion 
of  the  comparative  merits  of  a  double  or  single  standard.  Hamilton 
decides  in  favor  of  the  former,  and  his  argument  has  a  very  present 
and  immediate  value.  It  is  needless  to  say  that  he,  of  course,  did  not 
favor  the  overvaluation  of  one  metal,  but  wished  as  exact  an  equality 
as  possible  to  be  maintained  between  gold  and  silver. 

3 


4  Alexander  Hamilton 

of  the  House  of  Representatives,  of  the  fifteenth  of 
April  last,  relatively  to  the  establishment  of  a  mint, 
most  respectfully  submits  the  result  of  his  inquiries 
and  reflections. 

A  plan  for  an  establishment  of  this  nature  in 
volves  a  great  variety  of  considerations — intricate, 
nice,  and  important.  The  general  state  of  debtor 
and  creditor;  all  the  relations  and  consequences  of 
price;  the  essential  interests  of  trade  and  industry; 
the  value  of  all  property;  the  whole  income,  both  of 
the  state  and  of  individuals,  are  liable  to  be  sensibly 
influenced,  beneficially  or  otherwise,  by  the  judicious 
or  injudicious  regulation  of  this  interesting  object. 

It  is  one,  likewise,  not  more  necessary  than  diffi 
cult  to  be  rightly  adjusted ;  one  which  has  frequently 
occupied  the  reflections  and  researches  of  politicians, 
without  having  harmonized  their  opinions  on  some 
of  the  most  important  of  the  principles  which  enter 
into  its  discussion.  Accordingly,  different  systems 
continue  to  be  advocated,  and  the  systems  of  different 
nations,  after  much  investigation,  continue  to  differ 
from  each  other. 

But,  if  a  right  adjustment  of  the  matter  be  truly 
of  such  nicety  and  difficulty,  a  question  naturally 
arises,  whether  it  may  not  be  most  advisable  to  leave 
things,  in  this  respect,  in  the  state  in  which  they  are. 
Why,  might  it  be  asked,  since  they  have  so  long 
proceeded  in  a  train  which  has  caused  no  general 
sensation  of  inconvenience,  should  alterations  be  at 
tempted,  the  precise  effect  of  which  cannot  with  cer 
tainty  be  calculated? 

The  answer  to  this  question  is  not  perplexing. 


Coinage  and  the  Mint  5 

The  immense  disorder  which  actually  reigns  in  so 
delicate  and  important  a  concern,  and  the  still 
greater  disorder  which  is  every  moment  possible, 
call  loudly  for  a  reform.  The  dollar  originally  con 
templated  in  the  money  transactions  of  this  country, 
by  successive  diminutions  of  its  weight  and  fineness, 
has  sustained  a  depreciation  of  five  per  cent.,  and  yet 
the  new  dollar  has  a  currency,  in  all  payments  in 
place  of  the  old,  with  scarcely  any  attention  to  the 
difference  between  them.  The  operation  of  this  in 
depreciating  the  value  of  property,  depending  upon 
past  contracts,  and  (as  far  as  inattention  to  the 
alteration  in  the  coin  may  be  supposed  to  leave 
prices  stationary)  of  all  other  property,  is  apparent. 
Nor  can  it  require  argument  to  prove  that  a  nation 
ought  not  to  suffer  the  value  of  the  property  of  its 
citizens  to  fluctuate  with  the  fluctuations  of  a  foreign 
mint,  and  to  change  with  the  changes  in  the  regula 
tions  of  a  foreign  sovereign.  This,  nevertheless,  is 
the  condition  of  one  which,  having  no  coins  of  its 
own,  adopts  with  implicit  confidence  those  of  other 
countries. 

The  unequal  values  allowed  in  different  parts  of 
the  Union  to  coins  of  the  same  intrinsic  worth,  the 
defective  species  of  them  which  embarrass  the  circula 
tion  of  some  of  the  States,  and  the  dissimilarity  in 
their  several  moneys  of  account,  are  inconveniences 
which,  if  not  to  be  ascribed  to  the  want  of  a  national 
coinage,  will  at  least  be  most  effectually  remedied  by 
the  establishment  of  one — a  measure  that  will,  at 
the  same  time,  give  additional  security  against  im 
positions  by  counterfeit  as  well  as  by  base  currencies. 


6  Alexander  Hamilton 

It  was  with  great  reason,  therefore,  that  the  atten 
tion  of  Congress,  tinder  the  late  Confederation,  was 
repeatedly  drawn  to  the  establishment  of  a  mint; 
and  it  is  with  equal  reason  that  the  subject  has  been 
resumed,  now  that  the  favorable  change  which  has 
taken  place  in  the  situation  of  public  affairs  admits 
of  its  being  carried  into  execution. 

But  though  the  difficulty  of  devising  a  proper 
establishment  ought  not  to  deter  from  undertaking 
so  necessary  a  work,  yet  it  cannot  but  inspire  diffi 
dence  in  one,  whose  duty  it  is  made  to  propose  a  plan 
for  the  purpose,  and  may  perhaps  be  permitted  to  be 
relied  upon  as  some  excuse  for  any  errors  which  may 
be  chargeable  upon  it,  or  for  any  deviations  from 
sounder  principles  which  may  have  been  suggested 
by  others,  or  even  in  part  acted  upon  by  the  former 
Government  of  the  United  States. 

In  order  to  a  right  judgment  of  what  ought  to  be 
done,  the  following  particulars  require  to  be  dis 
cussed. 

i  st.  What  ought  to  be  the  nature  of  the  money 
unit  of  the  United  States? 

2d.  What  the  proportion  between  gold  and  silver, 
if  coins  of  both  metals  are  to  be  established  ? 

3d.  What  the  proportion  and  composition  of  alloy 
in  each  kind? 

4th.  Whether  the  expense  of  coinage  shall  be  de 
frayed  by  the  government,  or  out  of  the  material 
itself? 

5th.  What  shall  be  the  number,  denominations, 
sizes,  and  devices  of  the  coins? 

6th.  Whether  foreign  coins  shall  be  permitted  to 


Coinage  and  the  Mint  7 

be  current  or  not;  if  the  former,  at  what  rate,  and 
for  what  period? 

A  prerequisite  to  determining  with  propriety  what 
ought  to  be  the  money  unit  of  the  United  States,  is 
to  endeavor  to  form  as  accurate  an  idea  as  the  nature 
of  the  case  will  admit,  of  what  it  actually  is.  The 
pound,  though  of  various  value,  is  the  unit  in  the 
money  account  of  all  the  States.  But  it  is  not 
equally  easy  to  pronounce  what  is  to  be  considered 
as  the  unit  in  the  coins.  There  being  no  formal 
regulation  on  the  point  (the  resolutions  of  Congress 
of  the  6th  July,  1785,  and  8th  of  August,  1786,  hav 
ing  never  yet  been  carried  into  operation),  it  can 
only  be  inferred  from  usage  or  practice.  The  man 
ner  of  adjusting  foreign  exchanges  would  seem  to 
indicate  the  dollar  as  best  entitled  to  that  character. 
In  these  the  old  piaster  of  Spain,  or  old  Seville  piece 
of  eight  reals,  of  the  value  of  four  shillings  and  six 
pence  sterling,  is  evidently  contemplated.  The  com 
puted  par  between  Great  Britain  and  Pennsylvania 
will  serve  as  an  example.  According  to  that,  one 
hundred  pounds  sterling  is  equal  to  one  hundred  and 
sixty-six  pounds  and  two  thirds  of  a  pound,  Penn 
sylvania  currency,  which  corresponds  with  the  pro 
portion  between  43.  6d.  sterling  and  75.  6d.,  the 
current  value  of  the  dollar  in  that  State  by  invari 
able  usage.  And,  as  far  as  the  information  of  the 
Secretary  goes,  the  same  comparison  holds  in  the 
other  States. 

But  this  circumstance  in  favor  of  the  dollar  loses 
much  of  its  weight  from  two  considerations.  That 
species  of  coin  has  never  had  any  settled  or  standard 


8  Alexander  Hamilton 

value,  according  to  weight  or  fineness,  but  has  been 
permitted  to  circulate  by  tale,  without  regard  to 
either,  very  much  as  a  mere  money  of  convenience, 
while  gold  has  had  a  fixed  price  by  weight,  and  with 
an  eye  to  its  fineness.  This  greater  stability  of 
value  of  the  gold  coins  is  an  argument  of  force  for 
regarding  the  money  unit  as  having  been  hitherto 
virtually  attached  to  gold,  rather  than  to  silver. 

Twenty-four  grains  and  six  eighths  of  a  grain  of 
fine  gold  have  corresponded  with  the  nominal  value 
of  the  dollar  in  the  several  States,  without  regard  to 
the  successive  diminutions  of  its  intrinsic  worth. 

But,  if  the  dollar  should,  nothwithstanding,  be 
supposed  to  have  the  best  title  to  being  considered 
as  the  present  unit  in  the  coins,  it  would  remain  to 
determine  what  kind  of  dollar  ought  to  be  under 
stood;  or,  in  other  words,  what  precise  quantity  of 
fine  silver. 

The  old  piaster  of  Spain,  which  appears  to  have 
regulated  our  foreign  exchanges,  weighed  17  dwt.  12 
grains,  and  contained  386  grains  and  15  mites  of  fine 
silver.  But  this  piece  has  been  long  since  out  of 
circulation.  The  dollars  now  in  common  currency 
are  of  recent  date,  and  much  inferior  to  that,  both  in 
weight  and  fineness.  The  average  weight  of  them, 
upon  different  trials,  in  large  masses,  has  been  found 
to  be  17  dwt.  8  grains.  Their  fineness  is  less  pre 
cisely  ascertained;  the  results  of  various  assays, 
made  by  different  persons,  under  the  direction  of 
the  late  Superintendent  of  Finances  and  of  the  Sec 
retary,  being  as  various  as  the  assays  themselves. 
The  difference  between  their  extremes  is  not  less 


Coinage  and  the  Mint  9 

than  24  grains  in  a  dollar  of  the  same  weight  and  age, 
which  is  too  much  for  any  probable  differences  in  the 
pieces.  It  is  rather  to  be  presumed,  that  a  degree 
of  inaccuracy  has  been  occasioned  by  the  want  of 
proper  apparatus  and,  in  general,  of  practice.  The 
experiment  which  appears  to  have  the  best  preten 
sions  to  exactness  would  make  the  new  dollar  to 
contain  370  grains  and  933  thousandth  parts  of  a 
grain  of  pure  silver. 

According  to  an  authority  on  which  the  Secretary 
places  reliance,  the  standard  of  Spain  for  its  silver 
coin,  in  the  year  1761,  was  261  parts  fine  and  27 
parts  alloy,  at  which  proportion  a  dollar  of  17  dwt. 
8  grains  would  consist  of  377  grains  of  fine  silver  and 
39  grains  of  alloy.  But  there  is  no  question  that 
this  standard  has  been  since  altered  considerably 
for  the  worse — to  what  precise  point  is  not  as  well 
ascertained  as  could  be  wished;  but,  from  the  com 
putation  of  the  value  of  dollars  in  the  markets  both 
of  Amsterdam  and  London  (a  criterion  which  cannot 
materially  mislead),  the  new  dollar  appears  to  con 
tain  about  368  grains  of  fine  silver,  and  that  which 
immediately  preceded  it  about  374  grains. 

In  this  state  of  things,  there  is  some  difficulty  in 
defining  the  dollar  which  is  to  be  understood  as 
constituting  the  present  money  unit,  on  the  supposi 
tion  of  its  being  most  applicable  to  that  species  of 
coin.  The  old  Seville  piece  of  386  grains  and  15 
mites  fine,  comports  best  with  the  computations  of 
foreign  exchanges,  and  with  the  more  ancient  con 
tracts  respecting  landed  property ;  but  far  the  greater 
number  of  contracts  still  in  operation  concerning 


io  Alexander  Hamilton 

that  kind  of  property,  and  all  those  of  a  merely  per 
sonal  nature,  now  in  force,  must  be  referred  to  a 
dollar  of  a  different  kind.  The  actual  dollar,  at  the 
time  of  contracting,  is  the  only  one  which  can  be  sup 
posed  to  have  been  intended;  and  it  has  been  seen 
that,  as  long  ago  as  the  year  1761,  there  had  been  a 
material  degradation  of  the  standard.  And  even  in 
regard  to  the  more  ancient  contracts,  no  person  has 
ever  had  any  idea  of  a  scruple  about  receiving  the 
dollar  of  the  day  as  a  full  equivalent  for  the  nominal 
sum  which  the  dollar  originally  imported. 

A  recurrence,  therefore,  to  the  ancient  dollar  would 
be  in  the  greatest  number  of  cases  an  innovation  in 
fact,  and  in  all,  an  innovation  in  respect  to  opinion. 
The  actual  dollar  in  common  circulation  has  evi 
dently  a  much  better  claim  to  be  regarded  as  the 
actual  money  unit. 

The  mean  intrinsic  value  of  the  different  kinds  of 
known  dollars  has  been  intimated  as  affording  the 
proper  criterion.  But,  when  it  is  recollected  that 
the  more  ancient  and  more  valuable  ones  are  not 
now  to  be  met  with  at  all  in  circulation,  and  that  the 
mass  of  those  generally  current  is  composed  of  the 
newest  and  most  inferior  kinds,  it  will  be  perceived 
that  even  an  equation  of  that  nature  would  be  a 
considerable  innovation  upon  the  real  present  state 
of  things;  which  it  will  certainly  be  prudent  to  ap 
proach,  as  far  as  may  be  consistent  with  the  per 
manent  order  designed  to  be  introduced. 

An  additional  reason  for  considering  the  prevailing 
dollar  as  the  standard  of  the  present  money  unit, 
rather  than  the  ancient  one,  is,  that  it  will  not  only  be 


Coinage  and  the  Mint  n 

conformable  to  the  true  existing  proportion  between 
the  two  metals  in  this  country,  but  will  be  more  con 
formable  to  that  which  obtains  in  the  commercial 
world  generally. 

The  difference  established  by  custom  in  the 
United  States  between  coined  gold  and  coined  silver 
has  been  stated  upon  another  occasion  to  be  nearly 
as  i  to  15.6.  This,  if  truly  the  case,  would  imply 
that  gold  was  extremely  overvalued  in  the  United 
States;  for  the  highest  actual  proportion  in  any  part 
of  Europe,  very  little,  if  at  all,  exceeds  i  to  15,  and 
the  average  proportion  throughout  Europe  is  prob 
ably  not  more  than  about  i  to  14  4/5.  But  that 
statement  has  proceeded  upon  the  idea  of  the  an 
cient  dollar.  One  pennyweight  of  gold  of  twenty- 
two  carats  fine,  at  6s.  &d.,  and  the  old  Seville  piece 
of  386  grains  and  15  mites  of  pure  silver,  at  75.  6d., 
furnish  the  exact  ratio  of  i  to  15.6262.  But  this 
does  not  coincide  with  the  real  difference  between 
the  metals  in  our  market,  or,  which  is  with  us  the 
same  thing,  in  our  currency.  To  determine  this, 
the  quantity  of  fine  silver  in  the  general  mass  of 
the  dollars  now  in  circulation  must  afford  the  rule. 
Taking  the  rate  of  the  late  dollar  of  374  grains,  the 
proportion  would  be  as  i  to  15.11.  Taking  the  rate 
of  the  newest  dollar,  the  proportion  would  then  be 
as  i  to  14.87.  The  mean  of  the  two  would  give  the 
proportion  of  i  to  15  very  nearly:  less  than  the  legal 
proportions  in  the  coins  of  Great  Britain,  which  is  as 
i  to  15.2;  but  somewhat  more  than  the  actual  or 
market  proportion,  which  is  not  quite  i  to  15. 

The  preceding  view  of  the  subject  does  not  indeed 


12  Alexander  Hamilton 

afford  a  precise  or  certain  definition  of  the  present 
unit  in  the  coins,  but  it  furnishes  data  which  will 
serve  as  guides  in  the  progress  of  the  investigation. 
It  ascertains,  at  least,  that  the  sum  in  the  money  of 
account  of  each  State,  corresponding  with  the  nomi 
nal  value  of  the  dollar  in  such  State,  corresponds  also 
with  24  grains  and  6/8  of  a  grain  of  fine  gold,  and 
with  something  between  368  and  374  grains  of  fine 
silver. 

The  next  inquiry  towards  a  right  determination  of 
what  ought  to  be  the  future  money  unit  of  the  United 
States  turns  upon  these  questions :  Whether  it  ought 
to  be  peculiarly  attached  to  either  of  the  metals,  in 
preference  to  the  other,  or  not ;  and,  if  to  either,  to 
which  of  them? 

The  suggestions  and  proceedings,  hitherto,  have 
had  for  object,  the  annexing  of  it  emphatically  to  the 
silver  dollar.  A  resolution  of  Congress,  of  the  6th 
of  July,  1785,  declares  that  the  money  unit  of  the 
United  States  shall  be  a  dollar;  and  another  resolu 
tion  of  the  8th  of  August,  1786,  fixes  that  dollar  at 
375  grains  and  64  hundredths  of  a  grain  of  fine  silver. 
The  same  resolution,  however,  determines  that  there 
shall  also  be  two  gold  coins,  one  of  246  grains  and 
268  parts  of  a  grain  of  pure  gold,  equal  to  ten  dollars, 
and  the  other  of  half  that  quantity  of  pure  gold, 
equal  to  five  dollars.  And  it  is  not  explained, 
whether  either  of  the  two  species  of  coins,  of  gold  or 
silver,  shall  have  any  greater  legality  in  payments 
than  the  other.  Yet  it  would  seem  that  a  preference 
in  this  particular  is  necessary  to  execute  the  idea  of 
attaching  the  unit  exclusively  to  one  kind.  If  each 


Coinage  and  the  Mint  13 

of  them  be  as  valid  as  the  other,  in  payments  to  any 
amount,  it  is  not  obvious  in  what  effectual  sense 
either  of  them  can  be  deemed  the  money  unit  rather 
than  the  other. 

If  the  general  declaration,  that  the  dollar  shall  be 
the  money  unit  of  the  United  States,  could  be  under 
stood  to  give  it  a  superior  legality  in  payments,  the 
institution  of  coins  of  gold,  and  the  declaration  that 
each  of  them  shall  be  equal  to  a  certain  number  of 
dollars,  would  appear  to  destroy  that  inference. 
And  the  circumstance  of  making  the  dollar  the  unit 
in  the  money  of  account,  seems  to  be  rather  matter 
of  form  than  of  substance. 

Contrary  to  the  ideas  which  have  heretofore  pre 
vailed,  in  the  suggestions  concerning  a  coinage  for 
the  United  States,  though  not  without  much  hesita 
tion,  arising  from  a  deference  for  those  ideas,  the 
Secretary  is,  upon  the  whole,  strongly  inclined  to 
the  opinion,  that  a  preference  ought  to  be  given  to 
neither  of  the  metals,  for  the  money  unit.  Perhaps, 
if  either  were  to  be  preferred,  it  ought  to  be  gold 
rather  than  silver. 

The  reasons  are  these: 

The  inducement  to  such  a  preference  is  to  render 
the  unit  as  little  variable  as  possible;  because  on 
this  depends  the  steady  value  of  all  contracts,  and, 
in  a  certain  sense,  of  all  other  property.  And,  it  is 
truly  observed,  that  if  the  unit  belong  indiscrimin 
ately  to  both  the  metals,  it  is  subject  to  all  the  fluc 
tuations  that  happen  in  the  relative  value  which 
they  bear  to  each  other.  But  the  same  reason 
would  lead  to  annexing  it  to  that  particular  one, 


1 4  Alexander  Hamilton 

which  is  itself  the  least  liable  to  variation,  if  there 
be,  in  this  respect,  any  discernible  difference  between 
the  two. 

Gold  may,  perhaps,  in  certain  senses,  be  said  to 
have  greater  stability  than  silver:  as,  being  of  su 
perior  value,  less  liberties  have  been  taken  with  it, 
in  the  regulations  of  different  countries.  Its  stand 
ard  has  remained  more  uniform,  and  it  has,  in  other 
respects,  undergone  fewer  changes:  as,  being  not  so 
much  an  article  of  merchandise,  owing  to  the  use  made 
of  silver  in  the  trade  with  the  East  Indies  and  China, 
it  is  less  liable  to  be  influenced  by  circumstances  of 
commercial  demand.  And  if,  reasoning  by  analogy, 
it  could  be  affirmed  that  there  is  a  physical  proba 
bility  of  greater  proportional  increase  in  the  quantity 
of  silver  than  in  that  of  gold,  it  would  afford  an  addi 
tional  reason  for  calculating  on  greater  steadiness  in 
the  value  of  the  latter. 

As  long  as  gold,  either  from  its  intrinsic  superiority 
as  a  metal,  from  its  greater  rarity,  or  from  the  pre 
judices  of  mankind,  retains  so  considerable  a  pre 
eminence  in  value  over  silver,  as  it  has  hitherto  had, 
a  natural  consequence  of  this  seems  to  be  that  its 
condition  will  be  more  stationary.  The  revolutions, 
therefore,  which  may  take  place  in  the  comparative 
value  of  gold  and  silver,  will  be  changes  in  the  state 
of  the  latter,  rather  than  in  that  of  the  former. 

If  there  should  be  an  appearance  of  too  much  ab 
straction  in  any  of  these  ideas,  it  may  be  remarked, 
that  the  first  and  most  simple  impressions  do  not 
naturally  incline  to  giving  a  preference  to  the  in 
ferior  or  less  valuable  of  the  two  metals. 


Coinage  and  the  Mint  15 

It  is  sometimes  observed,  that  silver  ought  to  be 
encouraged  rather  than  gold,  as  being  more  con 
ducive  to  the  extension  of  bank  circulation,  from  the 
greater  difficulty  and  inconvenience  which  its  greater 
bulk,  compared  with  its  value,  occasions  in  the  trans 
portation  of  it.  But  bank  circulation  is  desirable, 
rather  as  an  auxiliary  to,  than  as  a  substitute  for, 
that  of  the  precious  metals,  and  ought  to  be  left 
to  its  natural  course.  Artificial  expedients  to  ex 
tend  it,  by  opposing  obstacles  to  the  other,  are,  at 
least,  not  recommended  by  any  very  obvious  advan 
tages.  And,  in  general,  it  is  the  safest  rule  to  regu 
late  every  particular  institution  or  object,  according 
to  the  principles  which,  in  relation  to  itself,  appear 
the  most  sound.  In  addition  to  this,  it  may  be  ob 
served,  that  the  inconvenience  of  transporting  either 
of  the  metals  is  sufficiently  great  to  induce  a  pre 
ference  of  bank  paper,  whenever  it  can  be  made  to 
answer  the  purpose  equally  well. 

But,  upon  the  whole,  it  seems  to  be  most  advisable, 
as  has  been  observed,  not  to  attach  the  unit  ex 
clusively  to  either  of  the  metals ;  because  this  cannot 
be  done  effectually,  without  destroying  the  office 
and  character  of  one  of  them  as  money,  and  reducing 
it  to  the  situation  of  a  mere  merchandise ;  which,  ac 
cordingly,  at  different  times,  has  been  proposed  from 
different  and  very  respectable  quarters;  but  which 
would,  probably,  be  a  greater  evil  than  occasional 
variations  in  the  unit,  from  the  fluctuations  in  the 
relative  value  of  the  metals;  especially,  if  care  be 
taken  to  regulate  the  proportion  between  them, 
with  an  eye  to  their  average  commercial  value. 


1 6  Alexander  Hamilton 

To  annul  the  use  of  either  of  the  metals  as  money, 
is  to  abridge  the  quantity  of  circulating  medium, 
and  is  liable  to  all  the  objections  which  arise  from  a 
comparison  of  the  benefits  of  a  full,  with  the  evils  of 
a  scanty  circulation. 

It  is  not  a  satisfactory  answer  to  say,  that  none 
but  the  favored  metal  would,  in  this  case,  find  its 
way  into  the  country,  as  in  that  all  balances  must  be 
paid.  The  practicability  of  this  would,  in  some 
measure,  depend  on  the  abundance  or  scarcity  of  it 
in  the  country  paying.  Where  there  was  but  little, 
it  either  would  not  be  procurable  at  all,  or  it  would 
cost  a  premium  to  obtain  it ;  which,  in  every  case  of 
a  competition  with  others,  in  a  branch  of  trade, 
would  constitute  a  deduction  from  the  profits  of  the 
party  receiving.  Perhaps,  too,  the  embarrassments 
which  such  a  circumstance  might  sometimes  create, 
in  the  pecuniary  liquidation  of  balances,  might  lead 
to  additional  efforts  to  find  a  substitute  in  com 
modities,  and  might  so  far  impede  the  introduction 
of  the  metals.  Neither  could  the  exclusion  of  either 
of  them  be  deemed,  in  other  respects,  favorable  to 
commerce.  It  is  often,  in  the  course  of  trade,  as 
desirable  to  possess  the  kind  of  money,  as  the  kind 
of  commodities,  best  adapted  to  a  foreign  market. 

It  seems,  however,  most  probable,  that  the  chief, 
if  not  the  sole  effect  of  such  a  regulation  would  be 
to  diminish  the  utility  of  one  of  the  metals.  It 
could  hardly  prove  an  obstacle  to  the  introduction 
of  that  which  was  excluded  in  the  natural  course  of 
trade;  because  it  would  always  command  a  ready 
sale,  for  the  purpose  of  exportation  to  foreign  mar- 


Coinage  and  the  Mint  17 

kets.  But  such  an  effect,  if  the  only  one,  is  not  to 
be  regarded  as  a  trivial  inconvenience. 

If,  then,  the  unit  ought  not  to  be  attached  ex 
clusively  to  either  of  the  metals,  the  proportion 
which  ought  to  subsist  between  them,  in  the  coins, 
becomes  a  preliminary  inquiry,  in  order  to  its  proper 
adjustment.  This  proportion  appears  to  be,  in  sev 
eral  views,  of  no  inconsiderable  moment. 

One  consequence  of  overvaluing  either  metal,  in 
respect  to  the  other,  is  the  banishment  of  that  which 
is  undervalued.  If  two  countries  are  supposed,  in 
one  of  which  the  proportion  of  gold  to  silver  is  as  i 
to  1 6,  in  the  other  as  i  to  15,  gold  being  worth  more, 
silver  less,  in  one  than  in  the  other,  it  is  manifest 
that,  in  their  reciprocal  payments,  each  will  select 
that  species  which  it  values  least,  to  pay  to  the 
other,  where  it  is  valued  most.  Besides  this,  the 
dealers  in  money  will,  from  the  same  cause,  often 
find  a  profitable  traffic  in  an  exchange  of  the  metals 
between  the  two  countries.  And  hence  it  would 
come  to  pass,  if  other  things  were  equal,  that  the 
greatest  part  of  the  gold  would  be  collected  in  one, 
and  the  greatest  part  of  the  silver  in  the  other.  The 
course  of  trade  might,  in  some  degree,  counteract 
the  tendency  of  the  difference  in  the  legal  proportions, 
by  the  market  value ;  but  this  is  so  far  and  so  often 
influenced  by  the  legal  rates,  that  it  does  not  pre 
vent  their  producing  the  effect  which  is  inferred. 
Facts,  too,  verify  the  inference:  In  Spain  and  Eng 
land,  where  gold  is  rated  higher  than  in  other  parts 
of  Europe,  there  is  a  scarcity  of  silver;  while  it  is 
found  to  abound  in  France  and  Holland,  where  it  is 


VOL.  IV.-2. 


1 8  Alexander  Hamilton 

rated  higher,  in  proportion  to  gold,  than  in  the 
neighboring  nations.  And  it  is  continually  flowing 
from  Europe  to  China  and  the  East  Indies,  owing 
to  the  comparative  cheapness  of  it  in  the  former, 
and  dearness  of  it  in  the  latter. 

This  consequence  is  deemed  by  some  not  very 
material;  and  there  are  even  persons  who,  from  a 
fanciful  predilection  to  gold,  are  willing  to  invite  it, 
even  by  a  higher  price.  But  general  utility  will  best 
be  promoted  by  a  due  proportion  of  both  metals- 
If  gold  be  most  convenient  in  large  payments,  silver 
is  best  adapted  to  the  more  minute  and  ordinary 
circulation. 

But  it  is  to  be  suspected  that  there  is  another  con 
sequence  more  serious  than  the  one  which  has  been 
mentioned.  This  is  the  diminution  of  the  total 
quantity  of  specie  which  a  country  would  naturally 
possess. 

It  is  evident  that,  as  often  as  a  country,  which 
over-rates  either  of  the  metals,  receives  a  payment 
in  that  metal,  it  gets  a  less  actual  quantity  than  it 
ought  to  do,  or  than  it  would  do,  if  the  rate  were  a 
just  one. 

It  is  also  equally  evident  that  there  will  be  a  con 
tinual  effort  to  make  payment  to  it  in  that  species 
to  which  it  has  annexed  an  exaggerated  estimation, 
wherever  it  is  current  at  a  less  proportional  value. 
And  it  would  seem  to  be  a  very  natural  effect  of  these 
two  causes,  not  only  that  the  mass  of  the  precious 
metals  in  the  country  in  question  would  consist 
chiefly  of  that  kind  to  which  it  had  given  an  extra 
ordinary  value,  but  that  it  would  be  absolutely  less 


Coinage  and  the  Mint  19 

than  if  they  had  been  duly  proportioned  to  each 
other. 

A  conclusion  of  this  sort,  however,  is  to  be  drawn 
with  great  caution.  In  such  matters  there  are 
always  some  local  and  many  other  particular  cir 
cumstances,  which  qualify  and  vary  the  operation 
of  general  principles,  even  where  they  are  just;  and 
there  are  endless  combinations,  very  difficult  to 
be  analyzed,  which  often  render  principles,  that 
have  the  most  plausible  pretensions,  unsound  and 
delusive. 

There  ought,  for  instance,  according  to  those 
which  have  been  stated,  to  have  been  formerly  a 
greater  quantity  of  gold  in  proportion  to  silver  in 
the  United  States  than  there  has  been ;  because  the 
actual  value  of  gold  in  this  country,  compared  with 
silver,  was  perhaps  higher  than  in  any  other.  But 
our  situation  with  regard  to  the  West  Indian  islands, 
into  some  of  which  there  is  a  large  influx  of  silver 
directly  from  the  mines  of  South  America,  occasions 
an  extraordinary  supply  of  that  metal,  and  con 
sequently  a  greater  proportion  of  it  in  our  circula 
tion  than  might  have  been  expected  from  its  relative 
value. 

What  influence  the  proportion  under  considera 
tion  may  have  upon  the  state  of  prices,  and  how  far 
this  may  counteract  its  tendency  to  increase  or 
lessen  the  quantity  of  the  metals,  are  points  not 
easy  to  be  developed;  and  yet  they  are  very  neces 
sary  to  an  accurate  judgment  of  the  true  operation 
of  the  thing. 

But,  however  impossible  it  may  be  to  pronounce 


20  Alexander  Hamilton 

with  certainty  that  the  possession  of  a  less  quantity 
of  specie  is  a  consequence  of  overvaluing  either  of 
the  metals,  there  is  enough  of  probability  in  the 
considerations  which  seem  to  indicate  it,  to  form  an 
argument  of  weight  against  such  overvaluation. 

A  third  ill  consequence  resulting  from  it  is  a  greater 
and  more  frequent  disturbance  of  the  state  of  the 
money  unit  by  a  greater  and  more  frequent  diversity 
between  the  legal  and  market  proportions  of  the 
metals.  This  has  not  hitherto  been  experienced  in 
the  United  States,  but  it  has  been  experienced  else 
where  ;  and  from  its  not  having  been  felt  by  us 
hitherto,  it  does  not  follow  that  this  will  not  be  the 
case  hereafter,  when  our  commerce  shall  have  at 
tained  a  maturity  which  will  place  it  under  the  in 
fluence  of  more  fixed  principles. 

In  establishing  a  proportion  between  the  metals, 
there  seems  to  be  an  option  of  one  of  two  things: 

To  approach,  as  nearly  as  can  be  ascertained,  the 
mean  or  average  proportion,  in  what  may  be  called 
the  commercial  world;  or, 

To  retain  that  which  now  exists  in  the  United 
States. 

As  far  as  these  happen  to  coincide,  they  will  ren 
der  the  course  to  be  pursued  more  plain  and  more 
certain. 

To  ascertain  the  first,  with  precision,  would  re 
quire  better  materials  than  are  possessed,  or  than 
could  be  obtained,  without  an  inconvenient  delay. 

Sir  Isaac  Newton,  in  a  representation  to  the 
treasury  of  Great  Britain,  in  the  year  1717,  after 
stating  the  particular  proportions  in  the  different 


Coinage  and  the  Mint  21 

countries  of  Europe,  concludes  thus: — "  By  the 
course  of  trade  and  exchange  between  nation  and 
nation,  in  all  Europe,  fine  gold  is  to  fine  silver  as 
14  4/5  or  15  to  i." 

But  however  accurate  and  decisive  this  authority 
may  be  deemed,  in  relation  to  the  period  to  which 
it  applies,  it  cannot  be  taken,  at  the  distance  of 
more  than  seventy  years,  as  a  rule  for  determining 
the  existing  proportion.  Alterations  have  been 
since  made,  in  the  regulations  of  their  coins,  by 
several  nations ;  which,  as  well  as  the  course  of  trade, 
have  an  influence  upon  the  market  values.  Never 
theless,  there  is  reason  to  believe  that  the  state  of 
the  matter,  as  represented  by  Sir  Isaac  Newton,  is 
not  very  remote  from  its  actual  state. 

In  Holland,  the  greatest  money  market  of  Europe, 
gold  was  to  silver,  in  December,  1789,  as  i  to  14.88; 
and  in  that  of  London,  it  has  been,  for  some  time 
past,  but  little  different,  approaching,  perhaps,  some 
thing  nearer  i  to  15. 

It  has  been  seen  that  the  existing  proportion  be 
tween  the  two  metals,  in  this  country,  is  about  as  i 
to  15. 

It  is  fortunate,  in  this  respect,  that  the  innova 
tions  of  the  Spanish  mint  have  imperceptibly  in 
troduced  a  proportion  so  analogous,  as  this  is,  to 
that  which  prevails  among  the  principal  commercial 
nations,  as  it  greatly  facilitates  a  proper  regulation 
of  the  matter. 

This  proportion  of  i  to  15  is  recommended  by  the 
particular  situation  of  our  trade,  as  being  very 
nearly  that  which  obtains  in  the  market  of  Great 


22  Alexander  Hamilton 

Britain,  to  which  nation  our  specie  is  principally 
exported.  A  lower  rate  for  either  of  the  metals,  in 
our  market,  than  in  hers,  might  not  only  afford  a 
motive  the  more,  in  certain  cases,  to  remit  in  specie 
rather  than  in  commodities;  but  it  might,  in  some 
others,  cause  us  to  pay  a  greater  quantity  of  it  for  a 
given  sum  than  we  should  otherwise  do.  If  the 
effect  should  rather  be  to  occasion  a  premium  to  be 
given  for  the  metal  which  was  underrated,  this  would 
obviate  those  disadvantages,  but  it  would  involve 
another — a  customary  difference  between  the  market 
and  legal  proportions,  which  would  amount  to  a 
species  of  disorder  in  the  national  coinage. 

Looking  forward  to  the  payments  of  interest  here 
after  to  be  made  to  Holland,  the  same  proportion 
does  not  appear  ineligible.  The  present  legal  pro 
portion  in  the  coins  of  Holland  is  stated  to  be  i  to 
14  9/10.  That  of  the  market  varies  somewhat,  at 
different  times,  but  seldom  very  widely,  from  this 
point. 

There  can  hardly  be  a  better  rule,  in  any  country, 
for  the  legal,  than  the  market  proportion,  if  this  can 
be  supposed  to  have  been  produced  by  the  free  and 
steady  course  of  commercial  principles.  The  pre 
sumption,  in  such  case,  is,  that  each  metal  finds  its 
true  level,  according  to  its  intrinsic  utility  in  the 
general  system  of  money  operations. 

But  it  must  be  admitted  that  this  argument,  in 
favor  of  continuing  the  existing  proportion,  is  not 
applicable  to  the  state  of  the  coins  with  us.  There 
have  been  too  many  artificial  and  heterogeneous  in 
gredients,  too  much  want  of  order  in  the  pecuniary 


Coinage  and  the  Mint  23 

transactions  of  this  country,  to  authorize  the  at 
tributing  the  effects  which  have  appeared  to  the 
regular  operations  of  commerce.  A  proof  of  this  is 
to  be  drawn  from  the  alterations  which  have  hap 
pened  in  the  proportion  between  the  metals  merely 
by  the  successive  degradations  of  the  dollar,  in  con 
sequence  of  the  mutability  of  a  foreign  mint.  The 
value  of  gold  to  silver  appears  to  have  declined 
wholly  from  this  cause,  from  15  6/10  to  about  15  to 
i.  Yet,  as  this  last  proportion,  however  produced, 
coincides  so  nearly  with  what  may  be  deemed  the 
commercial  average,  it  may  be  supposed  to  furnish  as 
good  a  rule  as  can  be  pursued. 

The  only  question  seems  to  be,  whether  the  value 
of  gold  ought  not  to  be  a  little  lowered  to  bring  it  to 
a  more  exact  level  with  the  two  markets  which  have 
been  mentioned.  But  as  the  ratio  of  i  to  15  is  so 
nearly  conformable  to  the  state  of  those  markets, 
and  best  agrees  with  that  of  our  own,  it  will  probably 
be  found  the  most  eligible.  If  the  market  of  Spain 
continues  to  give  a  higher  value  to  gold  (as  it  has 
done  in  time  past)  than  that  which  is  recommended, 
there  may  be  some  advantage  in  a  middle  station. 

A  further  preliminary  to  the  adjustment  of  the 
future  money  unit,  is,  to  determine  what  shall  be  the 
proportion  and  composition  of  alloy  in  each  species 
of  the  coins. 

The  first,  by  the  resolution  of  the  8th  of  August, 
1786,  before  referred  to,  is  regulated  at  one-twelfth, 
or,  in  other  words,  at  i  part  alloy  to  n  parts  fine, 
whether  gold  or  silver;  which  appears  to  be  a  con 
venient  rule;  unless  there  should  be  some  collateral 


24  Alexander  Hamilton 

consideration  which  may  dictate  a  departure  from 
it.  Its  correspondency,  in  regard  to  both  metals,  is 
a  recommendation  of  it,  because  a  difference  could 
answer  no  purpose  of  pecuniary  or  commercial 
utility,  and  uniformity  is  favorable  to  order. 

This  ratio,  as  it  regards  gold,  coincides  with  the 
proportion,  real  or  professed,  in  the  coins  of  Por 
tugal,  England,  France,  and  Spain.  In  those  of  the 
two  former,  it  is  real;  in  those  of  the  two  latter, 
there  is  a  deduction  for  what  is  called  remedy  of 
weight  and  alloy,  which  is  in  the  nature  of  an  allow 
ance  to  the  master  of  the  mint  for  errors  and  im 
perfections  in  the  process,  rendering  the  coin  either 
lighter  or  baser  than  it  ought  to  be.  The  same 
thing  is  known  in  the  theory  of  the  English  mint, 
where  1/6  of  a  carat  is  allowed.  But  the  difference 
seems  to  be,  that  there,  it  is  merely  an  occasional 
indemnity  within  a  certain  limit,  for  real  and  un 
avoidable  errors  and  imperfections ;  whereas,  in  the 
practice  of  the  mints  of  France  and  Spain,  it  appears 
to  amount  to  a  stated  and  regular  deviation  from  the 
nominal  standard.  Accordingly,  the  real  standards 
of  France  and  Spain  are  something  worse  than  22 
carats,  or  n  parts  in  12  fine. 

The  principal  gold  coins  in  Germany,  Holland, 
Sweden,  Denmark,  Poland,  and  Italy,  are  finer  than 
those  of  England  and  Portugal,  in  different  degrees, 
from  i  carat  and  1/4  to  i  carat  and  7/8,  which  last 
is  within  1/8  of  a  carat  of  pure  gold. 

There  are  similar  diversities  in  the  standards  of 
the  silver  coins  of  the  different  countries  of  Europe. 
That  of  Great  Britain  is  222  parts  fine,  to  18  alloy; 


Coinage  and  the  Mint  25 

those  of  the  other  European  nations  vary  from  that 
of  Great  Britain  as  widely  as  from  about  17  of  the 
same  parts  better,  to  75  worse. 

The  principal  reasons  assigned  for  the  use  of  alloy, 
are  the  saving  of  expense  in  the  refining  of  the  metals 
(which  in  their  natural  state  are  usually  mixed  with 
a  portion  of  the  coarser  kinds),  and  the  rendering  of 
them  harder  as  a  security  against  too  great  waste  by 
friction  or  wearing.  The  first  reason,  drawn  from 
the  original  composition  of  the  metals,  is  strengthened 
at  present  by  the  practice  of  alloying  their  coins, 
which  has  obtained  among  so  many  nations.  The 
reality  of  the  effect  to  which  the  last  reason  is  ap 
plicable  has  been  denied,  and  experience  has  been 
appealed  to,  as  proving  that  the  more  alloyed  coins 
wear  faster  than  the  purer.  The  true  state  of  this 
matter  may  be  worthy  of  future  investigation, 
though  first  appearances  are  in  favor  of  alloy.  In 
the  meantime,  the  saving  of  trouble  and  expense  are 
sufficient  inducements  to  following  those  examples 
which  suppose  its  expediency.  And  the  same  con 
siderations  lead  to  taking  as  our  models  those  na 
tions  with  whom  we  have  most  intercourse,  and 
whose  coins  are  most  prevalent  in  our  circulation. 
These  are  Spain,  Portugal,  England,  and  France. 
The  relation  which  the  proposed  proportion  bears  to 
their  gold  coins  has  been  explained.  In  respect  to 
their  silver  coins,  it  will  not  be  very  remote  from  the 
mean  of  their  several  standards. 

The  component  ingredients  of  the  alloy  in  each 
metal  will  also  require  to  be  regulated.  In  silver, 
copper  is  the  only  kind  in  use,  and  it  is  doubtless  the 


26  Alexander  Hamilton 

only  proper  one.  In  gold,  there  is  a  mixture  of  silver 
and  copper:  In  the  English  coins  consisting  of 
equal  parts;  in  the  coins  of  some  other  countries, 
varying  from  1/3  to  2/3  silver , 

The  reason  of  this  union  of  silver  with  copper  is 
this:  The  silver  counteracts  the  tendency  of  the 
copper  to  injure  the  color  or  beauty  of  the  coin,  by 
giving  it  too  much  redness,  or  rather  a  coppery  hue, 
which  a  small  quantity  will  produce ;  and  the  copper 
prevents  the  too  great  whiteness  which  silver  alone 
would  confer.  It  is  apprehended,  that  there  are 
considerations  which  may  render  it  prudent  to  estab 
lish,  by  law,  that  the  proportion  of  silver  to  copper, 
in  the  gold  coins  of  the  United  States,  shall  not  be 
more  than  1/2,  nor  less  than  1/3;  vesting  discretion 
in  some  proper  place  to  regulate  the  matter  within 
those  limits,  as  experience  in  the  execution  may 
recommend. 

A  third  point  remains  to  be  discussed,  as  a  pre 
requisite  to  the  determination  of  the  money  unit, 
which  is,  whether  the  expense  of  coining  shall  be 
defrayed  by  the  public,  or  out  of  the  material  itself; 
or,  as  it  is  sometimes  stated,  whether  coinage  shall 
be  free,  or  shall  be  subject  to  a  duty  or  imposition? 
This  forms,  perhaps,  one  of  the  nicest  questions  in 
the  doctrine  of  money. 

The  practice  of  different  nations  is  dissimilar  in 
this  particular.  In  England,  coinage  is  said  to  be 
entirely  free ;  the  mint  price  of  the  metals  in  bullion, 
being  the  same  with  the  value  of  them  in  coin.  In 
France,  there  is  a  duty,  which  has  been,  if  it  is  not 
now,  eight  per  cent.  In  Holland,  there  is  a  difference 


Coinage  and  the  Mint  27 

between  the  mint  price  and  the  value  in  the  coins, 
which  has  been  computed  at  .96,  or  something  less 
than  one  per  cent,  upon  gold,  at  1.48,  or  something 
less  than  one  and  a  half  per  cent,  upon  silver.  The 
resolution  of  the  8th  of  August,  1786,  proceeds  upon 
the  idea  of  a  deduction  of  a  half  per  cent,  from  gold, 
and  of  two  per  cent,  from  silver,  as  an  indemnifica 
tion  for  the  expense  of  coining.  This  is  inferred  from 
a  report  of  the  late  Board  of  Treasury,  upon  which 
that  resolution  appears  to  have  been  founded. 

Upon  the  supposition  that  the  expense  of  coinage 
ought  to  be  defrayed  out  of  the  metals,  there  are  two 
ways  in  which  it  may  be  effected:  one  by  a  reduction 
of  the  quantity  of  fine  gold  and  silver  in  the  coins; 
the  other,  by  establishing  a  difference  between  the 
value  of  those  metals  in  the  coins,  and  the  mint  price 
of  them  in  bullion. 

The  first  method  appears  to  the  Secretary  inad 
missible.  He  is  unable  to  distinguish  an  operation 
of  this  sort,  from  that  of  raising  the  denomination  of 
the  coin — a  measure  which  has  been  disapproved  by 
the  wisest  men  of  the  nations  in  which  it  has  been 
practised,  and  condemned  by  the  rest  of  the  world. 
To  declare  that  a  less  weight  of  gold  or  silver  shall 
pass  for  the  same  sum  which  before  represented  a 
greater  weight,  or  to  ordain  that  the  same  weight 
shall  pass  for  a  greater  sum,  are  things  substantially 
of  one  nature.  The  consequence  of  either  of  them, 
if  the  change  can  be  realized,  is  to  degrade  the  money 
unit;  obliging  creditors  to  receive  less  than  their 
just  dues,  and  depreciating  property  of  every  kind. 
For  it  is  manifest  that  every  thing  would,  in  this 


28  Alexander  Hamilton 

case,  be  represented  by  a  less  quantity  of  gold  and 
silver  than  before. 

It  is  sometimes  observed,  on  this  head,  that, 
though  any  article  of  property  might,  in  fact,  be 
represented  by  a  less  actual  quantity  of  pure  metal, 
it  would  nevertheless  be  represented  by  something 
of  the  same  intrinsic  value.  Every  fabric,  it  is  re 
marked,  is  worth  intrinsically  the  price  of  the  raw  ma 
terial  and  the  expense  of  fabrication;  a  truth  not  less 
applicable  to  a  piece  of  coin  than  to  a  yard  of  cloth. 

This  position,  well  founded  in  itself,  is  here  mis 
applied.  It  supposes  that  the  coins  now  in  circula 
tion  are  to  be  considered  as  bullion,  or,  in  other 
words,  as  raw  material.  But  the  fact  is,  that  the 
adoption  of  them  as  money  has  caused  them  to  be 
come  the  fabric;  it  has  invested  them  with  the 
character  and  office  of  coins,  and  has  given  them  a 
sanction  and  efficacy,  equivalent  to  that  of  the 
stamp  of  the  sovereign.  The  prices  of  all  our  com 
modities,  at  home  and  abroad,  and  of  all  foreign 
commodities  in  our  markets,  have  found  their  level 
in  conformity  to  this  principle.  The  foreign  coins 
may  be  divested  of  the  privilege  they  have  hitherto 
been  permitted  to  enjoy,  and  may  of  course  be  left 
to  find  their  value  in  the  market  as  a  raw  material. 
But  the  quantity  of  gold  and  silver  in  the  national 
coins,  corresponding  with  a  given  sum,  cannot  be 
made  less  than  heretofore,  without  disturbing  the 
balance  of  intrinsic  value,  and  making  every  acre  of 
land,  as  well  as  every  bushel  of  wheat,  of  less  actual 
worth  than  in  time  past. 

If  the  United  States  were  isolated,  and  cut  off 


Coinage  and  the  Mint  29 

from  all  intercourse  with  the  rest  of  mankind,  this 
reasoning  would  not  be  equally  conclusive.  But  it 
appears  decisive,  when  considered  with  a  view  to 
the  relations  which  commerce  has  created  between 
us  and  other  countries. 

It  is,  however,  not  improbable  that  the  effect 
meditated  would  be  defeated  by  a  rise  of  prices  pro 
portioned  to  the  diminution  of  the  intrinsic  value  of 
the  coins.  This  might  be  looked  for  in  every  en 
lightened  commercial  country ;  but,  perhaps,  in  none 
with  greater  certainty  than  in  this ,  because,  in  none, 
are  men  less  liable  to  be  the  dupes  of  sounds;  in 
none,  has  authority  so  little  resource  for  substituting 
names  for  things. 

A  general  revolution  in  prices,  though  only  nom 
inally  and  in  appearance,  could  not  fail  to  distract 
the  ideas  of  the  community,  and  would  be  apt  to 
breed  discontents  as  well  among  all  those  who  live 
on  the  income  of  their  money  as  among  the  poorer 
classes  of  the  people,  to  whom  the  necessaries  of  life 
would  seem  to  have  become  dearer.  In  the  con 
fusion  of  such  a  state  of  things,  ideas  of  value  would 
not  improbably  adhere  to  the  old  coins,  which,  from 
that  circumstance,  instead  of  feeling  the  effect  of  the 
loss  of  their  privilege  as  money,  would,  perhaps,  bear 
a  price  in  the  market,  relatively  to  the  new  ones,  in 
exact  proportion  to  weight.  The  frequency  of  the 
demand  for  the  metals  to  pay  foreign  balances, 
would  contribute  to  this  effect. 

Among  the  evils  attendant  on  such  an  operation 
are  these:  creditors,  both  of  the  public  and  of  in 
dividuals,  would  lose  a  part  of  their  property;  public 


30  Alexander  Hamilton 

and  private  credit  would  receive  a  wound;  the 
effective  revenues  of  the  government  would  be 
diminished.  There  is  scarcely  any  point,  in  the 
economy  of  national  affairs,  of  greater  moment 
than  the  uniform  preservation  of  the  intrinsic  value 
of  the  money  unit.  On  this  the  security  and  steady 
value  of  property  essentially  depend. 

The  second  method,  therefore,  of  defraying  the 
expense  of  the  coinage  out  of  the  metals,  is  greatly 
to  be  preferred  to  the  other.  This  is  to  let  the  same 
sum  of  money  continue  to  represent  in  the  new  coins 
exactly  the  same  quantity  of  gold  and  silver  as  it 
does  in  those  now  current ;  to  allow  at  the  mint  such 
a  price  only  for  those  metals  as  will  admit  of  profit 
just  sufficient  to  satisfy  the  expense  of  coinage;  to 
abolish  the  legal  currency  of  the  foreign  coins,  both 
in  public  and  private  payments;  and,  of  course,  to 
leave  the  superior  utility  of  the  national  coins  for 
domestic  purposes,  to  operate  the  difference  of  mar 
ket  value,  which  is  necessary  to  induce  the  bringing 
of  bullion  to  the  mint.  In  this  case  all  property  and 
labor  will  still  be  represented  by  the  same  quantity 
of  gold  and  silver  as  formerly;  and  the  only  change 
which  will  be  wrought  will  consist  in  annexing  the 
office  of  money  exclusively  to  the  national  coins; 
consequently,  withdrawing  it  from  those  of  foreign 
countries,  and  suffering  them  to  become,  as  they 
ought  to  be,  mere  articles  of  merchandise. 

The  arguments  in  favor  of  a  regulation  of  this  kind 
are: 

First.  That  the  want  of  it  is  a  cause  of  extra 
expense.  There  being,  then,  no  motive  of  individual 


Coinage  and  the  Mint  31 

interest  to  distinguish  between  the  national  coins  and 
bullion,  they  are,  it  is  alleged,  indiscriminately 
melted  down  for  domestic  manufactures,  and  ex 
ported  for  the  purposes  of  foreign  trade:  and  it  is 
added  that,  when  the  coins  become  light  by  wearing, 
the  same  quantity  of  fine  gold  or  silver  bears  a 
higher  price  in  bullion  than  in  the  coins;  in  which 
state  of  things  the  melting  down  of  the  coins  to  be 
sold  as  bullion  is  attended  with  profit;  and  from 
both  causes  the  expense  of  the  mint,  or,  in  other 
words,  the  expense  of  maintaining  the  specie  capital 
of  the  nation,  is  materially  augmented. 

Secondly.  That  the  existence  of  such  a  regula 
tion  promotes  a  favorable  course  of  exchange,  and 
benefits  trade  not  only  by  that  circumstance,  but  by 
obliging  foreigners,  in  certain  cases,  to  pay  dearer 
for  domestic  commodities,  and  to  sell  their  own 
cheaper. 

As  far  as  relates  to  the  tendency  of  a  free  coinage 
to  produce  an  increase  of  expense  in  the  different 
ways  that  have  been  stated,  the  argument  must  be 
allowed  to  have  foundation  both  in  reason  and  in 
experience.  It  describes  what  has  been  exemplified 
in  Great  Britain. 

The  effect  of  giving  an  artificial  value  to  bullion  is 
not,  at  first  sight,  obvious ;  but  it  actually  happened 
at  the  period  immediately  preceding  the  late  reforma 
tion  in  the  gold  coin  of  the  country  just  named.  A 
pound  troy  in  gold  bullion,  of  standard  fineness,  was 
then  from  195.  6d.  to  255.  sterling  dearer  than  an 
equal  weight  of  guineas,  as  delivered  at  the  mint. 
The  phenomenon  is  thus  accounted  for:  The  old 


32  Alexander  Hamilton 

guineas  were  more  than  two  per  cent,  lighter  than 
their  standard  weight.  This  weight,  therefore,  in 
bullion,  was  truly  worth  two  per  cent,  more  than 
those  guineas.  It  consequently  had,  in  respect  to 
them,  a  correspondent  rise  in  the  market. 

And  as  guineas  were  then  current  by  tale,  the  new 
ones,  as  they  issued  from  the  mint,  were  confounded 
in  circulation  with  the  old  ones ;  and,  by  the  associa 
tion,  were  depreciated  below  the  intrinsic  value,  in 
comparison  with  bullion.  It  became  of  course  a 
profitable  traffic  to  sell  bullion  for  coin,  to  select  the 
light  pieces  and  re-issue  them  in  currency,  and  to 
melt  down  the  heavy  ones  and  sell  them  again  as 
bullion.  This  practice,  besides  other  inconveniences, 
cost  the  government  large  sums  in  the  renewal  of  the 
coins. 

But  the  remainder  of  the  argument  stands  upon 
ground  far  more  questionable.  It  depends  upon 
very  numerous  and  very  complex  combinations,  in 
which  there  is  infinite  latitude  for  fallacy  and  error. 

The  most  plausible  part  of  it  is  that  which  relates 
to  the  course  of  exchange.  Experience  in  France 
has  shown  that  the  market  price  of  bullion  has  been 
influenced  by  the  mint  difference  between  that  and 
coin ;  sometimes  to  the  full  extent  of  the  difference ; 
and  it  would  seem  to  be  a  clear  inference  that,  when 
ever  that  difference  materially  exceeded  the  charges 
of  remitting  bullion  from  the  country  where  it 
existed,  to  another  in  which  coinage  is  free,  exchange 
would  be  in  favor  of  the  former. 

If,  for  instance,  the  balance  of  trade  between 
France  and  England  were  at  any  time  equal,  their 


Coinage  and  the  Mint  33 

merchants  would  naturally  have  reciprocal  payments 
to  make  to  an  equal  amount,  which,  as  usual,  would 
be  liquidated  by  means  of  bills  of  exchange.  If  in 
this  situation  the  difference  between  coin  and  bul 
lion  should  be,  in  the  market,  as  at  the  mint  of 
France,  eight  per  cent. ;  if,  also,  the  charges  of  trans 
porting  money  from  France  to  England  should  not 
be  above  two  per  cent. ;  and  if  exchange  should  be 
at  par,  it  is  evident  that  a  profit  of  six  per  cent, 
might  be  made,  by  sending  bullion  from  France  to 
England,  and  drawing  bills  for  the  amount.  One 
hundred  louis  d'ors  in  coin  would  purchase  the 
weight  of  one  hundred  and  eight  in  bullion;  one 
hundred  of  which,  remitted  to  England,  would  suf 
fice  to  pay  a  debt  of  an  equal  amount ;  and  two  being 
paid  for  the  charges  of  insurance  and  transportation, 
there  would  remain  six  for  the  benefit  of  the  person 
who  should  manage  the  negotiation.  But  as  so 
large  a  profit  could  not  fail  to  produce  competition, 
the  bills,  in  consequence  of  this,  would  decrease  in 
price,  till  the  profit  was  reduced  to  the  minimum  of 
an  adequate  recompense  for  the  trouble  and  risk. 
And  as  the  amount  of  one  hundred  louis  d'ors  in 
England  might  be  afforded  for  ninety-six  in  France, 
with  a  profit  of  more  than  one  and  a  half  per  cent., 
bills  upon  England  might  fall,  in  France,  to  four  per 
cent,  below  par;  one  per  cent,  being  a  sufficient 
profit  to  the  exchanger  or  broker  for  the  management 
of  the  business. 

But  it  is  admitted  that  this  advantage  is  lost  when 
the  balance  of  trade  is  against  the  nation  which  im 
poses  the  duty  in  question;  because,  by  increasing 


VOL.  IV.— 3. 


34  Alexander  Hamilton 

the  demand  for  bullion,  it  brings  this  to  a  par  with 
the  coins;  and  it  is  to  be  suspected  that,  where  com 
mercial  principles  have  their  free  scope,  and  are  well 
•understood,  the  market  difference  between  the  met 
als  in  coin  and  bullion  will  seldom  approximate  to 
that  of  the  mint,  if  the  latter  be  considerable.  It 
must  be  not  a  little  difficult  to  keep  the  money  of 
the  world,  which  can  be  employed  to  an  equal  pur 
pose  in  the  commerce  of  the  world,  in  a  state  of 
degradation,  in  comparison  with  the  money  of  a  par 
ticular  country. 

This  alone  would  seem  sufficient  to  prevent  it: 
Whenever  the  price  of  coin  to  bullion,  in  the  market, 
materially  exceeded  the  par  of  the  metals,  it  would 
become  an  object  to  send  the  bullion  abroad,  if  not 
to  pay  a  foreign  balance,  to  be  invested  in  some 
other  way,  in  foreign  countries,  where  it  bore  a  su 
perior  value;  an  operation  by  which  immense  for 
tunes  might  be  amassed,  if  it  were  not  that  the 
exportation  of  the  bullion  would  of  itself  restore  the 
intrinsic  par.  But,  as  it  would  naturally  have  this 
effect,  the  advantage  supposed  would  contain  in 
itself  the  principle  of  its  own  destruction.  As  long, 
however,  as  the  exportation  of  bullion  could  be 
made  with  profit,  which  is  as  long  as  exchange  could 
remain  below  par,  there  would  be  a  drain  of  the  gold 
and  silver  of  the  country. 

If  any  thing  can  maintain,  for  a  length  of  time,  a 
material  difference  between  the  value  of  the  metals 
in  coin  and  in  bullion,  it  must  be  a  constant  and  con 
siderable  balance  of  trade  in  favor  of  the  country  in 
which  it  is  maintained.  In  one  situated  like  the 


Coinage  and  the  Mint  35 

United  States,  it  would  in  all  probability  be  a  hope 
less  attempt.  The  frequent  demand  for  gold  and 
silver,  to  pay  balances  to  foreigners,  would  tend 
powerfully  to  preserve  the  equilibrium  of  intrinsic 
value. 

The  prospect  is,  that  it  would  occasion  foreign 
coins  to  circulate  by  common  consent,  nearly  at  par 
with  the  national. 

To  say  that,  as  far  as  the  effect  of  lowering  ex 
change  is  produced,  though  it  be  only  occasional  and 
momentary,  there  is  a  benefit  the  more  thrown  into 
the  scale  of  public  prosperity,  is  not  satisfactory.  It 
has  been  seen  that  it  may  be  productive  of  one  evil, 
the  investment  of  a  part  of  the  national  capital  in 
foreign  countries ;  which  can  hardly  be  beneficial  but 
in  a  situation  like  that  of  the  United  Netherlands, 
where  an  immense  capital,  and  a  decrease  of  internal 
demand,  render  it  necessary  to  find  employment  for 
money  in  the  wants  of  other  nations;  and  perhaps, 
on  a  close  examination,  other  evils  may  be  descried. 

One  allied  to  that  which  has  been  mentioned  is 
this — taking  France,  for  the  sake  of  more  concise 
illustration,  as  the  scene :  Whenever  it  happens  that 
French  louis  d'ors  are  sent  abroad,  from  whatever 
cause,  if  there  be  a  considerable  difference  between 
coin  and  bullion  in  the  market  of  France,  it  will  con 
stitute  an  advantageous  traffic  to  send  back  these 
louis  d'ors,  and  bring  away  bullion  in  lieu  of  them; 
upon  all  which  exchanges  France  must  sustain  an 
actual  loss  of  a  part  of  its  gold  and  silver. 

Again,  such  a  difference  between  coin  and  bullion 
may  tend  to  counteract  a  favorable  balance  of  trade. 


36  Alexander  Hamilton 

Whenever  a  foreign  merchant  is  the  carrier  of  his 
own  commodities  to  France  for  sale,  he  has  a  strong 
inducement  to  bring  back  specie,  instead  of  French 
commodities;  because  a  return  in  the  latter  may 
afford  no  profit,  may  even  be  attended  with  loss;  in 
the  former  it  will  afford  a  certain  profit.  The  same 
principle  must  be  supposed  to  operate  in  the  general 
course  of  remittances  from  France  to  other  countries- 
The  principal  question  with  a  merchant  naturally  is, 
in  what  manner  can  I  realize  a  given  sum,  with  most 
advantage,  where  I  wish  to  place  it?  And,  in  cases 
in  which  other  commodities  are  not  likely  to  produce 
equal  profit  with  bullion,  it  may  be  expected  that 
this  will  be  preferred;  to  which  the  greater  certainty 
attending  the  operation  must  be  an  additional  in 
citement.  There  can  hardly  be  imagined  a  circum 
stance  less  friendly  to  trade  than  the  existence  of  an 
extra  inducement,  arising  from  the  possibility  of  a 
profitable  speculation  upon  the  articles  themselves, 
to  export  from  a  country  its  gold  and  silver,  rather 
than  the  products  of  its  land  and  labor. 

The  other  advantages  supposed,  of  obliging  foreign 
ers  to  pay  dearer  for  domestic  commodities,  and  to 
sell  their  own  cheaper,  are  applied  to  a  situation 
which  includes  a  favorable  balance  of  trade.  It  is 
understood  in  this  sense — the  prices  of  domestic 
commodities  (such,  at  least,  as  are  peculiar  to  the 
country)  remain  attached  to  the  denominations  of 
the  coins.  When  a  favorable  balance  of  trade 
realizes  in  the  market  the  mint  difference  between 
coin  and  bullion,  foreigners,  who  must  pay  in  the 
latter,  are  obliged  to  give  more  of  it  for  such  com- 


Coinage  and  the  Mint  37 

modities  than  they  otherwise  would  do.  Again,  the 
bullion,  which  is  now  obtained  at  a  cheaper  rate  in 
the  home  market,  will  procure  the  same  quantity  of 
goods  in  the  foreign  market  as  before ;  which  is  said 
to  render  foreign  commodities  cheaper.  In  this 
reasoning,  much  fallacy  is  to  be  suspected.  If  it  be 
true,  that  foreigners  pay  more  for  domestic  com 
modities,  it  must  be  equally  true  that  they  get  more 
for  their  own  when  they  bring  them  themselves  to 
the  market.  If  peculiar  or  other  domestic  com 
modities  adhere  to  the  denominations  of  the  coins, 
no  reason  occurs  why  foreign  commodities  of  a  like 
character  should  not  do  the  same  thing;  and,  in 
this  case,  the  foreigner,  though  he  receive  only  the 
same  value  in  coin  for  his  merchandise  as  formerly, 
can  convert  it  into  a  greater  quantity  of  bullion. 
Whence  the  nation  is  liable  to  lose  more  of  its  gold 
and  silver  than  if  their  intrinsic  value  in  relation  to 
the  coins  were  preserved.  And  whether  the  gain  or 
the  loss  will,  on  the  whole,  preponderate,  would 
appear  to  depend  on  the  comparative  proportion  of 
active  commerce  of  the  one  country  with  the  other. 

It  is  evident,*  also,  that  the  nation  must  pay  as 
much  gold  and  silver  as  before,  for  the  commodities 
which  it  procures  abroad;  and  whether  it  obtains 
this  gold  and  silver  cheaper  or  not,  turns  upon  the 
solution  of  the  question  just  intimated,  respecting 
the  relative  proportion  of  active  commerce  between 
the  two  countries. 

Besides  these  considerations,  it  is  admitted  in  the 
reasoning,  that  the  advantages  supposed,  which  de 
pend  on  a  favorable  balance  of  trade,  have  a  tendency 


38  Alexander  Hamilton 

to  affect  that  balance  disadvantageously.  Foreign 
ers,  it  is  allowed,  will  in  this  case  seek  some  other 
vent  for  their  commodities,  and  some  other  market 
where  they  can  supply  their  wants  at  an  easier  rate. 
A  tendency  of  this  kind,  if  real,  would  be  a  sufficient 
objection  to  the  regulation.  Nothing  which  con 
tributes  to  change  a  beneficial  current  of  trade,  can 
well  compensate,  by  particular  advantages,  for  so 
injurious  an  effect.  It  is  far  more  easy  to  transfer 
trade  from  a  less  to  a  more  favorable  channel,  than, 
when  once  transferred,  to  bring  it  back  to  its  old  one. 
Every  source  of  artificial  interruption  to  an  advan 
tageous  current  is,  therefore,  cautiously  to  be  avoided. 

It  merits  attention,  that  the  able  minister,  who 
lately  and  so  long  presided  over  the  finances  of 
France,  does  not  attribute  to  the  duty  on  coinage  in 
that  country  any  particular  advantages  in  relation 
to  exchange  and  trade.  Though  he  rather  appears 
an  advocate  for  it,  it  is  on  the  sole  ground  of  the 
revenue  it  affords,  which  he  represents  as  in  the 
nature  of  a  very  moderate  duty  on  the  general  mass 
of  exportation. 

And  it  is  not  improbable  that,  to  the  singular 
felicity  of  situation  of  that  kingdom,  is  to  be  attrib 
uted  its  not  having  been  sensible  of  the  evils  which 
seem  incident  to  the  regulation.  There  is,  perhaps, 
no  part  of  Europe  which  has  so  little  need  of  other 
countries  as  France.  Comprehending  a  variety  of 
soils  and  climates,  an  immense  population,  its  agri 
culture  in  a  state  of  mature  improvement,  it  pos 
sesses  within  its  own  bosom  most,  if  not  all,  the 
productions  of  the  earth  which  any  of  its  most  fa- 


Coinage  and  the  Mint  39 

vored  neighbors  can  boast.  The  variety,  abundance, 
and  excellence  of  its  wines  constitute  a  peculiar 
advantage  in  its  favor.  Arts  and  manufactures 
are  there  also  in  a  very  advanced  state;  some  of 
them,  of  considerable  importance,  in  higher  per 
fection  than  elsewhere.  Its  contiguity  to  Spain; 
the  intimate  nature  of  its  connection  with  that 
country — a  country  with  few  fabrics  of  its  own,  con 
sequently  numerous  wants,  and  the  principal  re 
ceptacle  of  the  treasures  of  the  New  World: — these 
circumstances  concur  in  securing  to  France  so  uni 
form  and  so  considerable  a  balance  of  trade,  as  in  a 
great  measure  to  counteract  the  natural  tendency 
of  any  errors  which  may  exist  in  the  system  of  her 
mint ;  and  to  render  inferences  from  the  operation  of 
that  system  there,  in  reference  to  this  country,  more 
liable  to  mislead  than  to  instruct.  Nor  ought  it  to 
pass  unnoticed,  that,  with  all  these  advantages,  the 
Government  of  France  has  found  it  necessary,  on 
some  occasions,  to  employ  very  violent  methods  to 
compel  the  bringing  of  bullion  to  the  mint, — a  cir 
cumstance  which  affords  a  strong  presumption  of 
the  inexpediency  of  the  regulation,  and  of  the  im 
practicability  of  executing  it  in  the  United  States. 

This  point  has  been  the  longer  dwelt  upon,  not 
only  because  there  is  a  diversity  of  opinion  among 
speculative  men  concerning  it,  and  a  diversity  in  the 
practice  of  the  most  considerable  commercial  na 
tions,  but  because  the  acts  of  our  own  government, 
under  the  Confederation,  have  not  only  admitted 
the  expediency  of  defraying  the  expense  of  coinage 
out  of  the  metals  themselves,  but  upon  this  idea 


4°  Alexander  Hamilton 

have  both  made  a  deduction  from  the  weight  of  the 
coins,  and  established  a  difference  between  their 
regulated  value  and  the  mint  price  of  bullion, 
greater  than  would  result  from  that  deduction. 
This  double  operation  in  favor  of  a  principle  so 
questionable  in  itself,  has  made  a  more  particular 
investigation  of  it  a  duty. 

The  intention,  however,  of  the  preceding  remarks, 
is  rather  to  show  that  the  expectation  of  commercial 
advantages  ought  not  to  decide  in  favor  of  a  duty  on 
coinage,  and  that,  if  it  should  be  adopted,  it  ought 
not  to  be  in  the  form  of  a  deduction  from  the  in 
trinsic  value  of  the  coins,  than  absolutely  to  exclude 
the  idea  of  any  difference  whatever  between  the 
value  of  the  metals  in  coin  and  in  bullion.  It  is  not 
clearly  discerned,  that  a  small  difference  between 
the  mint  price  of  bullion  and  the  regulated  value  of 
the  coins  would  be  pernicious,  or  that  it  might  not 
even  be  advisable,  in  the  first  instance,  by  way  of 
experiment,  merely  as  a  preventive  to  the  melting 
down  and  exportation  of  the  coins.  This  will,  now, 
be  somewhat  more  particularly  considered. 

The  arguments  for  a  coinage  entirely  free  are,  that 
it  preserves  the  intrinsic  value  of  the  metals ;  that  it 
makes  the  expense  of  fabrication  a  general  instead 
of  partial  tax;  and  that  it  tends  to  promote  the 
abundance  of  gold  and  silver,  which,  it  is  alleged, 
will  flow  to  that  place  where  they  find  the  best  price, 
from  that  place  where  they  are  in  any  degree 
undervalued. 

The  first  consideration  has  not  much  weight,  as  an 
objection  to  a  plan  which,  without  diminishing  the 


Coinage  and  the  Mint  41 

quantity  of  metals  in  the  coins,  merely  allows  a  less 
price  for  them  in  bullion  at  the  national  factory  or 
mint.  No  rule  of  intrinsic  value  is  violated,  by  con 
sidering  the  raw  material  as  worth  less  than  the 
fabric  in  proportion  to  the  expense  of  fabrication. 
And  by  divesting  foreign  coins  of  the  privilege 
of  circulating  as  money,  they  become  the  raw 
material. 

The  second  consideration  has  perhaps  greater 
weight.  But  it  may  not  amount  to  an  objection,  if 
it  be  the  best  method  of  preventing  disorders  in  the 
coins,  which  it  is,  in  a  particular  manner,  the  interest 
of  those,  on  whom  the  tax  would  fall,  to  prevent. 
The  practice  of  taking  gold  by  weight,  which  has  of 
late  years  obtained  in  Great  Britain,  has  been  found 
in  some  degree,  a  remedy;  but  this  is  inconvenient, 
and  may,  on  that  account,  fall  into  disuse.  Another 
circumstance  has  had  a  remedial  operation.  This  is 
the  delay  of  the  mint.  It  appears  to  be  the  practice 
there,  not  to  make  payment  for  the  bullion  which  is 
brought  to  be  exchanged  for  coin,  till  it  either  has  in 
fact,  or  is  pretended  to  have,  undergone  the  process 
of  recoining. 

The  necessity  of  fulfilling  prior  engagements  is  a 
cause  or  pretext  for  postponing  the  delivery  of  the 
coin  in  lieu  of  the  bullion.  And  this  delay  creates  a 
difference  in  the  market  price  of  the  two  things. 
Accordingly,  for  some  years  past,  an  ounce  of  stand 
ard  gold,  which  is  worth  in  coin  £3  1 75.  io^d.  sterling, 
has  been  in  the  market  of  London,  in  bullion,  only 
£3.  175.  6d.,  which  is  within  a  small  fraction  of  one 
half  per  cent.  less.  Whether  this  be  management  in 


42  Alexander  Hamilton 

the  mint,  to  accommodate  the  bank  in  the  purchase 
of  bullion,  or  to  effect  indirectly  something  equiva 
lent  to  a  formal  difference  of  price,  or  whether  it 
be  the  natural  course  of  the  business,  is  open  to 
conjecture. 

It,  at  the  same  time,  indicates  that,  if  the  mint 
were  to  make  prompt  payment,  at  about  half  per 
cent,  less  than  it  does  at  present,  the  state  of  bullion 
in  respect  to  coin  would  be  precisely  the  same  as  it 
now  is.  And  it  would  be  then  certain,  that  the  gov 
ernment  would  save  expense  in  the  coinage  of  gold; 
since  it  is  not  probable  that  the  time  actually  lost  in 
the  course  of  the  year,  in  converting  bullion  into 
coin,  can  be  an  equivalent  to  half  per  cent,  on  the 
advance,  and  there  will  generally  be  at  the  command 
of  the  treasury  a  considerable  sum  of  money  waiting 
for  some  periodical  disbursement,  which,  without 
hazard,  might  be  applied  to  that  advance. 

In  what  sense  a  free  coinage  can  be  said  to  pro 
mote  the  abundance  of  gold  and  silver,  may  be  in 
ferred  from  the  instances  which  have  been  given  of 
the  tendency  of  a  contrary  system  to  promote  their 
exportation.  It  is,  however,  not  probable,  that  a 
very  small  difference  of  value  between  coin  and 
bullion  can  have  any  effect  which  ought  to  enter  into 
calculation.  There  can  be  no  inducement  of  positive 
profit,  to  export  the  bullion,  as  long  as  the  difference 
of  price  is  exceeded  by  the  expense  of  transportation. 
And  the  prospect  of  smaller  loss  upon  the  metals 
than  upon  commodities,  when  the  difference  is  very 
minute,  will  be  frequently  overbalanced  by  the  pos 
sibility  of  doing  better  with  the  latter,  from  a  rise  of 


Coinage  and  the  Mint  43 

markets.  It  is,  at  any  rate,  certain,  that  it  can  be 
of  no  consequence  in  this  view,  whether  the  super 
iority  of  coin  to  bullion  in  the  market  be  produced, 
as  in  England,  by  the  delay  of  the  mint,  or  by  a 
formal  discrimination  in  the  regulated  values. 

Under  an  impression  that  a  small  difference  be 
tween  the  value  of  the  coin  and  the  mint  price  of 
bullion  is  the  least  exceptionable  expedient  for  re 
straining  the  melting  down  or  exportation  of  the 
former,  and  not  perceiving  that,  if  it  be  a  very  mod 
erate  one,  it  can  be  hurtful  in  other  respects,  the 
Secretary  is  inclined  to  an  experiment  of  one  half 
per  cent,  on  each  of  the  metals.  The  fact  which  has 
been  mentioned,  with  regard  to  the  price  of  gold 
bullion  in  the  English  market,  seems  to  demonstrate 
that  such  a  difference  may  safely  be  made.  In  this 
case  there  must  be  immediate  payment  for  the  gold 
and  silver  offered  to  the  mint.  How  far  one  half 
per  cent,  will  go  towards  defraying  the  expense  of 
the  coinage,  cannot  be  determined  beforehand  with 
accuracy.  It  is  presumed  that,  on  an  economical 
plan,  it  will  suffice  in  relation  to  gold.  But  it  is  not 
expected  that  the  same  rate  on  silver  will  be  sufficient 
to  defray  the  expense  attending  that  metal.  Some 
additional  provision  may,  therefore,  be  found  neces 
sary,  if  this  limit  be  adopted. 

It  does  not  seem  to  be  advisable  to  make  any 
greater  difference  in  regard  to  silver  than  to  gold; 
because  it  is  desirable  that  the  proportion  between 
the  two  metals  in  the  market  should  correspond  with 
that  in  the  coins,  which  would  not  be  the  case  if  the 
mint  price  of  one  was  comparatively  lower  than  that 


44  Alexander  Hamilton 

of  the  other;  and  because,  also,  silver  being  pro 
posed  to  be  rated  in  respect  to  gold,  somewhat  below 
its  general  commercial  value,  if  there  should  be  a 
disparity  to  its  disadvantage  in  the  mint  prices  of  the 
two  metals,  it  would  obstruct  too  much  the  bringing 
of  it  to  be  coined,  and  would  add  an  inducement  to 
export  it.  Nor  does  it  appear  to  the  Secretary  safe 
to  make  a  greater  difference  between  the  value  of 
coin  and  bullion,  than  has  been  mentioned.  It  will 
be  better  to  have  to  increase  it,  hereafter,  if  this 
shall  be  found  expedient,  than  to  have  to  recede 
from  too  considerable  a  difference,  in  consequence 
of  evils  which  shall  have  been  experienced. 

It  is  sometimes  mentioned,  as  an  expedient  which, 
consistently  with  a  free  coinage,  may  serve  to  pre 
vent  the  evils  desired  to  be  avoided,  to  incorporate 
in  the  coins  a  greater  proportion  of  alloy  than  is 
usual;  regulating  their  value,  nevertheless,  accord 
ing  to  the  quantity  of  pure  metal  they  contain. 
This,  it  is  supposed,  by  adding  to  the  difficulty  of 
refining  them,  would  cause  bullion  to  be  preferred, 
both  for  manufacture  and  exportation. 

But  strong  objections  lie  against  this  scheme — an 
augmentation  of  expense;  an  actual  depreciation  of 
the  coin;  a  danger  of  still  greater  depreciation  in 
the  public  opinion;  the  facilitating  of  counterfeits; 
while  it  is  questionable  whether  it  would  have  the 
effect  expected  from  it. 

The  alloy  being  esteemed  of  no  value,  an  increase 
of  it  is  evidently  an  increase  of  expense.  This,  in 
relation  to  the  gold  coins,  particularly,  is  a  matter 
of  moment.  It  has  been  noted,  that  the  alloy  in 


Coinage  and  the  Mint  45 

them  consists  partly  of  silver.  If,  to  avoid  expense, 
the  addition  should  be  of  copper  only,  this  would 
spoil  the  appearance  of  the  coin,  and  give  it  a  base 
countenance.  Its  beauty  would  indeed  be  injured, 
though  in  a  less  degree,  even  if  the  usual  proportions 
of  silver  and  copper  should  be  maintained  in  the  in 
creased  quantity  of  alloy. 

And  however  inconsiderable  an  additional  ex 
penditure  of  copper  in  the  coinage  of  a  year  may  be 
deemed,  in  a  series  of  years  it  would  become  of  con 
sequence.  In  regulations  which  contemplate  the 
lapse  and  operation  of  ages,  a  very  small  item  of 
expense  acquires  importance. 

The  actual  depreciation  of  the  coin  by  an  increase 
of  alloy,  results  from  the  very  circumstance  which  is 
the  motive  to  it — the  greater  difficulty  of  refining. 
In  England,  it  is  customary  for  those  concerned  in 
manufactures  of  gold,  to  make  a  deduction  in  the 
price,  of  fourpence  sterling  per  ounce  of  fine  gold, 
for  every  carat  which  the  mass  containing  it  is  below 
the  legal  standard.  Taking  this  as  a  rule,  an  in 
feriority  of  a  single  carat,  or  one  twenty-fourth  part, 
in  the  gold  coins  of  the  United  States,  compared 
with  the  English  standard,  would  cause  the  same 
quantity  of  pure  gold  in  them  to  be  worth  nearly 
four-tenths  per  cent,  less  than  in  the  coins  of  Great 
Britain.  This  circumstance  would  be  likely,  in  pro 
cess  of  time,  to  be  felt  in  the  market  of  the  United 
States. 

A  still  greater  depreciation,  in  the  public  opinion, 
would  be  to  be  apprehended  from  the  apparent  de 
basement  of  the  coin.  The  effects  of  imagination  and 


46  Alexander  Hamilton 

prejudice  cannot  safely  be  disregarded  in  any  thing 
that  relates  to  money.  If  the  beauty  of  the  coin 
be  impaired,  it  may  be  found  difficult  to  satisfy 
the  generality  of  the  community,  that  what  appears 
worse  is  not  really  less  valuable;  and  it  is  not  al 
together  certain,  that  an  impression  of  its  being  so, 
may  not  occasion  an  unnatural  augmentation  of 
prices. 

Greater  danger  of  imposition,  by  counterfeits,  is 
also  to  be  apprehended  from  the  injury  which  will  be 
done  to  the  appearance  of  the  coin.  It  is  a  just  ob 
servation,  that  "  the  perfection  of  the  coins  is  a  great 
safeguard  against  counterfeits."  And  it  is  evident 
that  the  color,  as  well  as  the  excellence  of  the  work 
manship,  is  an  ingredient  in  that  perfection.  The 
intermixture  of  too  much  alloy,  particularly  of  cop 
per,  in  the  gold  coins  at  least,  must  materially  les 
sen  the  facility  of  distinguishing,  by  the  eye,  the 
purer  from  the  baser  kind — the  genuine  from  the 
counterfeit. 

The  inefficacy  of  the  arrangement  to  the  purpose 
intended  to  be  answered  by  it,  is  rendered  prob 
able  by  different  considerations.  If  the  standard  of 
plate  in  the  United  States  should  be  regulated  ac 
cording  to  that  of  the  national  coins,  it  is  to  be  ex 
pected  that  the  goldsmith  would  prefer  these  to  the 
foreign  coins,  because  he  would  find  them  prepared 
to  his  hand,  in  the  state  which  he  desires;  whereas 
he  would  have  to  expend  an  additional  quantity  of 
alloy  to  bring  the  foreign  coins  to  that  state.  If  the 
standard  of  plate,  by  law  or  usage,  should  be  su 
perior  to  that  of  the  national  coins,  there  would  be  a 


Coinage  and  the  Mint  47 

possibility  of  the  foreign  coins  bearing  a  higher  price 
in  the  market;  and  this  would  not  only  obstruct 
their  being  brought  to  the  mint,  but  might  occasion 
the  exportation  of  the  national  coin  in  preference. 
It  is  not  understood,  that  the  practice  of  making  an 
abatement  of  price  for  the  inferiority  of  standard, 
is  applicable  to  the  English  mint;  and  if  it  be  not, 
this  would  also  contribute  to  frustrating  the  ex 
pected  effect  from  the  increase  of  alloy.  For,  in 
this  case,  a  given  quantity  of  pure  metal,  in  our 
standard,  would  be  worth  as  much  there  as  in  bullion 
of  the  English  or  any  other  standard. 

Considering,  therefore,  the  uncertainty  of  the  suc 
cess  of  the  expedient,  and  the  inconveniences  which 
seem  incident  to  it,  it  would  appear  preferable  to 
submit  to  those  of  a  free  coinage.  It  is  observable 
that  additional  expense,  which  is  one  of  the  prin 
cipal  of  these,  is  also  applicable  to  the  proposed 
remedy. 

It  is  now  proper  to  resume  and  finish  the  answer 
to  the  first  question,  in  order  to  which  the  three 
succeeding  ones  have  necessarily  been  anticipated. 
The  conclusion  to  be  drawn  from  the  observations 
which  have  been  made  on  the  subject  is  this:  That 
the  unit,  in  the  coins  of  the  United  States,  ought  to 
correspond  with  24  grains  and  3/4  of  a  grain  of  pure 
gold,  and  with  371  grains  and  1/4  of  a  grain  of  pure 
silver,  each  answering  to  a  dollar  in  the  money  of 
account.  The  former  is  exactly  agreeable  to  the 
present  value  of  gold,  and  the  latter  is  within  a  small 
fraction  of  the  mean  of  the  two  last  emissions  of  dol 
lars — the  only  ones  which  are  now  found  in  common 


48  Alexander  Hamilton 

circulation,  and  of  which  the  newest  is  in  the  great 
est  abundance;  the  alloy  in  each  case  to  be  one- 
twelfth  of  the  total  weight,  which  will  make  the  unit 
27  grains  of  standard  gold,  and  405  grains  of  standard 
silver. 

Each  of  these,  it  has  been  remarked,  will  answer  to 
a  dollar  in  the  money  of  account.  It  is  conceived 
that  nothing  better  can  be  done  in  relation  to  this 
than  to  pursue  the  track  marked  out  by  the  resolu 
tion  of  the  8th  August,  1786.  This  has  been  ap 
proved  abroad,  as  well  as  at  home,  and  it  is  certain 
that  nothing  can  be  more  simple  and  convenient 
than  the  decimal  subdivisions.  There  is  every 
reason  to  expect  that  the  method  will  speedily  grow 
into  general  use,  when  it  shall  be  seconded  by  corre 
sponding  coins.  On  this  plan  the  unit  in  the  money 
of  account  will  continue  to  be,  as  established  by  that 
resolution,  a  dollar;  and  its  multiples,  dimes,  cents, 
and  mills,  or  tenths,  hundredths,  and  thousandths. 

With  regard  to  the  number  of  different  pieces 
which  shall  compose  the  coins  of  the  United  States, 
two  things  are  to  be  consulted — convenience  of  cir 
culation,  and  cheapness  of  the  coinage.  The  first 
ought  not  to  be  sacrificed  to  the  last ;  but  as  far  as 
they  can  be  reconciled  to  each  other,  it  is  desirable  to 
do  it.  Numerous  and  small  (if  not  too  minute)  sub 
divisions  assist  circulation ;  but  the  multiplication  of 
the  smaller  kinds  increases  expense;  the  same  pro 
cess  being  necessary  to  a  small  as  to  a  large  piece. 

As  it  is  easy  to  add,  it  will  be  most  advisable  to 
begin  with  a  small  number,  till  experience  shall  de 
cide  whether  any  other  kinds  are  necessary.  The 


Coinage  and  the  Mint  49 

following,  it  is  conceived,  will  be  sufficient  in  the 
commencement : 

One  gold  piece,  equal  in  weight  and  value  to  ten 
units,  or  dollars. 

One  gold  piece,  equal  to  a  tenth  part  of  the  former, 
and  which  shall  be  a  unit,  or  dollar. 

One  silver  piece,  which  shall  also  be  a  unit,  or 
dollar. 

One  silver  piece,  which  shall  be,  in  weight  and 
value,  a  tenth  part  of  the  silver  unit,  or  dollar. 

One  copper  piece,  which  shall  be  of  the  value  of 
a  hundredth  part  of  a  dollar. 

One  other  copper  piece,  which  shall  be  half  the 
value  of  the  former. 

It  is  not  proposed  that  the  lighter  piece  of  the  two 
gold  coins  should  be  numerous,  as,  in  large  payments, 
the  larger  the  pieces  the  shorter  the  process  of  count 
ing,  the  less  risk  of  mistake,  and,  consequently,  the 
greater  the  safety  and  the  convenience;  and,  in 
small  payments  it  4s  not  perceived  that  any  incon 
venience  can  accrue  from  an  entire  dependence  on 
the  silver  and  copper  coins.  The  chief  inducement 
to  the  establishment  of  the  small  gold  piece  is  to  have 
a  sensible  object  in  that  metal,  as  well  as  in  silver, 
to  express  the  unit.  Fifty  thousand  at  a  time  in  cir 
culation  may  suffice  for  this  purpose. 

The  tenth  part  of  a  dollar  is  but  a  small  piece,  and, 
with  the  aid  of  the  copper  coins,  will  probably  suffice 
for  all  the  more  minute  uses  of  circulation.  It  is 
less  than  the  least  of  the  silver  coins  now  in  general 
currency  in  England. 

The  large  copper  piece  will  nearly  answer  to  the 


VOL.  IV. — 4. 


50  Alexander  Hamilton 

halfpenny  sterling,  and  the  smaller,  of  course,  to  the 
farthing.  Pieces  of  very  small  value  are  a  great  ac 
commodation,  and  the  means  of  a  beneficial  economy 
to  the  poor,  by  enabling  them  to  purchase,  in  small 
portions,  and  at  a  more  reasonable  rate,  the  neces 
saries  of  which  they  stand  in  need.  If  there  are 
only  cents,  the  lowest  price  for  any  portion  of  a  ven 
dible  commodity,  however  inconsiderable  in  quan 
tity,  will  be  a  cent;  if  there  are  half  cents,  it  will  be 
a  half  cent ;  and,  in  a  great  number  of  cases,  exactly 
the  same  things  will  be  sold  for  a  half  cent,  which, 
if  there  were  none,  would  cost  a  cent.  But  a  half 
cent  is  low  enough  for  the  minimum  of  price.  Ex 
cessive  minuteness  would  defeat  its  object.  To  en 
able  the  poorer  classes  to  procure  necessaries  cheap 
is  to  enable  them,  with  more  comfort  to  themselves, 
to  labor  for  less;  the  advantages  of  which  need  no 
comment. 

The  denominations  of  the  silver  coins  contained  in 
the  resolution  of  the  8th  of  August,  1786,  are  con 
ceived  to  be  significant  and  proper.  The  dollar  is 
recommended  by  its  correspondency  with  the  present 
coin  of  that  name  for  which  it  is  designed  to  be  a 
substitute,  which  will  facilitate  its  ready  adoption  as 
such,  in  the  minds  of  the  citizens.  The  dime,  or 
tenth,  the  cent,  or  hundredth,  the  mill,  or  thousandth, 
are  proper,  because  they  express  the  proportions 
which  they  are  intended  to  designate.  It  is  only  to 
be  regretted  that  the  meaning  of  these  terms  will 
not  be  familiar  to  those  who  are  not  acquainted  with 
the  language  from  which  they  are  borrowed.  It 
were  to  be  wished  that  the  length,  and,  in  some  de- 


Coinage  and  the  Mint  51 

gree,  the  clumsiness  of  some  of  the  corresponding 
terms  in  English,  did  not  discourage  from  preferring 
them.  It  is  useful  to  have  names  which  signify  the 
things  to  which  they  belong;  and,  in  respect  to  ob 
jects  of  general  use,  in  a  manner  intelligent  to  all. 
Perhaps  it  might  be  an  improvement  to  let  the  dollar 
have  the  appellation  either  of  dollar  or  unit  (which 
latter  will  be  the  more  significant),  and  to  substitute 
"  tenth ' '  for  dime.  In  time  the  unit  may  succeed  to 
the  dollar.  The  word  cent  being  in  use  in  various 
transactions  and  instruments,  will,  without  much 
difficulty,  be  understood  as  the  hundredth,  and  the 
half  cent,  of  course,  as  the  two-hundredth  part. 

The  eagle  is  not  a  very  expressive  or  apt  appella 
tion  for  the  larger  gold  piece,  but  nothing  better 
occurs.  The  smaller  of  the  two  gold  coins  may  be 
called  the  dollar,  or  unit,  in  common  with  the  silver 
piece  with  which  it  coincides. 

The  volume  or  size  of  each  piece  is  a  matter  of 
more  consequence  than  its  denomination.  It  is 
evident,  that  the  more  superficies,  or  surface,  the 
more  the  piece  will  be  liable  to  be  injured  by  friction, 
or  in  other  words,  the  faster  it  will  wear.  For  this  rea 
son  it  is  desirable  to  render  the  thickness  as  great,  in 
proportion  to  the  breadth,  as  may  consist  with  neat 
ness  and  good  appearance.  Hence,  the  form  of  the 
double  guinea,  or  double  louis  d'or,  is  preferable  to 
that  of  the  half  Johannes,  for  the  large  gold  piece. 
The  small  one  cannot  well  be  of  any  other  size  than 
the  Portuguese  piece  of  eight,  of  the  same  metal. 

As  it  is  of  consequence  to  fortify  the  idea  of  the 
identity  of  the  dollar,  it  may  be  best  to  let  the  form 


52  Alexander  Hamilton 

and  size  of  the  new  one,  as  far  as  the  quantity  of 
matter  (the  alloy  being  less)  permits,  agree  with  the 
form  and  size  of  the  present.  The  diameter  may  be 
the  same. 

The  tenths  may  be  in  a  mean  between  the  Spanish 
1/8  and  1/6  of  a  dollar. 

The  copper  coins  may  be  formed,  merely  with  a 
view  to  good  appearance,  as  any  difference  in  the 
wearing  that  can  result  from  difference  of  form,  can 
be  of  little  consequence  in  reference  to  that  metal. 

It  is  conceived  that  the  weight  of  the  cent  may  be 
eleven  pennyweights,  which  will  about  correspond 
with  the  value  of  the  copper  and  the  expense  of  coin 
age.  This  will  be  to  conform  to  the  rule  of  intrinsic 
value,  as  far  as  regard  to  the  convenient  size  of  the 
coins  will  permit;  and  the  deduction  of  the  expense 
of  the  coinage  in  this  case  will  be  the  more  proper,  as 
the  copper  coins,  which  have  been  current  hitherto, 
have  passed,  till  lately,  for  much  more  than  their  in 
trinsic  value.  Taking  the  weight,  as  has  been  sug 
gested,  the  size  of  the  cent  may  be  nearly  that  of 
the  piece  herewith  transmitted,  which  weighs  10 
dwt.  ii  grs.  10  m.  Two  thirds  of  the  diameter  of 
the  cent  will  suffice  for  the  diameter  of  the  half 
cent. 

It  may,  perhaps,  be  thought  expedient,  according 
to  general  practice,  to  make  the  copper  coinage  an 
object  of  profit,  but,  where  this  is  done  to  any  con 
siderable  extent,  it  is  hardly  possible  to  have  effectual 
security  against  counterfeits.  This  consideration, 
concurring  with  the  soundness  of  the  principle  of 
preserving  the  intrinsic  value  of  the  money  of  a 


Coinage  and  the  Mint  53 

country,  seems  to  outweigh  the  consideration  of 
profit. 

The  foregoing  suggestions  respecting  the  sizes  of 
the  several  coins,  are  made  on  the  supposition  that 
the  Legislature  may  think  fit  to  regulate  this  matter. 
Perhaps,  however,  it  may  be  judged  not  unadvisable 
to  leave  it  to  Executive  discretion. 

With  regard  to  the  proposed  size  of  the  cent,  it  is 
to  be  confessed,  that  it  is  rather  greater  than  might 
be  wished,  if  it  could,  with  propriety  and  safety,  be 
made  less ;  and  should  the  value  of  copper  continue 
to  decline,  as  it  has  done  for  some  time  past,  it  is 
very  questionable  whether  it  will  long  remain  alone 
a  fit  metal  for  money.  This  has  led  to  a  considera 
tion  of  the  expediency  of  uniting  a  small  proportion 
of  silver  with  the  copper,  in  order  to  be  able  to 
lessen  the  bulk  of  the  inferior  coins.  For  this  there 
are  precedents  in  several  parts  of  Europe.  In 
France,  the  composition  which  is  called  billon,  has 
consisted  of  one  part  silver  and  four  parts  copper; 
according  to  which  proportion,  a  cent  might  contain 
seventeen  grains,  defraying  out  of  the  material  the 
expense  of  coinage.  The  conveniency  of  size  is  a 
recommendation  of  such  a  species  of  coin,  but  the 
Secretary  is  deterred  from  proposing  it,  by  the  ap 
prehension  of  counterfeits.  The  effect  of  so  small 
a  quantity  of  silver,  in,  comparatively,  so  large  a 
quantity  of  copper,  could  easily  be  imitated,  by  a 
mixture  of  other  metals  of  little  value,  and  the  tempt 
ation  to  doing  it  would  not  be  inconsiderable. 

The  devices  of  the  coins  are  far  from  being  matters 
of  indifference,  as  they  may  be  made  the  vehicles  of 


54  Alexander  Hamilton 

useful  impressions.  They  ought,  therefore,  to  be  em 
blematical,  but  without  losing  sight  of  simplicity. 
The  fewer  sharp  points  and  angles  there  are,  the  less 
will  be  the  loss  by  wearing.  The  Secretary  thinks  it 
best,  on  this  head,  to  confine  himself  to  these  concise 
and  general  remarks. 

The  last  point  to  be  discussed  respects  the  cur 
rency  of  foreign  coins. 

The  abolition  of  this,  in  proper  season,  is  a  neces 
sary  part  of  the  system  contemplated  for  the  na 
tional  coinage.  But  this  it  will  be  expedient  to 
defer,  till  some  considerable  progress  has  been  made 
in  preparing  substitutes  for  them.  A  gradation  may, 
therefore,  be  found  most  convenient. 

The  foreign  coins  may  be  suffered  to  circulate, 
precisely  upon  their  present  footing,  for  one  year 
after  the  mint  shall  have  commenced  its  operations. 
The  privilege  may  then  be  continued  for  another 
year,  to  the  gold  coins  of  Portugal,  England,  and 
France,  and  to  the  silver  coins  of  Spain.  And  these 
may  still  be  permitted  to  be  current  for  one  year 
more,  at  the  rates  allowed  to  be  given  for  them  at 
the  mint ;  after  the  expiration  of  which  the  circula 
tion  of  all  foreign  coins  to  cease. 

The  moneys  which  will  be  paid  into  the  treasury 
during  the  first  year,  being  re-coined  before  they  are 
issued  anew,  will  afford  a  partial  substitute  before 
any  interruption  is  given  to  the  pre-existing  sup 
plies  of  circulation.  The  revenues  of  the  succeeding 
year,  and  the  coins  which  will  be  brought  to  the 
mint  in  consequence  of  the  discontinuance  of  their 
currency,  will  materially  extend  the  substitute  in 


Coinage  and  the  Mint  55 

the  course  of  that  year,  and  its  extension  will  be  so 
far  increased  during  the  third  year  by  the  facility  of 
procuring  the  remaining  species  to  be  re-coined, 
which  will  arise  from  the  diminution  of  their  current 
values,  as  probably  to  enable  the  dispensing  wholly 
with  the  circulation  of  foreign  coins  after  that  period. 
The  progress  which  the  currency  of  bank  bills  will  be 
likely  to  have  made,  during  the  same  time,  will  also 
afford  a  substitute  of  another  kind. 

This  arrangement,  besides  avoiding  a  sudden  stag 
nation  of  circulation,  will  cause  a  considerable  pro 
portion  of  whatever  loss  may  be  incident  to  the 
establishment  in  the  first  instance  to  fall,  as  it  ought 
to  do,  upon  the  government,  and  will  probably  tend 
to  distribute  the  remainder  of  it  more  equally  among 
the  community. 

It  may,  nevertheless,  be  advisable,  in  addition  to 
the  precautions  here  suggested,  to  repose  a  discretion 
ary  authority  in  the  President  of  the  United  States, 
to  continue  the  currency  of  the  Spanish  dollar,  at  a 
value  corresponding  with  the  quantity  of  fine  silver 
contained  in  it,  beyond  the  period  above  mentioned 
for  the  cessation  of  the  circulation  of  the  foreign 
coins.  It  is  possible  that  an  exception  in  favor  of 
this  particular  species  of  coin  may  be  found  exped 
ient,  and  it  may  tend  to  obviate  inconveniences,  if 
there  be  a  power  to  make  the  exception,  in  a  capacity 
to  be  exerted,  when  the  period  shall  arrive. 

The  Secretary  for  the  Department  of  State,  in  his  re 
port  to  the  House  of  Representatives,  on  the  subject 
/of  establishing  a  uniformity  in  the  weights,  meas- 
7  ures,  and  coins,  of  the  United  States,  has  proposed 


56  Alexander  Hamilton 

that  the  weight  of  the  dollar  should  correspond  with 
the  unit  of  weight.  This  was  done  on  the  sup 
position  that  it  would  require  but  a  very  small  ad 
dition  to  the  quantity  of  metal  which  the  dollar, 
independently  of  the  object  he  had  in  view,  ought  to 
contain,  in  which  he  was  guided  by  the  resolution  of 
the  8th  of  August,  1786,  fixing  the  dollar  at  375 
grains  and  64  hundredths  of  a  grain. 

Taking  this  as  the  proper  standard  of  the  dollar,  a 
small  alteration,  for  the  sake  of  incorporating  so 
systematic  an  idea,  would  appear  desirable.  But,  if 
the  principles  which  have  been  reasoned  from,  in  this 
report,  are  just,  the  execution  of  that  idea  becomes 
more  difficult.  It  would,  certainly,  not  be  advisable 
to  make,  on  that  account,  so  considerable  a  change  in 
the  money  unit,  as  would  be  produced  by  the  addi 
tion  of  five  grains  of  silver  to  the  proper  weight  of 
the  dollar,  without  a  proportional  augmentation  of 
its  relative  value,  and,  to  make  such  an  augmenta 
tion,  would  be  to  abandon  the  advantage  of  pre 
serving  the  identity  of  the  dollar,  or,  to  speak  more 
accurately,  of  having  the  proposed  one  received  and 
considered  as  a  mere  substitute  for  the  present. 

The  end  may,  however,  be  obtained,  without 
either  of  those  inconveniences,  by  increasing  the 
proportion  of  alloy  in  the  silver  coins.  But  this 
would  destroy  the  uniformity,  in  that  respect,  be 
tween  the  gold  and  silver  coins.  It  remains,  there 
fore,  to  elect  which  of  the  two  systematic  ideas  shall 
be  pursued  or  relinquished;  and  it  may  be  re 
marked,  that  it  will  be  more  easy  to  convert  the 
present  silver  coins  into  the  proposed  ones,  if  these 


Coinage  and  the  Mint  57 

last  have  the  same,  or  nearly  the  same,  proportion  of 
alloy,  than  if  they  have  less. 

The  organization  of  the  mint  yet  remains  to  be 
considered. 

This  relates  to  the  persons  to  be  employed,  and  to 
the  services  which  they  are  respectively  to  perform. 
It  is  conceived  that  there  ought  to  be: 

A  director  of  the  mint,  to  have  the  general  super 
intendence  of  the  business. 

An  assay  master,  or  assayer,  to  receive  the  metals 
brought  to  the  mint,  ascertain  their  fineness,  and 
deliver  them  to  be  coined. 

A  master  coiner,  to  conduct  the  making  of  the 
coins. 

A  cashier,  to  receive  and  pay  them  out. 

An  auditor,  to  keep  and  adjust  the  accounts  of  the 
mint. 

Clerks,  as  many  as  the  director  of  the  mint  shall 
deem  necessary,  to  assist  the  different  officers. 

Workmen,  as  many  as  may  be  found  requisite. 

A  porter. 

In  several  of  the  European  mints  there  are  various 
other  officers,  but  the  foregoing  are  those,  only,  who 
appear  to  be  indispensable.  Persons  in  the  capacity 
of  clerks  will  suffice  instead  of  the  others,  with  the 
advantage  of  greater  economy. 

The  number  of  workmen  is  left  indefinite,  because 
at  certain  times  it  is  requisite  to  have  more  than  at 
others.  They  will,  however,  never  be  numerous. 
The  expense  of  the  establishment,  in  an  ordinary 
year,  will  probably  be  from  fifteen  to  twenty  thou 
sand  dollars. 


58  Alexander  Hamilton 

The  remedy  for  errors  in  the  weight  and  alloy  of 
the  coins  must  necessarily  form  a  part  in  the  system 
of  a  mint;  and  the  manner  of  applying  it  will  require 
to  be  regulated.  The  following  account  is  given  of 
the  practice  in  England,  in  this  particular. 

A  certain  number  of  pieces  are  taken  promiscu 
ously  out  of  every  fifteen  pounds  of  gold  coined  at 
the  mint,  which  are  deposited,  for  safe-keeping,  in  a 
strong  box,  called  the  pix.  This  box,  from  time  to 
time,  is  opened  in  the  presence  of  the  lord  chancellor, 
the  officers  of  the  treasury,  and  others,  and  portions 
are  selected  from  the  pieces  of  each  coinage,  which 
are  melted  together,  and  the  mass  assayed  by  a  jury 
of  the  company  of  goldsmiths.  If  the  imperfection 
and  deficiency,  both  in  fineness  and  weight,  fall  short 
of  a  sixth  of  a  carat,  or  40  grains  of  pure  gold,  upon  a 
pound  of  standard,  the  master  of  the  mint  is  held 
excusable,  because  it  is  supposed,  that  no  workman 
can  reasonably  be  answerable  for  greater  exactness. 
The  expediency  of  some  similar  regulation  seems  to 
be  manifest. 

All  of  which  is  humbly  submitted. 

ALEXANDER  HAMILTON, 
Secretary  of  the  Treasury. 


HAMILTON   TO   JEFFERSON 
«  TREASURY  DEPARTMENT,  June  21,  1791. 

biR: 

It  has  occurred  to  me  that  it  would  be  productive 
of  very  useful  information,  if  some  officer  of  the 
United  States,  in  each  foreign  country  where  there 


Coinage  and  the  Mint  59 

is  one,  were  instructed  to  transmit  occasionally  a 
state  of  the  coins  of  the  country,  specifying  their 
respective  standards,  weights,  and  values;  and, 
periodically,  a  state  of  the  market  prices  of  gold  and 
silver  in  coin  and  bullion,  and  of  the  rates  of  foreign 
exchange ;  and  of  the  rates  of  the  different  kinds  of 
labor,  as  well  that  employed  in  manufactures  and  in 
tillage. 

I  would  beg  leave  to  request,  if  there  appears  to 
you  no  inconvenience  in  the  thing,  that  an  instruc 
tion  may  be  sent  for  the  above  purpose,  and  that 
copies  of  the  statements  which  shall  from  time  to 
time  be  received  in  consequence  of  it  may  be  fur 
nished  to  the  treasury. 


HAMILTON   TO    WASHINGTON 

TREASURY  DEPARTMENT,  January  31,  1795. 

SIR: 

Previous  to  the  leaving  my  present  office,  there 
are  a  few  points  which  I  think  it  my  duty  to  bring 
under  the  consideration  of  the  President. 

The  first  regards  the  present  state  and  arrange 
ment  of  the  mint. 

It  is  certain  that  this  establishment  is  capable  of 
producing  very  important  benefits  to  the  com 
munity.  At  this  moment,  when  an  unusually  large 
and  sudden  exportation  of  silver  has  produced  a 
very  inconvenient  scarcity  of  that  species  of  money, 
the  full  activity  of  the  mint  would  be  of  primary 
utility.  Large  quantities  of  silver  lie  in  the  banks 


60  Alexander  Hamilton 

and  other  places  in  ingots,  which,  if  turned  into  coin, 
would  be  of  the  greatest  advantage  to  trade,  and  to 
all  pecuniary  operations,  public  and  private. 

Hitherto  the  mint  has  comparatively  done  nothing. 
This  is  matter  both  of  surprise  and  complaint  with  all 
that  part  of  the  community  whose  dissatisfactions 
are  the  less  known,  because  they  are  not  lightly 
promulgated.  The  institution  itself,  by  not  fulfill 
ing  the  public  expectation,  grows  into  discredit,  and 
those  who  have  had  the  principal  agency  in  its  es 
tablishment  are  wounded  by  a  growing  disrepute, 
which  is  attributable  truly  to  an  insufficient  execu 
tion.  The  President  probably  knows  better  than  I 
do  what  have  been  the  causes  of  the  deficiency. 
They  may  afford  a  justification;  but,  uninformed 
as  I  am,  I  cannot  help  thinking  that,  with  due  exer 
tion,  the  business  of  the  mint  might  have  been  far 
more  matured,  and  its  present  powers  of  action  far 
greater  than  they  are.  And  I  am  led  to  fear  that  as 
long  as  it  continues  under  its  present  management 
the  public  expectation  will  be  disappointed.  The 
director,  though  a  most  respectable  and  excellent 
man,  can  hardly  be  expected,  on  several  accounts, 
to  give  that  close  and  undivided  attention  to  it 
which  in  its  first  stages  is  indispensable. 

There  is  another  point  in  relation  to  the  same  sub 
ject,  on  which  I  should  have  been  silent  as  long  as  I 
could  have  been  supposed  to  have  any  personal  mo 
tive  to  influence  my  opinion.  But  now  that  this  is 
at  an  end,  I  yield  without  hesitation  to  my  convic 
tions  of  the  public  interest,  in  presenting  with  the 
greatest  deference  those  convictions  to  the  considera- 


Coinage  and  the  Mint  61 

tion  of  the  President.  They  amount  to  this,  that 
the  mint  establishment  will  be  most  advantageously 
for  the  service  of  the  United  States  placed  under  the 
superintendence  of  the  Department  of  the  Treasury. 

It  is  obvious  that  that  establishment  forms  a  most 
material  link  in  the  money  system  of  the  country. 
This  system,  as  it  regards  public  operations,  is  in  the 
management  of  the  Department  of  the  Treasury.  It 
follows  that,  in  the  theory  of  the  case,  there  is  an 
intimate  relation  between  this  department  and  that 
establishment. 

The  law  constituting  the  mint  also  establishes 
some  relations  between  them. 

The  fifth  section  refers  to  the  judgment  of  the 
Secretary  of  the  Treasury  the  competency  of  the 
sureties  to  be  given  by  the  officers  of  the  mint. 

The  fourteenth  section,  providing  for  the  ex 
change  of  the  bullion  for  money,  with  the  deduction 
of  one-half  per  cent.,  toward  defraying  the  expenses 
of  the  mint,  makes  it  the  duty  of  the  Secretary  of 
the  Treasury  to  furnish  the  mint  from  time  to  time, 
whenever  the  state  of  the  treasury  will  admit  of  it, 
with  such  sums  as  may  be  necessary  for  effecting 
those  exchanges.  To  engage  the  Secretary  to  dis 
possess  the  treasury  with  confidence  of  large  sums 
for  such  exchanges,  it  is  necessary  that  he  should 
be  very  certain  of  their  regular  and  punctual  return. 
The  assurance  of  this  would  be  not  a  little  strength 
ened  by  that  intimate  knowledge  of  situation  which 
would  result  from  the  duty  of  superintending.  The 
efficient  operation  of  this  provision  is  of  no  small 
consequence  to  the  economy  of  the  establishment. 


62  Alexander  Hamilton 

Hitherto  its  situation  has  been  such  as  to  preclude 
absolutely  the  effect  of  it. 

Moreover,  the  Secretary  of  the  Treasury,  called 
daily  and  habitually  to  observe  the  progress  of 
money  transactions,  awake  to  everything  which  can 
affect  them  well  or  ill,  because  the  credit  of  his  de 
partment  depends  upon  it,  must  be  more  likely  than 
any  other  officer  to  feel  a  due  sensibility  to  the  effi 
cient  and  proper  course  of  the  mint,  and  consequently 
to  exert  himself  to  give  it  such  a  course. 

The  Post  Office,  on  the  other  hand,  if  the  idea 
which  has  repeatedly  appeared  in  Congress  be  ad 
hered  to,  that  of  rendering  it  an  instrument  of  the 
improvement  of  the  public  roads  instead  of  a  means 
of  revenue,  may  without  inconvenience  be  placed 
under  the  Department  of  State,  while  the  mint  estab 
lishment  is  transferred  to  the  Treasury. 

These  observations  proceed  on  the  supposition 
that  the  President  has  adopted  in  principle  and 
practice  the  plan  of  distributing  all  the  particular 
branches  of  the  public  service,  except  that  of  the 
law,  among  the  three  great  departments;  a  plan 
which  is  believed  to  be  founded  on  good  reasons. 

Another  point,  to  which  I  would  invite  the  atten 
tion  of  the  President,  is  the  scheme  of  mounted 
volunteers,  as  established  in  the  law,  and  as  it  has 
operated  in  practice. 

The  expense  of  it  is  enormous,  and,  from  the  na 
ture  of  the  thing,  has  a  tendency  to  continue  so. 
Though  the  compensation  of  a  dollar  per  man  is  not 
fixed  absolutely,  but  as  a  limit  not  to  be  exceeded, 
the  effect  is,  that  extent  of  the  sum  is  expected,  and 


Coinage  and  the  Mint  63 

that  from  this  expectation  the  men  could  not  prob 
ably  be  obtained  for  less.  The  Executive,  too,  in 
an  emergent  service,  will  never  be  willing  to  incur 
the  responsibility  of  failing  by  a  restriction  of  the 
sum,  and  thus  the  ultimatum  becomes  the  ordinary 
rule. 

It  will  be  happy  if  a  revision  of  the  measures  for 
defensive  protection  should  issue  in  a  conviction 
that  the  number  of  volunteer  horse  can  be  reduced 
by  a  substitution  of  infantry.  It  is  imagined  that 
on  calculation  it  would  appear  that  a  more  than  pro 
portional  increase  of  infantry  would  cost  less. 

In  the  last  place,  I  beg  leave  to  submit  an  impres 
sion  that  advantages  would  accrue,  in  the  view  of 
economy  at  least,  if  the  agents  for  Indian  affairs,  in 
the  southwestern  and  northwestern  territories,  were 
distinct  from  the  governors.  These  might  still  re 
tain  the  political  direction  of  affairs,  and  there  would 
result  a  check  in  the  business  of  supplies. 


INDUSTRY  AND  COMMERCE 


VOU.V.-S. 


INDUSTRY  AND  COMMERCE 


FISHERIES 

HAMILTON   TO   GOODHUE 

October  29,  1790. 

DEAR  SIR: 

As  the  subject  of  the  enclosed  letter  is  of  conse 
quence  to  the  Whale  Fishery,  I  send  it  to  you  to 
read,  and  will  be  glad  to  converse  with  you  about  it 
to-morrow.  Your  obedient  servant, 

A.  H. 

October  29,  1790. 

MY  DEAR  SIR: 

I  am  duly  favored  with  your  letter  of  the  eight 
eenth  instant,  and  receive  the  observations  you  have 
been  so  obliging  as  to  make,  not  only  with  candor 
but  with  thanks,  as  a  mark  of  your  friendship  and 
confidence. 

I  am  far  from  relying  so  much  upon  my  own  judg 
ment  as  not  to  think  it  very  possible  that  I  may  have 
been  mistaken  in  both  the  constructions  on  which 
you  remark.  Indeed  I  see  abundant  room  for  adopt 
ing  opposite  ones,  and  did  not,  till  after  mature 
reflection,  conclude  on  those  which  had  been  an 
nounced,  and  not  then  entirely,  without  hesitation. 

67 


68  Alexander  Hamilton 

The  reasoning  which  prevailed  in  my  mind  in  each 
case  was  of  this  nature: 

First,  as  to  the  bounty. 

The  original  and  express  object  of  the  allowance 
was  by  way  of  compensation  for  the  duties  on  salt. 

The  declared  motive  of  the  suspension  was,  that 
there  was  salt  within  the  United  States  on  which  no 
such  duties  had  been  paid. 

The  equity  of  the  suspending  clause,  which  is, 
that  there  ought  to  be  no  compensation  where  there 
is  no  consideration,  and  the  general  intent  of  the 
Legislature,  which  was,  that  there  should  be  no 
compensation  where  there  had  been  no  such  con 
sideration,  were  therefore  both  manifestly  against 
the  allowance  of  the  bounty  on  the  articles  shipped 
between  the  passing  of  the  first  act  and  the  passing 
of  the  second.  And  though  the  letter  of  the  sus 
pending  clause  is  future,  yet  its  reason  being  retro 
spective,  and  the  actual  making  of  the  allowance  for 
articles  already  shipped  being  future  also,  I  thought 
it  admissible  so  to  construe  the  law  as  to  arrest  this 
allowance,  in  that  sense  future,  in  conformity  to  the 
real  justice  of  the  case  and  the  main  design  of  the 
Legislature.  In  a  circumstance  in  which  the  equity 
was  palpable,  and  the  law  doubtful,  I  thought  it  my 
duty  as  an  executive  servant  of  the  government  not 
to  let  the  public  money  be  parted  with  on  a  mere 
point  of  construction,  till  that  construction  should 
be  judicially  established.  This  resource  will  be  open 
to  any  individual  who  will  choose  to  pursue  it,  by  an 
action  against  the  collector  of  the  port  from  which 
the  articles  were  shipped. 


Industry  and  Commerce  69 

Secondly,  as  to  the  discount  for  prompt  payment. 

The  words  " prompt  payment"  are,  in  my  appre 
hension,  synonymous  with  immediate  payment,  or 
payment  down.  The  most  obvious  import  of  the 
clause  in  question  seems,  therefore,  to  be  this:  when 
the  amount  of  the  duties  exceeds  fifty  dollars,  time 
shall  be  given  for  payment  upon  proper  bond  se 
curity;  but  if  the  party  prefers  making  immediate 
payment,  on  paying  the  money  down  he  shall  have 
an  allowance  of  ten  per  cent.,  on  all  above  fifty  dol 
lars,  for  doing  it.  The  confining  the  discount  to  the 
excess  illustrates  the  meaning  of  the  provision,  and 
shows  that  payment  in  the  first  instance  was  con 
templated;  for  if  it  had  been  intended  that  the  dis 
count  might  be  made  at  any  time  before  the  bonds 
became  due,  it  would  be  difficult  to  imagine  why  it 
should  not  extend  to  the  fifty  dollars,  as  well  as  to 
the  excess. 

I  was  the  more  inclined  to  this  construction,  be 
cause  I  supposed  the  contrary  one  was  of  a  nature 
to  be  rendered  more  beneficial  to  any  collector  who 
might  choose  to  avail  himself  of  it  than  to  the  public. 
And  in  general,  I  doubt  much  that  it  is  the  interest 
of  the  public  to  make  such  a  discount,  as  they  now 
borrow  at  less  in  its  operation  than  six  per  cent. ;  on 
which  account  I  felt  no  inclination  to  extend  the 
discount. 

Thus  have  I,  my  dear  sir,  freely  explained  to  you 
the  motives  by  which  I  have  been  governed  in  the 
instances  in  question,  and  I  shall  be  happy  that  they 
may  appear  to  you  satisfactory.  I  am  sure,  at 
least,  that  you  will  view  the  intention  favorably; 


70  Alexander  Hamilton 

and  I  beg  you  to  be  assured  of  the  friendship  and 
esteem  with  which  I  am,  etc. 

MANUFACTURES 

Communicated  to  the  House  of  Representatives,  December  5,  1791. 

The  Secretary  of  the  Treasury,  in  obedience  to  the 
order  of  the  House  of  Representatives,  of  the  i$th 
day  of  January,  1790,  has  applied  his  attention,  at 
as  early  a  period  as  his  other  duties  would  permit,  to 
the  subject  of  Manufactures,  and  particularly  to  the 
means  of  promoting  such  as  will  tend  to  render  the 
United  States  independent  on  foreign  nations  for 
military  and  other  essential  supplies;  and  he  there 
upon  respectfully  submits  the  following  report: 

The  expediency  of  encouraging  manufactures  in 
the  United  States,  which  was  not  long  since  deemed 
very  questionable,  appears  at  this  time  to  be  pretty 
generally  admitted.  The  embarrassments  which  have 
obstructed  the  progress  of  our  external  trade,  have 
led  to  serious  reflections  on  the  necessity  of  enlarging 
the  sphere  of  our  domestic  commerce.  The  restrict 
ive  regulations,  which,  in  foreign  markets,  abridge 
the  vent  of  the  increasing  surplus  of  our  agricultural 
produce,  serve  to  beget  an  earnest  desire  that  a  more 
extensive  demand  for  that  surplus  may  be  created 
at  home;  and  the  complete  success  which  has  re 
warded  manufacturing  enterprise  in  some  valuable 
branches,  conspiring  with  the  promising  symptoms 
which  attend  some  less  mature  essays  in  others,  jus 
tify  a  hope  that  the  obstacles  to  the  growth  of  this 


Industry  and  Commerce  71 

species  of  industry  are  less  formidable  than  they 
were  apprehended  to  be,  and  that  it  is  not  difficult  to 
find,  in  its  further  extension,  a  full  indemnification 
for  any  external  disadvantages,  which  are  or  may 
be  experienced,  as  well  as  an  accession  of  resources, 
favorable  to  national  independence  and  safety. 

There  are  still,  nevertheless,  respectable  patrons 
of  opinions  unfriendly  to  the  encouragement  of 
manufactures.  The  following  are,  substantially,  the 
arguments  by  which  these  opinions  are  defended : 

1 '  In  every  country  (say  those  who  entertain  them)    / 
agriculture  is  the  most  beneficial  and  productive  ob-  ! 
ject  of  human  industry.     This  position,  generally  if 
not  universally  true,  applies  with  peculiar  emphasis 
to  the  United  States,  on  account  of  their  immense 
tracts  of  fertile  territory,   uninhabited  and  unim 
proved.     Nothing  can  afford  so  advantageous  an") 
employment  for  capital  and  labor,  as  the  conversion  \ 
of  this  extensive  wilderness  into  cultivated  farms,  j 
Nothing,  equally  with  this,  can  contribute  to  the 
population,  strength,  and  real  riches  of  the  country. 

"To  endeavor,  by  the  extraordinary  patronage  of] 
government,  to  accelerate  the  growth  of  manufac 
tures,  is,  in  fact,  to  endeavor,  by  force  and  art,  to 
transfer  the  natural  current  of  industry  from  a  more 
to  a  less  beneficial  channel.  Whatever  has  such  a 
tendency,  must  necessarily  be  unwise ;  indeed,  it  can 
hardly  ever  be  wise  in  a  government  to  attempt  to 
give  a  direction  to  the  industry  of  its  citizens.  This, 
under  the  quick-sighted  guidance  of  private  interest, 
will,  if  left  to  itself,  infallibly  find  its  own  way  to  the 
most  profitable  employment;  and  it  is  by  such  em- 


72  Alexander  Hamilton 

ployment,  that  the  public  prosperity  will  be  most 
effectually  promoted.  To  leave  industry  to  itself, 
therefore,  is,  in  almost  every  case,  the  soundest  as 
well  as  the  simplest  policy. 

"This  policy  is  not  only  recommended  to  the 
United  States,  by  considerations  which  affect  all  na 
tions;  it  is,  in  a  manner,  dictated  to  them  by  the 
imperious  force  of  a  very  peculiar  situation.  The 
}  smallness  of  their  population  compared  with  their 
[  territory ;  the  constant  allurements  to  emigration 
/  from  the  settled  to  the  unsettled  parts  of  the  country; 
the  facility  with  which  the  less  independent  condition 
of  an  artisan  can  be  exchanged  for  the  more  inde 
pendent  condition  of  a  farmer; — these,  and  similar 
causes,  conspire  to  produce,  and,  for  a  length  of  time, 
must  continue  to  occasion,  a  scarcity  of  hands  for 
manufacturing  occupation,  and  dearness  of  labor 
generally.  To  these  disadvantages  for  the  pro 
secution  of  manufactures,  a  deficiency  of  pecuniary 
capital  being  added,  the  prospect  of  a  successful 
competition  with  the  manufactures  of  Europe,  must 
be  regarded  as  little  less  than  desperate.  Extensive 
manufactures  can  only  be  the  offspring  of  a  redund 
ant,  at  least  of  a  full,  population.  Till  the  latter 
shall  characterize  the  situation  of  this  country,  't  is 
vain  to  hope  for  the  former. 

"  If,  contrary  to  the  natural  course  of  things,  an 
unseasonable  and  premature  spring  can  be  given  to 
certain  fabrics,  by  heavy  duties,  prohibitions,  boun 
ties,  or  by  other  forced  expedients,  this  will  only  be 
I  to  sacrifice  the  interests  of  the  community  to  those 
of  particular  classes.  Besides  the  misdirection  of 


Industry  and  Commerce  73 

labor,  a  virtual  monopoly  will  be  given  to  the  per 
sons  employed  on  such  fabrics ;  and  an  enhancement 
of  price,  the  inevitable  consequence  of  every  mono 
poly,  must  be  defrayed  at  the  expense  of  the  other 
parts  of  society.  It  is  far  preferable,  that  those  per 
sons  should  be  engaged  in  the  cultivation  of  the 
earth,  and  that  we  should  procure,  in  exchange  for 
its  productions,  the  commodities  with  which  foreign 
ers  are  able  to  supply  us  in  greater  perfection  and 
upon  better  terms." 

This  mode  of  reasoning  is  founded  upon  facts  and 
principles  which  have  certainly  respectable  preten 
sions.  If  it  had  governed  the  conduct  of  nations 
more  generally  than  it  has  done,  there  is  room  to 
suppose  that  it  might  have  carried  them  faster  to 
prosperity  and  greatness  than  they  have  attained  by 
the  pursuit  of  maxims  too  widely  opposite.  Most 
general  theories,  however,  admit  of  numerous  ex 
ceptions,  and  there  are  few,  if  any,  of  the  political 
kind,  which  do  not  blend  a  considerable  portion  of 
error  with  the  truths  they  inculcate. 

I.  In  order  to  an  accurate  judgment  how  far  that 
which  has  been  just  stated  ought  to  be  deemed 
liable  to  a  similar  imputation,  it  is  necessary  to  ad 
vert  carefully  to  the  considerations  which  plead  in 
favor  of  manufactures,  and  which  appear  to  recom 
mend  the  special  and  positive  encouragement  of 
them  in  certain  cases  and  under  certain  reasonable 
limitations. 

It  ought  readily  be  conceded  that  the  cultivation 
of  the  earth,  as  the  primary  and  most  certain  source 
of  national  supply,  as  the  immediate  and  chief 


74  Alexander  Hamilton 

source  of  subsistence  to  a  man,  as  the  principal  source 
of  those  materials  which  constitute  the  nutriment  of 
other  kinds  of  labor,  as  including  a  state  most  favor 
able  to  the  freedom  and  independence  of  the  human 
mind — one,  perhaps,  most  conducive  to  the  multi 
plication  of  the  human  species,  has  intrinsically  a 
strong  claim  to  pre-eminence  over  every  other  kind 
of  industry. 

But,  that  it  has  a  title  to  any  thing  like  an  ex 
clusive  predilection,  in  any  country,  ought  to  be 
admitted  with  great  caution;  that  it  is  even  more 
productive  than  every  other  branch  of  industry,  re 
quires  more  evidence  than  has  yet  been  given  in  sup 
port  of  the  position.  That  its  real  interests,  precious 
and  important  as,  without  the  help  of  exaggeration, 
they  truly  are,  will  be  advanced,  rather  than  in 
jured,  by  the  due  encouragement  of  manufactures, 
may,  it  is  believed,  be  satisfactorily  demonstrated. 
And  it  is  also  believed  that  the  expediency  of  such 
encouragement,  in  a  general  view,  may  be  shown  to 
be  recommended  by  the  most  cogent  and  persuasive 
motives  of  national  policy. 

It  has  been  maintained  that  agriculture  is  not  only 
the  most  productive,  but  the  only  productive,  species 
of  industry.  The  reality  of  this  suggestion,  in  either 
respect,  has,  however,  not  been  verified  by  any  accu 
rate  detail  of  facts  and  calculations ;  and  the  general 
arguments  which  are  adduced  to  prove  it,  are  rather 
subtile  and  paradoxical,  than  solid  or  convincing. 

Those  which  maintain  its  exclusive  productive 
ness  are  to  this  effect: 

Labor  bestowed  upon  the  cultivation  of  land  pro- 


Industry  and  Commerce  75 

duces  enough  not  only  to  replace  all  the  necessary 
expenses  incurred  in  the  business,  and  to  maintain 
the  persons  who  are  employed  in  it,  but  to  afford, 
together  with  the  ordinary  profit  on  the  stock  or 
capital  of  the  farmer,  a  net  surplus  or  rent  for  the 
landlord  or  proprietor  of  the  soil.  But  the  labor  of 
artificers  does  nothing  more  than  to  replace  the 
stock  which  employs  them  (or  which  furnishes  ma 
terials,  tools,  and  wages),  and  yields  the  ordinary 
profit  upon  that  stock.  It  yields  nothing  equivalent 
to  the  rent  of  land;  neither  does  it  add  any  thing  to 
the  total  value  of  the  whole  annual  produce  of  the 
land  and  labor  of  the  country.  The  additional  value 
given  to  those  parts  of  the  produce  of  land  which  are 
wrought  into  manufactures,  is  counterbalanced  by 
the  value  of  those  other  parts  of  that  produce  which 
are  consumed  by  the  manufacturers.  It  can,  there 
fore,  only  be  by  saving  or  parsimony,  not  by  the 
positive  productiveness  of  their  labor,  that  the 
classes  of  artificers  can,  in  any  degree,  augment 
the  revenue  of  the  society. 

To  this  it  has  been  answered: 

i.  "That,  inasmuch  as  it  is  acknowledged  that 
manufacturing  labor  re-produces  a  value  equal  to 
that  which  is  expended  or  consumed  in  carrying  it 
on,  and  continues  in  existence  the  original  stock  or 
capital  employed,  it  ought,  on  that  account,  alone, 
to  escape  being  considered  as  wholly  unproductive. 
That,  though  it  should  be  admitted,  as  alleged,  that 
the  consumption  of  the  produce  of  the  soil,  by  the 
classes  of  artificers  or  manufacturers,  is  exactly  equal 
to  the  value  added  by  their  labor  to  the  materials 


76  Alexander  Hamilton 

upon  which  it  is  exerted,  yet  it  would  not  thence 
follow  that  it  added  nothing  to  the  revenue  of  the 
society,  or  to  the  aggregate  value  of  the  annual  pro 
duce  of  its  land  and  labor.  If  the  consumption,  for 
any  given  period,  amounted  to  a  given  sum,  and  the 
increased  value  of  the  produce  manufactured,  in  the 
same  period,  to  a  like  sum,  the  total  amount  of 
the  consumption  and  production,  during  that  period, 
would  be  equal  to  the  two  sums,  and  consequently 
double  the  value  of  the  agricultural  produce  con 
sumed  ;  and  though  the  increment  of  value  produced 
by  the  classes  of  artificers  should,  at  no  time,  exceed 
the  value  of  the  produce  of  the  land  consumed  by 
them,  yet  there  would  be,  at  every  moment,  in  con 
sequence  of  their  labor,  a  greater  value  of  goods  in 
the  market  than  would  exist  independent  of  it." 

2.  "  That  the  position,  that  artificers  can  augment 
the  revenue  of  a  society  only  by  parsimony,  is  true  in 
no  other  sense  than  in  one  which  is  equally  applica 
ble  to  husbandmen  or  cultivators.     It  may  be  alike 
affirmed  of  all  these  classes,  that  the  fund  acquired 
by  their  labor,  and  destined  for  their  support,  is  not, 
in  an  ordinary  way,  more  than  equal  to  it.     And 
hence  it  will  follow  that  augmentations  of  the  wealth 
or  capital  of  the  community  (except  in  the  instances 
of  some  extraordinary  dexterity  or  skill)  can  only 
proceed,  with  respect  to  any  of  them,  from  the  sav 
ings  of  the  more  thrifty  and  parsimonious." 

3.  "That  the  annual  produce  of  the  land  and 
labor  of  a  country  can  only  be  increased  in  two  ways 
— by  some  improvement  in  the  productive  powers 
of  the  useful  labor  which  actually  exists  within  it, 


Industry  and  Commerce  77 

or  by  some  increase  in  the  quantity  of  such  labor. 
That,  with  regard  to  the  first,  the  labor  of  artificers 
being  capable  of  greater  subdivision  and  simplicity 
of  operation  than  that  of  cultivators,  it  is  susceptible, 
in  a  proportionably  greater  degree,  of  improvement 
in  its  productive  powers,  whether  to  be  derived  from 
an  accession  of  skill  or  from  the  application  of  in 
genious  machinery;  in  which  particular,  therefore, 
the  labor  employed  in  the  culture  of  land  can  pre 
tend  to  no  advantage  over  that  engaged  in  manu 
factures.  That,  with  regard  to  an  augmentation  of 
the  quantity  of  useful  labor,  this,  excluding  adventi 
tious  circumstances,  must  depend  essentially  upon 
an  increase  of  capital,  which  again  must  depend  upon 
the  savings  made  out  of  the  revenues  of  those  who 
furnish  or  manage  that  which  is  at  any  time  em 
ployed,  whether  in  agriculture  or  in  manufactures, 
or  in  any  other  way." 

But  while  the  exclusive  productiveness  of  agri 
cultural  labor  has  been  denied  and  refuted,  the 
superiority  of  its  productiveness  has  been  conceded 
without  hesitation.  As  this  concession  involves  a 
point  of  considerable  magnitude,  in  relation  to  max 
ims  of  public  administration,  the  grounds  on  which 
it  rests  are  worthy  of  a  distinct  and  particular  ex 
amination. 

One  of  the  arguments  made  use  of  in  support  of 
the  idea  may  be  pronounced  both  quaint  and  super 
ficial.  It  amounts  to  this:  That,  in  the  productions 
of  the  soil,  nature  co-operates  with  man;  and  that 
the  effect  of  their  joint  labor  must  be  greater  than 
that  of  the  labor  of  man  alone. 


78  Alexander  Hamilton 

This,  however,  is  far  from  being  a  necessary  in 
ference.  It  is  very  conceivable  that  the  labor  of 
man  alone,  laid  out  upon  a  work  requiring  great 
skill  and  art  to  bring  it  to  perfection,  may  be  more 
productive,  in  value,  than  the  labor  of  nature  and 
man  combined,  when  directed  towards  more  simple 
operations  and  objects;  and  when  it  is  recollected 
to  what  an  extent  the  agency  of  nature,  in  the  ap 
plication  of  the  mechanical  powers,  is  made  auxiliary 
to  the  prosecution  of  manufactures,  the  suggestion 
which  has  been  noticed  loses  even  the  appearance  of 
plausibility. 

It  might  also  be  observed,  with  a  contrary  view, 
that  the  labor  employed  in  agriculture  is,  in  a  great 
measure,  periodical  and  occasional,  depending  on  sea 
sons,  and  liable  to  various  and  long  intermissions; 
while  that  occupied  in  many  manufactures  is  constant 
and  regular,  extending  through  the  year,  embracing, 
in  some  instances,  night  as  well  as  day.  It  is  also 
probable  that  there  are,  among  the  cultivators  of 
land,  more  examples  of  remissness  than  among  arti 
ficers.  The  farmer,  from  the  peculiar  fertility  of 
his  land,  or  some  other  favorable  circumstance,  may 
frequently  obtain  a  livelihood,  even  with  a  consid 
erable  degree  of  carelessness  in  the  mode  of  cult 
ivation;  but  the  artisan  can  with  difficulty  effect 
the  same  object,  without  exerting  himself  pretty 
equally  with  all  those  who  are  engaged  in  the  same 
pursuit.  And  if  it  may  likewise  be  assumed  as  a 
fact,  that  manufactures  open  a  wider  field  to  exer 
tions  of  ingenuity  than  agriculture,  it  would  not  be 
a  strained  conjecture,  that  the  labor  employed  in 


Industry  and  Commerce  79 

the  former,  being  at  once  more  constant,  more  uni 
form,  and  more  ingenious,  than  that  which  is  em 
ployed  in  the  latter,  will  be  found,  at  the  same  time, 
more  productive. 

But  it  is  not  meant  to  lay  stress  on  observations  of 
this  nature;  they  ought  only  to  serve  as  a  counter 
balance  to  those  of  a  similar  complexion.  Circum 
stances  so  vague  and  general,  as  well  as  so  abstract, 
can  afford  little  instruction  in  a  matter  of  this  kind. 

Another,  and  that  which  seems  to  be  the  principal 
argument  offered  for  the  superior  productiveness  of 
agricultural  labor,  turns  upon  the  allegation,  that 
labor  employed  on  manufactures  yields  nothing 
equivalent  to  the  rent  of  land,  or  to  that  net  surplus, 
as  it  is  called,  which  accrues  to  the  proprietor  of  the 
soil. 

But  this  distinction,  important  as  it  has  been 
deemed,  appears  rather  verbal  than  substantial. 

It  is  easily  discernible,  that  what,  in  the  first  in 
stance,  is  divided  into  two  parts,  under  the  denomina 
tions  of  the  ordinary  profit  of  the  stock  of  the  farmer 
and  rent  to  the  landlord,  is,  in  the  second  instance 
united  under  the  general  appellation  of  the  ordinary 
profit  on  the  stock  of  the  undertaker;  and  that  this 
formal  or  verbal  distribution  constitutes  the  whole 
difference  in  the  two  cases.  It  seems  to  have  been 
overlooked,  that  the  land  is  itself  a  stock  or  capital, 
advanced  or  lent  by  its  owner  to  the  occupier  or  ten 
ant,  and  that  the  rent  he  receives  is  only  the  ordinary 
profit  of  a  certain  stock  in  land,  not  managed  by  the 
proprietor  himself,  but  by  another,  to  whom  he  lends 
or  lets  it,  and  who,  on  his  part,  advances  a  second 


8o  Alexander  Hamilton 

capital,  to  stock  and  improve  the  land,  upon  which 
he  also  receives  the  usual  profit.  The  rent  of  the 
landlord  and  the  profit  of  the  farmer  are,  therefore, 
nothing  more  than  the  ordinary  profits  of  two  capitals 
belonging  to  two  different  persons,  and  united  in  the 
cultivation  of  a  farm;  as,  in  the  other  case,  the  sur 
plus  which  arises  upon  any  manufactory,  after  re 
placing  the  expenses  of  carrying  it  on,  answers  to  the 
ordinary  profits  of  one  or  more  capitals  engaged  in 
the  prosecution  of  such  manufactory.  It  is  said  one 
or  more  capitals,  because,  in  fact,  the  same  thing 
which  is  contemplated  in  the  case  of  the  farm,  some 
times  happens  in  that  of  a  manufactory.  There  is 
one  who  furnishes  a  part  of  the  capital  or  lends  a  part 
of  the  money  by  which  it  is  carried  on,  and  another 
who  carries  it  on  with  the  addition  of  his  own  capital. 
Out  of  the  surplus  which  remains  after  defraying 
expenses,  an  interest  is  paid  to  the  money-lender,  for 
the  portion  of  the  capital  furnished  by  him,  which 
exactly  agrees  with  the  rent  paid  to  the  landlord; 
and  the  residue  of  that  surplus  constitutes  the  profit 
of  the  undertaker  or  manufacturer,  and  agrees  with 
what  is  denominated  the  ordinary  profits  on  the  stock 
of  the  farmer.  Both  together  make  the  ordinary 
profits  of  two  capitals  employed  in  a  manufactory; 
as,  in  the  other  case,  the  rent  of  the  landlord  and  the 
revenue  of  the  farmer  compose  the  ordinary  profits 
of  two  capitals  employed  in  the  cultivation  of  a  farm. 
The  rent,  therefore,  accruing  to  the  proprietor  of 
the  land,  far  from  being  a  criterion  of  exclusive 
productiveness,  as  has  been  argued,  is  no  criterion 
even  of  superior  productiveness,  j  The  question 


Industry  and  Commerce  81 

must  still  be,  whether  the  surplus,  after  defraying 
expenses,  of  a  given  capital,  employed  in  the  pur 
chase  and  improvement  of  a  piece  of  land,  is  greater 
or  less  than  that  of  a  like  capital,  employed  in  the 
prosecution  of  a  manufactory ;  or  whether  the  whole 
value  produced  from  a  given  capital  and  a  given 
quantity  of  labor,  employed  in  one  way,  be  greater 
or  less  than  the  whole  value  produced  from  an  equal 
capital  and  an  equal  quantity  of  labor,  employed 
in  the  other  way;  or  rather,  perhaps,  whether  the 
business  of  agriculture,  or  that  of  manufactures,  will 
yield  the  greater  product,  according  to  a  compound 
ratio  of  the  quantity  of  the  capital  and  the  quantity 
of  labor  which  are  employed  in  the  one  or  in  the 
other. 

The  solution  of  either  of  these  questions  is  not 
easy;  it  involves  numerous  and  complicated  details, 
depending  on  an  accurate  knowledge  of  the  objects 
to  be  compared.  It  is  not  known  that  the  com 
parison  has  ever  yet  been  made  upon  sufficient  data, 
properly  ascertained  and  analyzed.  To  be  able  to 
make  it,  on  the  present  occasion,  with  satisfactory 
precision,  would  demand  more  previous  inquiry  and 
investigation  than  there  has  been  hitherto  either 
leisure  or  opportunity  to  accomplish. 

Some  essays,  however,  have  been  made  towards 
acquiring  the  requisite  information,  which  have 
rather  served  to  throw  doubt  upon,  than  to  confirm, 
the  hypothesis  under  examination.  But  it  ought  to 
be  acknowledged  that  they  have  been  too  little 
diversified,  and  are  too  imperfect  to  authorize  a  de 
finite  conclusion  either  way ;  leading  rather  to  prob- 


VOL.  IV.— 6. 


82  Alexander  Hamilton 

able  conjecture  than  to  certain  deduction.  They 
render  it  probable  that  there  are  various  branches 
of  manufactures,  in  which  a  given  capital  will  yield 
a  greater  total  product,  and  a  considerably  greater 
net  product,  than  an  equal  capital  invested  in  the 
purchase  and  improvement  of  lands ;  and  that  there 
are  also  some  branches,  in  which  both  the  gross  and 
the  net  product  will  exceed  that  of  the  agricultural 
industry,  according  to  a  compound  ratio  of  capital 
and  labor.  But  it  is  on  this  last  point  that  there 
appears  to  be  the  greatest  room  for  doubt.  It  is  far 
less  difficult  to  infer  generally,  that  the  net  produce 
of  capital  engaged  in  manufacturing  enterprises  is 
greater  than  that  of  capital  engaged  in  agriculture. 

The  foregoing  suggestions  are  not  designed  to  in 
culcate  an  opinion  that  manufacturing  industry  is 
more  productive  than  that  of  agriculture.  They 
are  intended  rather  to  show  that  the  reverse  of  this 
proposition  is  not  ascertained;  that  the  general  ar 
guments  which  are  brought  to  establish  it  are  not 
satisfactory;  and,  consequently,  that  a  supposition 
of  the  superior  productiveness  of  tillage  ought  to  be 
no  obstacle  to  listening  to  any  substantial  induce 
ments  to  the  encouragement  of  manufactures,  which 
may  be  otherwise  perceived  to  exist,  through  an 
apprehension  that  they  may  have  a  tendency  to 
divert  labor  from  a  more  to  a  less  profitable  em 
ployment. 

It  is  extremely  probable  that,  on  a  full  and  ac 
curate  development  of  the  matter,  on  the  ground  of 
fact  and  calculation,  it  would  be  discovered  that 
there  is  no  material  difference  between  the  aggre- 


Industry  and  Commerce  83 

gate  productiveness  of  the  one  and  of  the  other  kind 
of  industry;  and  that  the  propriety  of  the  encour 
agements  which  may,  in  any  case,  be  proposed  to  be 
given  to  either,  ought  to  be  determined  upon  con 
siderations  irrelative  to  any  comparison  of  that 
nature. 

II.  But,  without  contending  for  the  superior  pro 
ductiveness  of  manufacturing  industry,  it  may  con 
duce  to  a  better  judgment  of  the  policy  which  ought 
to  be  pursued  respecting  its  encouragement,  to  con 
template  the  subject  under  some  additional  aspects, 
tending  not  only  to  confirm  the  idea  that  this  kind 
of  industry  has  been  improperly  represented  as  un 
productive  in  itself,  but  to  evince,  in  addition,  that 
the  establishment  and  diffusion  of  manufactures 
have  the  effect  of  rendering  the  total  mass  of  useful 
and  productive  labor,  in  a  community,  greater  than 
it  would  otherwise  be.  In  prosecuting  this  dis 
cussion,  it  may  be  necessary  briefly  to  resum£  and 
review  some  of  the  topics  which  have  been  already 
touched. 

To  affirm  that  the  labor  of  the  manufacturer  is  un 
productive,  because  he  consumes  as  much  of  the 
produce  of  land  as  he  adds  value  to  the  raw  material 
which  he  manufactures,  is  not  better  founded  than  it 
would  be  to  affirm  that  the  labor  of  the  farmer, 
which  furnishes  materials  to  the  manufacturer,  is 
unproductive,  because  he  consumes  an  equal  value 
of  manufactured  articles.  Each  furnishes  a  certain 
portion  of  the  produce  of  his  labor  to  the  other,  and 
each  destroys  a  corresponding  portion  of  the  produce 
of  the  labor  of  the  other.  In  the  meantime,  the 


84  Alexander  Hamilton 

maintenance  of  two  citizens,  instead  of  one,  is  going 
on ;  the  State  has  two  members  instead  of  one ;  and 
they,  together,  consume  twice  the  value  of  what  is 
produced  from  the  land. 

If,  instead  of  a  farmer  and  artificer,  there  were  a 
farmer  only,  he  would  be  under  the  necessity  of  de- 
|  voting  a  part  of  his  labor  to  the  fabrication  of 
clothing  and  other  articles,  which  he  would  procure 
of  the  artificer,  in  the  case  of  there  being  such  a  per 
son;  and  of  course  he  would  be  able  to  devote  less 
labor  to  the  cultivation  of  his  farm,  and  would  draw 
from  it  a  proportionately  less  product.  The  whole 
quantity  of  production,  in  this  state  of  things,  in  pro 
visions,  raw  materials,  and  manufactures,  would 
certainly  not  exceed  in  value  the  amount  of  what 
would  be  produced  in  provisions  and  raw  materials 
only,  if  there  were  an  artificer  as  well  as  a  farmer. 

Again,  if  there  were  both  an  artificer  and  a  farmer, 
the  latter  would  be  left  at  liberty  to  pursue  ex 
clusively  the  cultivation  of  his  farm.  A  greater 
quantity  of  provisions  and  raw  materials  would,  of 
course,  be  produced,  equal,  at  least,  as  has  been  al 
ready  observed,  to  the  whole  amount  of  the  pro 
visions,  raw  materials,  and  manufactures,  which 
would  exist  on  a  contrary  supposition.  The  arti 
ficer,  at  the  same  time,  would  be  going  on  in  the 
production  of  manufactured  commodities,  to  an 
amount  sufficient,  not  only  to  repay  the  farmer,  in 
those  commodities,  for  the  provisions  and  materials 
which  were  procured  from  him,  but  to  furnish  the 
artificer  himself  with  a  supply  of  similar  commodi 
ties  for  his  own  use.  Thus,  then,  there  would  be  two 


Industry  and  Commerce  85 

quantities  or  values  in  existence,  instead  of  one; 
and  the  revenue  and  consumption  would  be  double, 
in  one  case,  what  it  would  be  in  the  other. 

If,  in  place  of  both  of  these  suppositions,  there 
were  supposed  to  be  two  farmers  and  no  artificer, 
each  of  whom  applied  a  part  of  his  labor  to  the  cul 
ture  of  land  and  another  part  to  the  fabrication  of 
manufactures;  in  this  case,  the  portion  of  the  labor  of 
both,  bestowed  upon  land,  would  produce  the  same 
quantity  of  provisions  andraw  materials  only,  as  would 
be  produced  by  the  entire  sum  of  the  labor  of  one,  ap 
plied  in  the  same  manner ;  and  the  portion  of  the  labor 
of  both,  bestowed  upon  manufactures,  would  produce 
the  same  quantity  of  manufactures  only,  as  would  be 
produced  by  the  entire  sum  of  the  labor  of  one,  ap 
plied  in  the  same  manner.  Hence,  the  produce  of  the 
labor  of  the  two  farmers  would  not  be  greater  than  the 
produce  of  the  labor  of  the  farmer  and  artificer ;  and 
hence  it  results,  that  the  labor  of  the  artificer  is  as 
positively  productive  as  that  of  the  farmer,  and  as 
positively  augments  the  revenue  of  the  society. 

The  labor  of  the  artificer  replaces  to  the  farmer 
that  portion  of  his  labor  with  which  he  provides  the 
materials  of  exchange  with  the  artificer,  and  which 
he  would  otherwise  have  been  compelled  to  apply  to 
manufactures;  and  while  the  artificer  thus  enables 
the  farmer  to  enlarge  his  stock  of  agricultural  in 
dustry,  a  portion  of  which  he  purchases  for  his  own 
use,  he  also  supplies  himself  with  the  manufactured 
articles  of  which  he  stands  in  need.  He  does  still 
more.  Besides  this  equivalent,  which  he  gives  for 
the  portion  of  agricultural  labor  consumed  by  him, 


86  Alexander  Hamilton 

and  this  supply  of  manufactured  commodities  for 
his  own  consumption,  he  furnishes  still  a  surplus, 
which  compensates  for  the  use  of  the  capital  ad 
vanced,  either  by  himself  or  some  other  person,  for 
carrying  on  the  business.  This  is  the  ordinary 
profit  of  the  stock  employed  in  the  manufactory,  and 
is,  in  every  sense,  as  effective  an  addition  to  the 
income  of  the  society  as  the  rent  of  land. 

The  produce  of  the  labor  of  the  artificer,  conse 
quently,  may  be  regarded  as  composed  of  three 
parts:  one,  by  which  the  provisions  for  his  sub 
sistence  and  the  materials  for  his  work  are  pur 
chased  of  the  farmer;  one,  by  which  he  supplies 
himself  with  manufactured  necessaries ;  and  a  third, 
which  constitutes  the  profit  on  the  stock  employed. 
The  two  last  portions  seem  to  have  been  overlooked 
in  the  system  which  represents  manufacturing  in 
dustry  as  barren  and  unproductive. 

In  the  course  of  the  preceding  illustrations,  the 
products  of  equal  quantities  of  the  labor  of  the 
farmer  and  artificer  have  been  treated  as  if  equal  to 
each  other.  But  this  is  not  to  be  understood  as  in 
tending  to  assert  any  such  precise  equality.  It  is 
merely  a  manner  of  expression,  adopted  for  the  sake 
of  simplicity  and  perspicuity.  Whether  the  value 
of  the  produce  of  the  labor  of  the  farmer  be  some 
what  more  or  less  than  that  of  the  artificer,  is  not 
material  to  the  main  scope  of  the  argument,  which, 
hitherto,  has  only  aimed  at  showing  that  the  one,  as 
well  as  the  other,  occasions  a  positive  augmentation 
of  the  total  produce  and  revenue  of  the  society. 

It  is  now  proper  to  proceed  a  step  further,  and  to 


Industry  and  Commerce  87 

enumerate  the  principal  circumstances  from  which 
it  may  be  inferred  that  manufacturing  establish 
ments  not  only  occasion  a  positive  augmentation  of 
the  produce  and  revenue  of  the  society,  but  that 
they  contribute  essentially  to  rendering  them  greater 
than  they  could  possibly  be  without  such  establish 
ments.  These  circumstances  are: 

1.  The  division  of  labor. 

2.  An  extension  of  the  use  of  machinery. 

3.  Additional  employment  to  classes  of  the  com 
munity  not  ordinarily  engaged  in  the  business. 

4.  The    promoting    of    emigration    from    foreign 
countries. 

5.  The  furnishing  greater  scope  for  the  diversity 
of  talents  and  dispositions,  which  discriminate  men 
from  each  other. 

6.  The  affording  a  more  ample  and  various  field 
for  enterprise. 

7.  The  creating,  in  some  instances,  a  new,  and  se 
curing,  in  all,  a  more  certain  and  steady  demand  for 
the  surplus  produce  of  the  soil. 

Each  of  these  circumstances  has  a  considerable 
influence  upon  the  total  mass  of  industrious  effort  in 
a  community;  together,  they  add  to  it  a  degree  of 
energy  and  effect  which  is  not  easily  conceived. 
Some  comments  upon  each  of  them,  in  the  order  in 
which  they  have  been  stated,  may  serve  to  explain 
their  importance. 

i.  As  to  the  division  of  labor 

It  has  justly  been  observed,  that  there  is  scarcely 
any  thing  of  greater  moment  in  the  economy  of  a 


88  Alexander  Hamilton 

nation  than  the  proper  division  of  labor.  The  separ 
ation  of  occupations  causes  each  to  be  carried  to  a 
much  greater  perfection  than  it  could  possibly  ac 
quire  if  they  were  blended.  This  arises  principally 
from  three  circumstances: 

ist.  The  greater  skill  and  dexterity  naturally  re 
sulting  from  a  constant  and  undivided  application 
to  a  single  object.  It  is  evident  that  these  proper 
ties  must  increase  in  proportion  to  the  separation 
and  simplification  of  objects,  and  the  steadiness  of 
the  attention  devoted  to  each;  and  must  be  less  in 
proportion  to  the  complication  of  objects,  and  the 
number  among  which  the  attention  is  distracted. 

2d.  The  economy  of  time,  by  avoiding  the  loss  of 
it,  incident  to  a  frequent  transition  from  one  opera 
tion  to  another  of  a  different  nature.  This  depends 
on  various  circumstances:  the  transition  itself,  the 
orderly  disposition  of  the  implements,  machines,  and 
materials  employed  in  the  operation  to  be  relin 
quished,  the  preparatory  steps  to  the  commencement 
of  a  new  one,  the  interruption  of  the  impulse  which 
the  mind  of  the  workman  acquires  from  being  en 
gaged  in  a  particular  operation,  the  distractions, 
hesitations,  and  reluctances  which  attend  the  passage 
from  one  kind  of  business  to  another. 

3d.  An  extension  of  the  use  of  machinery.  A 
man  occupied  on  a  single  object  will  have  it  more  in 
his  power,  and  will  be  more  naturally  led  to  exert  his 
imagination,  in  devising  methods  to  facilitate  and 
abridge  labor,  than  if  he  were  perplexed  by  a  variety 
of  independent  and  dissimilar  operations.  Besides 
this  the  fabrication  of  machines,  in  numerous  in- 


Industry  and  Commerce  89 

stances,  becoming  itself  a  distinct  trade,  the  artist 
who  follows  it  has  all  the  advantages  which  have 
been  enumerated,  for  improvement  in  his  particular 
art;  and,  in  both  ways,  the  invention  and  applica 
tion  of  machinery  are  extended. 

And  from  these  causes  united,  the  mere  separation 
of  the  occupation  of  the  cultivator  from  that  of  the 
artificer,  has  the  effect  of  augmenting  the  productive 
powers  of  labor,  and  with  them,  the  total  mass  of  the 
produce  or  revenue  of  a  country.  In  this  single  view 
of  the  subject,  therefore,  the  utility  of  artificers  or 
manufacturers,  towards  producing  an  increase  of 
productive  industry,  is  apparent. 

2.  As  to  an  extension  of  the  use  of  machinery,  a  point 
which,  though  partly  anticipated,  requires  to  be 
placed  in  one  or  two  additional  lights 

The  employment  of  machinery  forms  an  item  of 
great  importance  in  the  general  mass  of  national  in 
dustry.  It  is  an  artificial  force  brought  in  aid  of  the 
natural  force  of  man ;  and,  to  all  the  purposes  of  la 
bor,  is  an  increase  of  hands,  an  accession  of  strength, 
unencumbered  too  by  the  expense  of  maintaining 
the  laborer.  May  it  not,  therefore,  be  fairly  inferred, 
that  those  occupations  which  give  greatest  scope  to 
the  use  of  this  auxiliary,  contribute  most  to  the  gen 
eral  stock  of  industrious  effort,  and,  in  consequence, 
to  the  general  product  of  industry? 

It  shall  be  taken  for  granted,  and  the  truth  of  the 
position  referred  to  observation,  that  manufacturing 
pursuits  are  susceptible,  in  a  greater  degree,  of  the 
application  of  machinery,  than  those  of  agriculture. 


90  Alexander  Hamilton 

If  so,  all  the  difference  is  lost  to  a  community  which, 
instead  of  manufacturing  for  itself,  procures  the 
fabrics  requisite  to  its  supply  from  other  countries. 
The  substitution  of  foreign  for  domestic  manufac 
tures  is  a  transfer  to  foreign  nations  of  the  advantages 
accruing  from  the  employment  of  machinery,  in  the 
modes  in  which  it  is  capable  of  being  employed  with 
most  utility  and  to  the  greatest  extent. 

The  cotton-mill,  invented  in  England,  within  the 
last  twenty  years,  is  a  signal  illustration  of  the  gen 
eral  proposition  which  has  been  just  advanced.  In 
consequence  of  it,  all  the  different  processes  for 
spinning  cotton  are  performed  by  means  of  ma 
chines,  which  are  put  in  motion  by  water,  and  at 
tended  chiefly  by  women  and  children — and  by  a 
smaller  number  of  persons,  in  the  whole,  than  are 
requisite  in  the  ordinary  mode  of  spinning.  And  it 
is  an  advantage  of  great  moment,  that  the  opera 
tions  of  this  mill  continue  with  convenience  during 
the  night  as  well  as  through  the  day.  The  prodigious 
effect  of  such  a  machine  is  easily  conceived.  To 
this  invention  is  to  be  attributed,  essentially,  the 
immense  progress  which  has  been  so  suddenly  made 
in  Great  Britain,  in  the  various  fabrics  of  cotton. 

j.  As  to  the  additional  employment  of  classes  of  the 
community  not  originally  engaged  in  the  par 
ticular  business 

This  is  not  among  the  least  valuable  of  the  means 
by  which  manufacturing  institutions  contribute  to 
augment  the  general  stock  of  industry  and  produc 
tion.  In  places  where  those  institutions  prevail, 


Industry  and  Commerce  91 

besides  the  persons  regularly  engaged  in  them,  they 
afford  occasional  and  extra  employment  to  indus 
trious  individuals  and  families,  who  are  willing  to 
devote  the  leisure  resulting  from  the  intermissions 
of  their  ordinary  pursuits  to  collateral  labors,  as  a 
resource  for  multiplying  their  acquisitions  or  their 
enjoyments.  The  husbandman  himself  experiences 
a  new  source  of  profit  and  support  from  the  in 
creased  industry  of  his  wife  and  daughters,  invited 
and  stimulated  by  the  demands  of  the  neighboring 
manufactories. 

Besides  this  advantage  of  occasional  employment 
to  classes  having  different  occupations,  there  is  an 
other,  of  a  nature  allied  to  it,  and  of  a  similar  tend 
ency.  This  is  the  employment  of  persons  who 
would  otherwise  be  idle,  and  in  many  cases  a  burthen 
on  the  community,  either  from  the  bias  of  temper, 
habit,  infirmity  of  body,  or  some  other  cause,  in 
disposing  or  disqualifying  them  for  the  toils  of  the 
country.  It  is  worthy  of  particular  remark  that,  in 
general,  women  and  children  are  rendered  more  use 
ful,  and  the  latter  more  early  useful,  by  manufactur 
ing  establishments,  than  they  would  otherwise  be. 
Of  the  number  of  persons  employed  in  the  cotton 
manufactories  of  Great  Britain,  it  is  computed  that 
four  sevenths,  nearly,  are  women  and  children,  of 
whom  the  greatest  proportion  are  children,  and  many 
of  them  of  a  tender  age. 

And  thus  it  appears  to  be  one  of  the  attributes  of 
manufactures,  and  one  of  no  small  consequence,  to 
give  occasion  to  the  exertion  of  a  greater  quantity 
of  industry,  even  by  the  same  number  of  persons, 


92  Alexander  Hamilton 

where  they  happen  to  prevail,  than  would  exist  if 
there  were  no  such  establishments. 

4.  As  to  the  promoting  of  emigration  from  foreign 

countries 

Men  reluctantly  quit  one  course  of  occupation  and 
livelihood  for  another,  unless  invited  to  it  by  very 
apparent  and  proximate  advantages.  Many  who 
would  go  from  one  country  to  another,  if  they  had 
a  prospect  of  continuing  with  more  benefit  the  call 
ings  to  which  they  have  been  educated,  will  often 
not  be  tempted  to  change  their  situation  by  the 
hope  of  doing  better  in  some  other  way.  Manu 
facturers  who,  listening  to  the  powerful  invitations 
of  a  better  price  for  their  fabrics  or  their  labor,  of 
greater  cheapness  of  provisions  and  raw  materials, 
of  an  exemption  from  the  chief  part  of  the  taxes, 
burthens,  and  restraints  which  they  endure  in  the 
Old  World,  of  greater  personal  independence  and 
consequence,  under  the  operation  of  a  more  equal 
government,  and  of  what  is  far  more  precious  than 
mere  religious  toleration,  a  perfect  equality  of  re 
ligious  privileges,  would  probably  flock  from  Europe 
to  the  United  States,  to  pursue  their  own  trades  or 
professions,  if  they  were  once  made  sensible  of  the 
advantages  they  would  enjoy,  and  were  inspired 
with  an  assurance  of  encouragement  and  employ 
ment,  will,  with  difficulty,  be  induced  to  transplant 
themselves,  with  a  view  to  becoming  cultivators  of 
land. 

If  it  be  true,  then,  that  it  is  the  interest  of  the 
United  States  to  open  every  possible  avenue  to  emi- 


Industry  and  Commerce  93 

gration  from  abroad,  it  affords  a  weighty  argument 
for  the  encouragement  of  manufactures;  which,  for 
the  reasons  just  assigned,  will  have  the  strongest 
tendency  to  multiply  the  inducements  to  it. 

Here  is  perceived  an  important  resource,  not  only 
for  extending  the  population,  and  with  it  the  useful 
and  productive  labor  of  the  country,  but  likewise  for 
the  prosecution  of  manufactures,  without  deducting 
from  the  number  of  hands  which  might  otherwise 
be  drawn  to  tillage,  and  even  for  the  indemnification 
of  agriculture  for  such  as  might  happen  to  be  di 
verted  from  it.  Many,  whom  manufacturing  views 
would  induce  to  emigrate,  would,  afterwards,  yield 
to  the  temptations  which  the  particular  situation  of 
this  country  holds  out  to  agricultural  pursuits.  And 
while  agriculture  would,  in  other  respects,  derive 
many  signal  and  unmingled  advantages  from  the 
growth  of  manufactures,  it  is  a  problem  whether  it 
would  gain  or  lose,  as  to  the  article  of  the  number  of 
persons  employed  in  carrying  it  on. 

5.  As  to  the  furnishing  greater  scope  for  the  diversity 
of  talents  and  dispositions,  which  discriminate 
men  from  each  other 

This  is  a  much  more  powerful  means  of  augment 
ing  the  fund  of  national  industry,  than  may  at  first 
sight  appear.  It  is  a  just  observation,  that  minds 
of  the  strongest  and  most  active  powers  for  their 
proper  objects,  fall  below  mediocrity,  and  labor 
without  effect,  if  confined  to  uncongenial  pursuits. 
And  it  is  thence  to  be  inferred,  that  the  results  of 


94  Alexander  Hamilton 

human  exertion  may  be  immensely  increased  by  di 
versifying  its  objects.  When  all  the  different  kinds 
of  industry  obtain  in  a  community,  each  individual 
can  find  his  proper  element,  and  can  call  into  activity 
the  whole  vigor  of  his  nature.  And  the  community 
is  benefited  by  the  services  of  its  respective  members, 
in  the  manner  in  which  each  can  serve  it  with  most 
effect. 

If  there  be  any  thing  in  a  remark  often  to  be  met 
with,  namely,  that  there  is,  in  the  genius  of  the 
people  of  this  country,  a  peculiar  aptitude  for  me 
chanic  improvements,  it  would  operate  as  a  forci 
ble  reason  for  giving  opportunities  to  the  exercise 
of  that  species  of  talent,  by  the  propagation  of 
manufactures. 

6.  As  to  the  affording  a  more  ample  and  various  field 
for  enterprise 

This  also  is  of  greater  consequence  in  the  general 
scale  of  national  exertion  than  might,  perhaps,  on  a 
superficial  view  be  supposed,  and  has  effects  not 
altogether  dissimilar  from  those  of  the  circumstance 
last  noticed.  To  cherish  and  stimulate  thejictivity 
of  the  human  mind,  by  multiplying  the  objects  of 
enterprise,  is  not  among  the  least  considerable  of  the 
expedients  by  which  the  wealth  of  a  nation  may  be 
promoted.  Even  things  in  themselves  not  positively 
advantageous  sometimes  become  so,  by  their  ten 
dency  to  provoke  exertion.  Every  new  scene  which 
is  opened  to  the  busy  nature  of  man  to  rouse  and 
exert  itself,  is  the  addition  of  a  new  energy  to  the 
general  stock  of  effort. 


Industry  and  Commerce  95 

The  spirit  of  enterprise,  useful  and  prolific  as  it 
is,  must  necessarily  be  contracted  or  expanded,  in 
proportion  to  the  simplicity  or  variety  of  the  occu 
pations  and  productions  which  are  to  be  found 
in  a  society.  It  must  be  less  in  a  nation  of  mere 
cultivators,  than  in  a  nation  of  cultivators  and 
merchants ;  less  in  a  nation  of  cultivators  and  mer 
chants,  than  in  a  nation  of  cultivators,  artificers, 
and  merchants. 

7.  As  to  the  creating,  in  some  instances,  a  new,  and 
securing,  in  all,  a  more  certain  and  steady  de 
mand  for  the  surplus  produce  of  the  soil 

This  is  among  the  most  important  of  the  cir 
cumstances  which  have  been  indicated.  It  is  a 
principal  means  by  which  the  establishment  of  manu 
factures  contributes  to  an  augmentation  of  the  pro 
duce  or  revenue  of  a  country,  and  has  an  immediate 
and  direct  relation  to  the  prosperity  of  agriculture. 

It  is  evident  that  the  exertions  of  the  husbandman 
will  be  steady  or  fluctuating,  vigorous  or  feeble,  in 
proportion  to  the  steadiness  or  fluctuation,  ade- 
quateness  or  inadequateness,  of  the  markets  on 
which  he  must  depend  for  the  vent  of  the  surplus 
which  may  be  produced  by  his  labor ;  and  that  such 
surplus,  in  the  ordinary  course  of  things,  will  be 
greater  or  less  in  the  same  proportion. 

For  the  purpose  of  this  vent,  a  domestic  market 
is  greatly  to  be  preferred  to  a  foreign  one;  because 
it  is,  in  the  nature  of  things,  far  more  to  be  relied 
upon. 

It  is  a  primary  object  of  the  policy  of  nations,  to 


96  Alexander  Hamilton 

be  able  to  supply  themselves  with  subsistence  from 
their  own  soils;  and  manufacturing  nations,  as  far 
as  circumstances  permit,  endeavor  to  procure  from 
the  same  source  the  raw  materials  necessary  for 
their  own  fabrics.  This  disposition,  urged  by  the 
spirit  of  monopoly,  is  sometimes  even  carried  to  an 
injudicious  extreme.  It  seems  not  always  to  be 
recollected,  that  nations  who  have  neither  mines  nor 
manufactures  can  only  obtain  the  manufactured 
articles  of  which  they  stand  in  need,  by  an  exchange 
of  the  products  of  their  soils;  and  that  if  those  who 
can  best  furnish  them  with  such  articles  are  unwill 
ing  to  give  a  due  course  to  this  exchange,  they  must, 
of  necessity,  make  every  possible  effort  to  manu 
facture  for  themselves;  the  effect  of  which  is,  that 
the  manufacturing  nations  abridge  the  natural  ad 
vantages  of  their  situation,  through  an  unwilling 
ness  to  permit  the  agricultural  countries  to  enjoy 
the  advantages  of  theirs,  and  sacrifice  the  interests 
of  a  mutually  beneficial  intercourse  to  the  vain 
project  of  selling  every  thing  and  buying  nothing. 

But  it  is  also  a  consequence  of  the  policy  which 
has  been  noted,  that  the  foreign  demand  for  the  pro 
ducts  of  agricultural  countries  is,  in  a  great  degree, 
rather  casual  and  occasional,  than  certain  or  con 
stant.  To  what  extent  injurious  interruptions  of 
the  demand  for  some  of  the  staple  commodities  of 
the  United  States  may  have  been  experienced  from 
that  cause,  must  be  referred  to  the  judgment  of 
those  who  are  engaged  in  carrying  on  the  commerce 
of  the  country;  but  it  may  be  safely  affirmed  that 
such  interruptions  are,  at  times,  very  inconveniently 


Industry  and  Commerce  97 

felt,  and  that  cases  not  unfrequently  occur,  in  which 
markets  are  so  confined  and  restricted  as  to  render 
the  demand  very  unequal  to  the  supply. 

Independently,  likewise,  of  the  artificial  impedi 
ments  which  are  created  by  the  policy  in  question, 
there  are  natural  causes  tending  to  render  the  ex 
ternal  demand  for  the  surplus  of  agricultural  na 
tions  a  precarious  reliance.  The  differences  of 
seasons  in  the  countries  which  are  the  consumers, 
make  immense  differences  in  the  produce  of  their 
own  soils,  in  different  years;  and  consequently  in 
the  degrees  of  their  necessity  for  foreign  supply. 
Plentiful  harvests  with  them,  especially  if  similar 
ones  occur  at  the  same  time  in  the  countries  which 
are  the  furnishers,  occasion,  of  course,  a  glut  in  the 
markets  of  the  latter. 

Considering  how  fast  and  how  much  the  progress 
of  new  settlements  in  the  United  States  must  in 
crease  the  surplus  produce  of  the  soil,  and  weighing 
seriously  the  tendency  of  the  system  which  prevails 
among  most  of  the  commercial  nations  of  Europe, 
whatever  dependence  may  be  placed  on  the  force  of 
natural  circumstances  to  counteract  the  effects  of 
an  artificial  policy,  there  appear  strong  reasons  to 
regard  the  foreign  demand  for  that  surplus  as  too 
uncertain  a  reliance,  and  to  desire  a  substitute  for  it 
in  an  extensive  domestic  market. 

To  secure  such  a  market  there  is  no  other  expedient 
than  to  promote  manufacturing  establishments.  Man 
ufacturers,  who  constitute  the  most  numerous  class, 
after  the  cultivators  of  land,  are  for  that  reason  the 
principal  consumers  of  the  surplus  of  their  labor. 


VOL.  IV.— 7. 


98  Alexander  Hamilton 

This  idea  of  an  extensive  domestic  market  for  the 
surplus  produce  of  the  soil,  is  of  the  first  conse 
quence.  It  is,  of  all  things,  that  which  most  effectu 
ally  conduces  to  a  flourishing  state  of  agriculture. 
If  the  effect  of  manufactories  should  be  to  detach  a 
portion  of  the  hands  which  would  otherwise  be  en 
gaged  in  tillage,  it  might  possibly  cause  a  smaller 
quantity  of  lands  to  be  under  cultivation;  but,  by 
their  tendency  to  procure  a  more  certain  demand 
for  the  surplus  produce  of  the  soil,  they  would,  at 
the  same  time,  cause  the  lands  which  were  in  cul 
tivation  to  be  better  improved  and  more  productive. 
And  while,  by  their  influence,  the  condition  of  each 
individual  farmer  would  be  meliorated,  the  total 
mass  of  agricultural  production  would  probably  be 
increased.  For  this  must  evidently  depend  as  much 
upon  the  degree  of  improvement,  if  not  more,  than 
upon  the  number  of  acres  under  culture. 

It  merits  particular  observation,  that  the  multi 
plication  of  manufactories  not  only  furnishes  a 
market  for  those  articles  which  have  been  accus 
tomed  to  be  produced  in  abundance  in  a  country, 
but  it  likewise  creates  a  demand  for  such  as  were 
either  unknown  or  produced  in  inconsiderable  quan 
tities.  The  bowels  as  well  as  the  surface  of  the  earth 
are  ransacked  for  articles  which  were  before  neg 
lected.  Animals,  plants,  and  minerals  acquire  a 
utility  and  a  value  which  were  before  unexplored. 

The  foregoing  considerations  seem  sufficient  to 
establish,  as  general  propositions,  that  it  is  the  in 
terest  of  nations  to  diversify  the  industrious  pur 
suits  of  the  individuals  who  compose  them ;  that  the 


Industry  and  Commerce  99 

establishment  of  manufactures  is  calculated  not  only 
to  increase  the  general  stock  of  useful  and  pro 
ductive  labor,  but  even  to  improve  the  state  of 
agriculture  in  particular, — certainly  to  advance  the 
interests  of  those  who  are  engaged  in  it.  There  are 
other  views  that  will  be  hereafter  taken  of  the  sub 
ject,  which  it  is  conceived  will  serve  to  confirm  these 
inferences. 

III.  Previously  to  a  further  discussion  of  the  ob 
jections  to  the  encouragement  of  manufactures, 
which  have  been  stated,  it  will  be  of  use  to  see  what 
can  be  said,  in  reference  to  the  particular  situation 
of  the  United  States,  against  the  conclusions  ap 
pearing  to  result  from  what  has  been  already  offered. 

It  may  be  observed,  and  the  idea  is  of  no  incon 
siderable  weight,  that  however  true  it  might  be  that 
a  state  which,  possessing  large  tracts  of  vacant  and 
fertile  territory,  was,  at  the  same  time,  secluded  from 
foreign  commerce,  would  find  its  interest  and  the  in 
terest  of  agriculture  in  diverting  a  part  of  its  popu 
lation  from  tillage  to  manufactures,  yet  it  will  not 
follow,  that  the  same  is  true  of  a  state  which,  having 
such  vacant  and  fertile  territory,  has,  at  the  same 
time,  ample  opportunity  of  procuring  from  abroad, 
on  good  terms,  all  the  fabrics  of  which  it  stands  in 
need,  for  the  supply  of  its  inhabitants.  The  power 
of  doing  this,  at  least  secures  the  great  advantage  of 
a  division  of  labor,  leaving  the  farmer  free  to  pursue, 
exclusively,  the  culture  of  his  land,  and  enabling  him 
to  procure  with  its  products  the  manufactured  sup 
plies  requisite  either  to  his  wants  or  to  his  enjoyments. 


ioo  Alexander  Hamilton 

And  though  it  should  be  true  that,  in  settled  coun 
tries,  the  diversification  of  industry  is  conducive  to 
an  increase  in  the  productive  powers  of  labor,  and 
to  an  augmentation  of  revenue  and  capital,  yet  it  is 
scarcely  conceivable  that  there  can  be  any  thing  of 
so  solid  and  permanent  advantage  to  an  uncultivated 
and  unpeopled  country,  as  to  convert  its  wastes  into 
cultivated  and  inhabited  districts.  If  the  revenue, 
in  the  meantime,  should  be  less,  the  capital,  in  the 
event,  must  be  greater. 

To  these  observations,  the  following  appears  to  be 
a  satisfactory  answer: 

i  st.  If  the  system  of  perfect  liberty  to  industry 
and  commerce  were  the  prevailing  system  of  nations, 
the  arguments  which  dissuade  a  country,  in  the 
predicament  of  the  United  States,  from  the  zealous 
pursuit  of  manufactures,  would  doubtless  have  great 
force.  It  will  not  be  affirmed  that  they  might  not 
be  permitted,  with  few  exceptions,  to  serve  as  a  rule 
of  national  conduct.  In  such  a  state  of  things,  each 
country  would  have  the  full  benefit  of  its  peculiar 
advantages  to  compensate  for  its  deficiencies  or  dis 
advantages.  If  one  nation  were  in  a  condition  to 
supply  manufactured  articles  on  better  terms  than 
another,  that  other  might  find  an  abundant  indemni 
fication  in  a  superior  capacity  to  furnish  the  produce 
of  the  soil.  And  a  free  exchange,  mutually  bene 
ficial,  of  the  commodities  which  each  was  able  to 
supply,  on  the  best  terms,  might  be  carried  on  be 
tween  them,  supporting,  in  full  vigor,  the  industry 
of  each.  And  though  the  circumstances  which  have 
been  mentioned,  and  others  which  will  be  unfolded 


Industry  and  Commerce  101 

hereafter,  render  it  probable  that  nations,  merely 
agricultural,  would  not  enjoy  the  same  degree  of 
opulence,  in  proportion  to  their  numbers,  as  those 
which  united  manufactures  with  agriculture,  yet  the 
progressive  improvement  of  the  lands  of  the  former 
might,  in  the  end,  atone  for  an  inferior  degree  of 
opulence  in  the  meantime;  and  in  a  case  in  which 
opposite  considerations  are  pretty  equally  balanced, 
the  option  ought,  perhaps,  always  be  in  favor  of 
leaving  industry  to  its  own  direction. 

But  the  system  which  has  been  mentioned  is  far 
from  characterizing  the  general  policy  of  nations. 
The  prevalent  one  has  been  regulated  by  an  opposite 
spirit.  The  consequence  of  it  is,  that  the  United 
States  are,  to  a  certain  extent,  in  the  situation  of  a 
country  precluded  from  foreign  commerce.  They 
can,  indeed,  without  difficulty,  obtain  from  abroad 
the  manufactured  supplies  of  which  they  are  in  want; 
but  they  experience  numerous  and  very  injurious 
impediments  to  the  emission  and  vent  of  their  own 
commodities.  Nor  is  this  the  case  in  reference  to  a 
single  foreign  nation  only.  The  regulations  of  sev 
eral  countries,  with  which  we  have  the  most  exten 
sive  intercourse,  throw  serious  obstructions  in  the 
way  of  the  principal  staples  of  the  United  States. 

In  such  a  position  of  things,  the  United  States 
cannot  exchange  with  Europe  on  equal  terms;  and 
the  want  of  reciprocity  would  render  them  the  vic 
tim  of  a  system  which  should  induce  them  to  confine 
their  views  to  agriculture,  and  refrain  from  manu 
factures.  A  constant  and  increasing  necessity,  on 
their  part,  for  the  commodities  of  Europe,  and  only 


102  Alexander  Hamilton 

a  partial  and  occasional  demand  for  their  own,  in 
return,  could  not  but  expose  them  to  a  state  of  im 
poverishment,  compared  with  the  opulence  to  which 
their  political  and  natural  advantages  authorize 
them  to  aspire. 

Remarks  of  this  kind  are  not  made  in  the  spirit  of 
complaint.  It  is  for  the  nations  whose  regulations  are 
alluded  to,  to  judge  for  themselves,  whether,  by  aim 
ing  at  too  much,  they  do  not  lose  more  than  they  gain. 
It  is  for  the  United  States  to  consider  by  what  means 
they  can  render  themselves  least  dependent  on  the 
combinations,  right  or  wrong,  of  foreign  policy. 

It  is  no  small  consolation  that,  already,  the 
measures  which  have  embarrassed  our  trade  have 
accelerated  internal  improvements,  which,  upon  the 
whole,  have  bettered  our  affairs.  To  diversify  and 
extend  these  improvements  is  the  surest  and  safest 
method  of  indemnifying  ourselves  for  any  incon 
veniences  which  those  or  similar  measures  have  a 
tendency  to  beget.  If  Europe  will  not  take  from  us 
the  products  of  our  soil,  upon  terms  consistent  with 
our  interest,  the  natural  remedy  is  to  contract,  as 
fast  as  possible,  our  wants  of  her. 

2d.  The  conversion  of  their  waste  into  cultivated 
lands  is  certainly  a  point  of  great  moment  in  the 
political  calculations  of  the  United  States.  But  the 
degree  in  which  this  may  possibly  be  retarded  by 
the  encouragement  of  manufactories,  does  not  ap 
pear  to  countervail  the  powerful  inducements  to 
afford  that  encouragement. 

An  observation  made  in  another  place  is  of  a  na 
ture  to  have  great  influence  upon  this  question.  If 


Industry  and  Commerce  103 

it  cannot  be  denied,  that  the  interests,  even  of  agri 
culture,  may  be  advanced  more  by  having  such  of 
the  lands  of  a  State  as  are  occupied,  under  good 
cultivation,  than  by  having  a  greater  quantity  occu 
pied  under  a  much  inferior  cultivation ;  and  if  manu 
factories,  for  the  reasons  assigned,  must  be  admitted 
to  have  a  tendency  to  promote  a  more  steady  and 
vigorous  cultivation  of  the  lands  occupied  than 
would  happen  without  them,  it  will  follow  that  they 
are  capable  of  indemnifying  a  country  for  a  diminu 
tion  of  the  progress  of  new  settlements,  and  may 
serve  to  increase  both  the  capital  value  and  the  in 
come  of  its  lands,  even  though  they  should  abridge 
the  number  of  acres  under  tillage. 

But  it  does  by  no  means  follow,  that  the  progress 
of  new  settlements  would  be  retarded  by  the  exten 
sion  of  manufactures.  The  desire  of  being  an  inde 
pendent  proprietor  of  land  is  founded  on  such  strong 
principles  in  the  human  breast,  that,  where  the  op 
portunity  of  becoming  so  is  as  great  as  it  is  in  the 
United  States,  the  proportion  will  be  small  of  those 
whose  situations  would  otherwise  lead  to  it,  who 
would  be  diverted  from  it  towards  manufactures. 
And  it  is  highly  probable,  as  already  intimated,  that 
the  accession  of  foreigners,  who,  originally  drawn 
over  by  manufacturing  views,  would  afterward  aban 
don  them  for  agricultural,  would  be  more  than  an 
equivalent  for  those  of  our  own  citizens  who  might 
happen  to  be  detached  from  them. 

The  remaining  objections  to  a  particular  encour 
agement  of  manufactures  in  the  United  States  now 
require  to  be  examined. 


IO4  Alexander  Hamilton 

One  of  these  turns  on  the  proposition,  that  in 
dustry,  if  left  to  itself,  will  naturally  find  its  way  to 
the  most  useful  and  profitable  employment.  Whence 
it  is  inferred  that  manufactures,  without  the  aid  of 
government,  will  grow  up  as  soon  and  as  fast  as  the 
natural  state  of  things  and  the  interest  of  the  com 
munity  may  require. 

Against  the  solidity  of  this  hypothesis,  in  the  full 
latitude  of  the  terms,  very  cogent  reasons  may  be 
offered.  These  have  relation  to  the  strong  influence 
of  habit  and  the  spirit  of  imitation ;  the  fear  of  want 
of  success  in  untried  enterprises;  the  intrinsic  diffi 
culties  incident  to  first  essays  towards  a  competition 
with  those  who  have  previously  attained  to  per 
fection  in  the  business  to  be  attempted ;  the  bounties, 
premiums,  and  other  artificial  encouragements  with 
which  foreign  nations  second  the  exertions  of  their 
own  citizens,  in  the  branches  in  which  they  are  to 
be  rivalled. 

Experience  teaches,  that  men  are  often  so  much 
governed  by  what  they  are  accustomed  to  see  and 
practise,  that  the  simplest  and  most  obvious  im 
provements,  in  the  most  ordinary  occupations,  are 
adopted  with  hesitation,  reluctance,  and  by  slow 
gradations.  The  spontaneous  transition  to  new  pur 
suits,  in  a  community  long  habituated  to  different 
ones,  may  be  expected  to  be  attended  with  pro- 
portionably  greater  difficulty.  When  former  occu 
pations  ceased  to  yield  a  profit  adequate  to  the 
subsistence  of  their  followers,  or  when  there  was  an 
absolute  deficiency  of  employment  in  them,  owing  to 
the  superabundance  of  hands,  changes  would  ensue; 


Industry  and  Commerce  105 

but  these  changes  would  be  likely  to  be  more  tardy 
than  might  consist  with  the  interest  either  of  in 
dividuals  or  of  the  society.  In  many  cases  they 
would  not  happen,  while  a  bare  support  could  be  in 
sured  by  an  adherence  to  ancient  courses,  though  a 
resort  to  a  more  profitable  employment  might  be 
practicable.  To  produce  the  desirable  changes  as 
early  as  may  be  expedient  may  therefore  require 
the  incitement  and  patronage  of  government. 

The  apprehension  of  failing  in  new  attempts  is, 
perhaps,  a  more  serious  impediment.  There  are 
dispositions  apt  to  be  attracted  by  the  mere  novelty 
of  an  undertaking;  but  these  are  not  always  the 
best  calculated  to  give  it  success.  To  this  it  is  of 
importance  that  the  confidence  of  cautious,  saga 
cious  capitalists,  both  citizens  and  foreigners,  should 
be  excited.  And  to  inspire  this  description  of  persons 
with  confidence,  it  is  essential  that  they  should  be 
made  to  see  in  any  project  which  is  new — and  for 
that  reason  alone,  if  for  no  other,  precarious  — 
the  prospect  of  such  a  degree  of  countenance  and 
support  from  government,  as  may  be  capable  of 
overcoming  the  obstacles  inseparable  from  first 
experiments. 

The  superiority  antecedently  enjoyed  by  nations 
who  have  preoccupied  and  perfected  a  branch  of  in 
dustry,  constitutes  a  more  formidable  obstacle  than 
either  of  those  which  have  been  mentioned,  to  the 
introduction  of  the  same  branch  into  a  country  in 
which  it  did  not  before  exist.  To  maintain,  between 
the  recent  establishments  of  one  country,  and  the 
long-matured  establishments  of  another  country,  a 


io6  Alexander  Hamilton 

competition  upon  equal  terms,  both  as  to  quality 
and  price,  is,  in  most  cases,  impracticable.  The  dis 
parity,  in  the  one,  or  in  the  other,  or  in  both,  must 
necessarily  be  so  considerable,  as  to  forbid  a  suc 
cessful  rivalship,  without  the  extraordinary  aid  and 
protection  of  government. 

But  the  greatest  obstacle  of  all  to  the  successful 
prosecution  of  a  new  branch  of  industry  in  a  country 
in  which  it  was  before  unknown,  consists,  as  far  as 
the  instances  apply,  in  the  bounties,  premiums,  and 
other  aids  which  are  granted,  in  a  variety  of  cases, 
by  the  nations  in  which  the  establishments  to  be 
imitated  are  previously  introduced.  It  is  well 
known  (and  particular  examples,  in  the  course  of 
this  report,  will  be  cited)  that  certain  nations  grant 
bounties  on  the  exportation  of  particular  commodi 
ties,  to  enable  their  own  workmen  to  undersell  and 
supplant  all  competitors  in  the  countries  to  which 
those  commodities  are  sent.  Hence  the  under 
takers  of  a  new  manufacture  have  to  contend,  not 
only  with  the  natural  disadvantages  of  a  new  under 
taking,  but  with  the  gratuities  and  remunerations 
which  other  governments  bestow.  To  be  enabled 
to  contend  with  success,  it  is  evident  that  the  in 
terference  and  aid  of  their  own  governments  are 
indispensable. 

Combinations  by  those  engaged  in  a  particular 
branch  of  business  in  one  country,  to  frustrate  the 
first  efforts  to  introduce  it  into  another,  by  tem 
porary  sacrifices,  recompensed,  perhaps,  by  extra 
ordinary  indemnifications  of  the  government  of  such 
country,  are  believed  to  have  existed,  and  are  not 


Industry  and  Commerce  107 

to  be  regarded  as  destitute  of  probability.  The 
existence  or  assurance  of  aid  from  the  government 
of  the  country  in  which  the  business  is  to  be  intro 
duced,  may  be  essential  to  fortify  adventurers 
against  the  dread  of  such  combinations;  to  defeat 
their  efforts,  if  formed;  and  to  prevent  their  being 
formed,  by  demonstrating  that  they  must  in  the  end 
prove  fruitless. 

Whatever  room  there  may  be  for  an  expectation 
that  the  industry  of  a  people,  under  the  direction  of 
private  interest,  will,  upon  equal  terms,  find  out  the 
most  beneficial  employment  for  itself,  there  is  none 
for  a  reliance  that  it  will  struggle  against  the  force 
of  unequal  terms,  or  will,  of  itself,  surmount  all  the 
adventitious  barriers  to  a  successful  competition 
which  may  have  been  erected,  either  by  the  advan 
tages  naturally  acquired  from  practice  and  previous 
possession  of  the  ground,  or  by  those  which  may 
have  sprung  from  positive  regulations  and  an  arti 
ficial  policy.  This  general  reflection  might  alone 
suffice  as  an  answer  to  the  objection  under  examina 
tion,  exclusively  of  the  weighty  considerations  which 
have  been  particularly  urged. 

The  objections  to  the  pursuit  of  manufactures  in 
the  United  States  which  next  present  themselves  to 
discussion,  represent  an  impracticability  of  success, 
arising  from  three  causes:  scarcity  of  hands,  dear- 
ness  of  labor,  want  of  capital. 

The  two  first  circumstances  are,  to  a  certain  ex 
tent,  real;  and,  within  due  limits,  ought  to  be 
admitted  as  obstacles  to  the  success  of  manufactur 
ing  enterprise  in  the  United  States.  But  there  are 


io8  Alexander  Hamilton 

various  considerations  which  lessen  their  force,  and 
tend  to  afford  an  assurance  that  they  are  not  suf 
ficient  to  prevent  the  advantageous  prosecution  of 
many  very  useful  and  extensive  manufactories. 

With  regard  to  scarcity  of  hands,  the  fact  itself 
must  be  applied  with  no  small  qualification  to  cer 
tain  parts  of  the  United  States.  There  are  large 
districts  which  may  be  considered  as  pretty  fully 
peopled;  and  which,  notwithstanding  a  continual 
drain  for  distant  settlement,  are  thickly  interspersed 
with  flourishing  and  increasing  towns.  If  these 
districts  have  not  already  reached  the  point  at  which 
the  complaint  of  scarcity  of  hands  ceases,  they  are 
not  remote  from  it,  and  are  approaching  fast  towards 
it;  and  having,  perhaps,  fewer  attractions  to  agri 
culture  than  some  other  parts  of  the  Union,  they 
exhibit  a  proportionably  stronger  tendency  towards 
other  kinds  of  industry.  In  these  districts  may  be 
discerned  no  inconsiderable  maturity  for  manu 
facturing  establishments. 

But  there  are  circumstances  which  have  been 
already  noticed,  with  another  view,  that  materially 
diminish,  everywhere,  the  effect  of  a  scarcity  of 
hands.  These  circumstances  are:  the  great  use 
which  can  be  made  of  women  and  children,  on  which 
point  a  very  pregnant  and  instructive  fact  has  been 
mentioned — the  vast  extension  given  by  late  im 
provements  to  the  employment  of  machines — which, 
substituting  the  agency  of  fire  and  water,  has  pro 
digiously  lessened  the  necessity  for  manual  labor; 
the  employment  of  persons  ordinarily  engaged  in 
other  occupations,  during  the  seasons  or  hours  of 


Industry  and  Commerce  109 

leisure,  which,  besides  giving  occasion  to  the  exer 
tion  of  a  greater  quantity  of  labor,  by  the  same  num 
ber  of  persons,  and  thereby  increasing  the  general 
stock  of  labor  as  has  been  elsewhere  remarked,  may 
also  be  taken  into  the  calculation,  as  a  resource  for 
obviating  the  scarcity  of  hands;  lastly,  the  attrac 
tion  of  foreign  emigrants.  Whoever  inspects,  with 
a  careful  eye,  the  composition  of  our  towns,  will  be 
made  sensible  to  what  an  extent  this  resource  may 
be  relied  upon.  This  exhibits  a  large  proportion  of 
ingenious  and  valuable  workmen,  in  different  arts 
and  trades,  who,  by  expatriating  from  Europe,  have 
improved  their  own  condition,  and  added  to  the  in 
dustry  and  wealth  of  the  United  States.  It  is  a 
natural  inference,  from  the  experience  we  have  al 
ready  had,  that,  as  soon  as  the  United  States  shall 
present  the  countenance  of  a  serious  prosecution  of 
manufactures,  as  soon  as  foreign  artists  shall  be 
made  sensible  that  the  state  of  things  here  affords  a 
moral  certainty  of  employment  and  encouragement, 
competent  numbers  of  European  workmen  will 
transplant  themselves,  effectually  to  insure  the  suc 
cess  of  the  design.  How,  indeed,  can  it  otherwise 
happen,  considering  the  various  and  powerful  in 
ducements  which  the  situation  of  this  country  offers 
— addressing  themselves  to  so  many  strong  passions 
and  feelings,  to  so  many  general  and  particular  in 
terests. 

It  may  be  affirmed,  therefore,  in  respect  to 
hands  for  carrying  on  manufactures,  that  we  shall 
in  a  great  measure,  trade  upon  a  foreign  stock,  re 
serving  our  own  for  the  cultivation  of  our  lands  and 


i  io  Alexander  Hamilton 

the  manning  of  our  ships,  as  far  as  character  and  cir 
cumstances  shall  incline.  It  is  not  unworthy  of 
remark,  that  the  objection  to  the  success  of  manu 
facturers,  deduced  from  the  scarcity  of  hands,  is 
alike  applicable  to  trade  and  navigation,  and  yet 
these  are  perceived  to  flourish,  without  any  sensible 
impediment  from  that  cause. 

As  to  the  dearness  of  labor  (another  of  the  ob 
stacles  alleged),  this  has  relation  principally  to  two 
circumstances:  one,  that  which  has  been  just  dis 
cussed,  of  the  scarcity  of  hands ;  the  other,  the  great 
ness  of  profits. 

As  far  as  it  is  a  consequence  of  the  scarcity  of 
hands,  it  is  mitigated  by  all  the  considerations 
which  have  been  adduced  as  lessening  that  de 
ficiency.  It  is  certain,  too,  that  the  disparity  in  this 
respect,  between  some  of  the  most  manufacturing 
parts  of  Europe  and  a  large  proportion  of  the  United 
States,  is  not  nearly  so  great  as  is  commonly  im 
agined.  It  is  also  much  less  in  regard  to  artificers 
and  manufacturers,  than  in  regard  to  country  labor 
ers;  and  while  a  careful  comparison  shows  that  there 
is,  in  this  particular,  much  exaggeration,  it  is  also 
evident  that  the  effect  of  the  degree  of  disparity 
which  does  truly  exist,  is  diminished  in  proportion 
to  the  use  which  can  be  made  of  machinery. 

To  illustrate  this  last  idea,  let  it  be  supposed  that 
the  difference  of  price,  in  two  countries,  of  a  given 
quantity  of  manual  labor  requisite  to  the  fabrication 
of  a  given  article,  is  as  ten,  and  that  some  mechanic 
power  is  introduced  into  both  countries,  which,  per 
forming  half  the  necessary  labor,  leaves  only  half  to 


Industry  and  Commerce  in 

be  done  by  hand ;  it  is  evident  that  the  difference  in 
the  cost  of  the  fabrication  of  the  article  in  question, 
in  the  two  countries,  as  far  as  it  is  connected  with  the 
price  of  labor,  will  be  reduced  from  ten  to  five,  in 
consequence  of  the  introduction  of  that  power. 

This  circumstance  is  worthy  of  the  most  particular 
attention.  It  diminishes  immensely  one  of  the  ob 
jections  most  strenuously  urged  against  the  success 
of  manufactures  in  the  United  States. 

To  procure  all  such  machines  as  are  known  in  any 
part  of  Europe,  can  only  require  a  proper  provision 
and  due  pains.  The  knowledge  of  several  of  the 
most  important  of  them  is  already  possessed.  The 
preparation  of  them  here  is,  in  most  cases,  practicable 
on  nearly  equal  terms.  As  far  as  they  depend  on 
water,  some  superiority  of  advantages  may  be 
claimed,  from  the  uncommon  variety  and  greater 
cheapness  of  situations  adapted  to  mill-seats,  with 
which  different  parts  of  the  United  States  abound. 

So  far  as  the  dearness  of  labor  may  be  a  conse 
quence  of  the  greatness  of  profits  in  any  branch  of 
business,  it  is  no  obstacle  to  its  success.  The  under 
taker  can  afford  to  pay  the  price. 

There  are  grounds  to  conclude,  that  undertakers 
of  manufactures  in  this  country  can,  at  this  time, 
afford  to  pay  higher  wages  to  the  workmen  they  may 
employ,  than  are  paid  to  similar  workmen  in  Europe. 
The  prices  of  foreign  fabrics  in  the  market  of  the 
United  States,  which  will,  for  a  long  time,  regulate 
the  prices  of  the  domestic  ones,  may  be  considered 
as  compounded  of  the  following  ingredients :  the  first 
cost  of  materials,  including  the  taxes,  if  any,  which 


H2  Alexander  Hamilton 

are  paid  upon  them,  where  they  are  made;  the  ex 
pense  of  grounds,  buildings,  machinery  and  tools; 
the  wages  of  the  persons  employed  in  the  manu 
factory;  the  profits  on  the  capital  or  stock  employed; 
the  commissions  of  agents  to  purchase  them  where 
they  are  made ;  the  expense  of  transportation  to  the 
United  States,  including  insurance  and  other  inci 
dental  charges ;  the  taxes  or  duties,  if  any,  and  fees 
of  office,  which  are  paid  on  their  exportation;  the 
taxes  or  duties,  and  fees  of  office,  which  are  paid  on 
their  importation. 

As  to  the  first  of  these  items,  the  cost  of  materials, 
the  advantage,  upon  the  whole,  is  at  present  on  the 
side  of  the  United  States;  and  the  difference  in 
their  favor  must  increase,  in  proportion  as  a  certain 
and  extensive  domestic  demand  shall  induce  the 
proprietors  of  land  to  devote  more  of  their  attention 
to  the  production  of  those  materials.  It  ought  not 
to  escape  observation,  in  a  comparison  on  this  point, 
that  some  of  the  principal  manufacturing  countries 
of  Europe  are  much  more  dependent  on  foreign  sup 
ply,  for  the  materials  of  their  manufactures,  than 
would  be  the  United  States,  who  are  capable  of  sup 
plying  themselves  with  a  greater  abundance,  as  well 
as  a  greater  variety,  of  the  requisite  materials. 

As  to  the  second  item,  the  expense  of  grounds, 
buildings,  machinery,  and  tools,  an  equality,  at 
least,  may  be  assumed;  since  advantages,  in  some 
particulars,  will  counterbalance  temporary  disad 
vantages  in  others. 

As  to  the  third  item,  or  the  article  of  wages,  the 
comparison  certainly  turns  against  the  United  States ; 


Industry  and  Commerce  113 

though,  as  before  observed,  not  in  so  great  a  degree  as 
commonly  supposed. 

The  fourth  item  is  alike  applicable  to  the  foreign 
and  to  the  domestic  manufacture.  It  is,  indeed, 
more  properly  a  result,  than  a  particular  to  be 
compared. 

But,  with  respect  to  all  the  remaining  items,  they 
are  alone  applicable  to  the  foreign  manufacture,  and, 
in  the  strictest  sense,  extraordinaries ;  constituting 
a  sum  of  extra  charge  on  the  foreign  fabric,  which 
cannot  be  estimated  at  less  than  from  fifteen  to 
thirty  per  cent,  on  the  cost  of  it  at  the  manufactory. 

This  sum  of  extra  charge  may  confidently  be  re 
garded  as  more  than  a  counterpoise  for  the  real 
difference  in  the  price  of  labor;  and  is  a  satisfactory 
proof  that  manufactures  may  prosper,  in  defiance  of 
it,  in  the  United  States. 

To  the  general  allegation,  connected  with  the  cir 
cumstances  of  scarcity  of  hands  and  dearness  of 
labor,  that  extensive  manufactures  can  only  grow 
out  of  a  redundant  or  full  population,  it  will  be 
sufficient  to  answer  generally,  that  the  fact  has  been 
otherwise.  That  the  situation  alleged  to  be  an 
essential  condition  of  success,  has  not  been  that  of 
several  nations,  at  periods  when  they  had  already 
attained  to  maturity  in  a  variety  of  manufactures. 

The  supposed  want  of  capital  for  the  prosecution 
of  manufactures  in  the  United  States,  is  the  most  in 
definite  of  the  objections  which  are  usually  opposed 
to  it. 

It  is  very  difficult  to  pronounce  any  thing  precise 
concerning  the  real  extent  of  the  moneyed  capital 


ii4  Alexander  Hamilton 

of  a  country,  and  still  more  concerning  the  propor 
tion  which  it  bears  to  the  objects  that  invite  the 
employment  of  capital.  It  is  not  less  difficult  to 
pronounce,  how  far  the  effect  of  any  given  quantity 
of  money,  as  capital,  or,  in  other  words,  as  a  medium 
for  circulating  the  industry  and  property  of  a  nation, 
may  be  increased  by  the  very  circumstance  of  the 
additional  motion  which  is  given  to  it,  by  new  ob 
jects  of  employment.  That  effect,  like  the  mo 
mentum  of  descending  bodies,  may  not  improperly 
be  represented  as  in  a  compound  ratio  to  mass  and 
velocity.  It  seems  pretty  certain,  that  a  given  sum 
of  money,  in  a  situation  in  which  the  quick  im 
pulses  of  commercial  activity  were  little  felt,  would 
appear  inadequate  to  the  circulation  of  as  great  a 
quantity  of  industry  and  property,  as  in  one  in 
which  their  full  influence  was  experienced. 

It  is  not  obvious  why  the  same  objection  might 
not  as  well  be  made  to  external  commerce  as  to 
manufactures,  since  it  is  manifest  that  our  immense 
tracts  of  land,  occupied  and  unoccupied,  are  capable 
of  giving  employment  to  more  capital  than  is  ac 
tually  bestowed  upon  them.  It  is  certain  that  the 
United  States  offer  a  vast  field  for  the  advantageous 
employment  of  capital;  but  it  does  not  follow  that 
there  will  not  be  found,  in  one  way  or  another,  a 
sufficient  fund  for  the  successful  prosecution  of  any 
species  of  industry  which  is  likely  to  prove  truly 
beneficial. 

The  following  considerations  are  of  a  nature  to  re 
move  all  inquietude  on  the  score  of  the  want  of 
capital: 


Industry  and  Commerce  115 

The  introduction  of  banks,  as  has  been  shown  on 
another  occasion,  has  a  powerful  tendency  to  extend 
the  active  capital  of  a  country.  Experience  of  the 
utility  of  these  institutions  is  multiplying  them  in 
the  United  States.  It  is  probable  that  they  will  be 
established  wherever  they  can  exist  with  advantage ; 
and  wherever  they  can  be  supported,  if  administered 
with  prudence,  they  will  add  new  energies  to  all 
pecuniary  operations. 

The  aid  of  foreign  capital  may  safely,  and  with 
considerable  latitude,  be  taken  into  calculation.  Its 
instrumentality  has  been  long  experienced  in  our 
external  commerce;  and  it  has  begun  to  be  felt  in 
various  other  modes.  Not  only  our  funds,  but  our 
agriculture,  and  other  internal  improvements,  have 
been  animated  by  it.  It  has  already,  in  a  few  in 
stances,  extended  even  to  our  manufactures. 

It  is  a  well-known  fact  that  there  are  parts  of  Eu 
rope  which  have  more  capital  than  profitable  do 
mestic  objects  of  employment.  Hence,  among  other 
proofs,  the  large  loans  continually  furnished  to 
foreign  states.  And  it  is  equally  certain,  that  the 
capital  of  other  parts  may  find  more  profitable  em 
ployment  in  the  United  States  than  at  home.  And, 
notwithstanding  there  are  weighty  inducements  to 
prefer  the  employment  of  capital  at  home,  even  at 
less  profit,  to  an  investment  of  it  abroad,  though 
with  greater  gain,  yet  these  inducements  are  over 
ruled,  either  by  a  deficiency  of  employment,  or  by  a 
very  material  difference  in  profit.  Both  these  causes 
operate  to  produce  a  transfer  of  foreign  capital  to 
the  United  States.  It  is  certain,  that  various  objects 


n6  Alexander  Hamilton 

in  this  country  hold  out  advantages,  which  are  with 
difficulty  to  be  equalled  elsewhere;  and  under  the 
increasingly  favorable  impressions  which  are  enter 
tained  of  our  government,  the  attractions  will  be 
come  more  and  more  strong.  These  impressions  will 
prove  a  rich  mine  of  prosperity  to  the  country,  if 
they  are  confirmed  and  strengthened  by  the  progress 
of  our  affairs.  And,  to  secure  this  advantage,  little 
more  is  now  necessary  than  to  foster  industry,  and 
cultivate  order  and  tranquillity  at  home  and  abroad. 

It  is  not  impossible,  that  there  may  be  persons 
disposed  to  look,  with  a  jealous  eye,  on  the  intro 
duction  of  foreign  capital,  as  if  it  were  an  instrument 
to  deprive  our  own  citizens  of  the  profits  of  our  own 
industry;  but,  perhaps,  there  never  could  be  a  more 
unreasonable  jealousy.  Instead  of  being  viewed  as 
a  rival,  it  ought  to  be  considered  as  a  most  valuable 
auxiliary,  conducing  to  put  in  motion  a  greater 
quantity  of  productive  labor,  and  a  greater  por 
tion  of  useful  enterprise,  than  could  exist  without  it. 
It  is  at  least  evident,  that,  in  a  country  situated  like 
the  United  States,  with  an  infinite  fund  of  resources 
yet  to  be  unfolded,  every  farthing  of  foreign  capital 
which  is  laid  out  in  internal  meliorations,  and  in  in 
dustrial  establishments,  of  a  permanent  nature,  is  a 
precious  acquisition. 

And,  whatever  be  the  objects  which  originally  at 
tract  foreign  capital,  when  once  introduced,  it  may 
be  directed  towards  any  purpose  of  beneficial  exer 
tion  which  is  desired.  And  to  detain  it  among  us, 
there  can  be  no  expedient  so  effectual,  as  to  enlarge 
the  sphere  within  which  it  may  be  usefully  em- 


Industry  and  Commerce  1 1 7 

ployed:  though  introduced  merely  with  views  to 
speculations  in  the  funds,  it  may  afterwards  be  ren 
dered  subservient  to  the  interests  of  agriculture, 
commerce,  and  manufactures. 

But  the  attraction  of  foreign  capital  for  the  direct 
purpose  of  manufactures,  ought  not  to  be  deemed  a 
chimerical  expectation.  There  are  already  exam 
ples  of  it,  as  remarked  in  another  place.  And  the 
examples,  if  the  disposition  be  cultivated,  can  hardly 
fail  to  multiply.  There  are,  also,  instances  of  an 
other  kind,  which  serve  to  strengthen  the  expectation. 
Enterprises  for  improvingthe  public  communications, 
by  cutting  canals,  opening  the  obstructions  in  rivers, 
and  erecting  bridges,  have  received  very  material  aid 
from  the  same  source. 

When  the  manufacturing  capitalist  of  Europe 
shall  advert  to  the  many  important  advantages 
which  have  been  intimated  in  the  course  of  this  re 
port,  he  cannot  but  perceive  very  powerful  induce 
ments  to  a  transfer  of  himself  and  his  capital  to  the 
United  States.  Among  the  reflections  which  a  most 
interesting  peculiarity  of  situation  is  calculated  to 
suggest,  it  cannot  escape  his  observation,  as  a  cir 
cumstance  of  moment  in  the  calculation,  that  the 
progressive  population  and  improvement  of  the 
United  States  insure  a  continually  increasing  do 
mestic  demand  for  the  fabrics  which  he  shall  pro 
duce,  not  to  be  affected  by  any  external  casualties 
or  vicissitudes. 

But,  while  there  are  circumstances  sufficiently 
strong  to  authorize  a  considerable  degree  of  re 
liance  on  the  aid  of  foreign  capital,  towards  the 


n8  Alexander  Hamilton 

attainment  of  the  object  in  view,  it  is  satisfactory 
to  have  good  grounds  of  assurance,  that  there  are 
domestic  resources,  of  themselves  adequate  to  it. 
It  happens  that  there  is  a  species  of  capital,  ac 
tually  existing  with  the  United  States,  which  re 
lieves  from  all  inquietude  on  the  score  of  want  of 
capital.  This  is  the  funded  debt. 

The  effect  of  a  funded  debt,  as  a  species  of  capital, 
has  been  noticed  upon  a  former  occasion;  but  a 
more  particular  elucidation  of  the  point  seems  to  be 
required,  by  the  stress  which  is  here  laid  upon  it. 
This  shall,  accordingly,  be  attempted. 

Public  funds  answer  the  purpose  of  capital,  from 
the  estimation  in  which  they  are  usually  held  by 
moneyed  men;  and,  consequently,  from  the  ease 
and  dispatch  with  which  they  can  be  turned  into 
money.  This  capacity  of  prompt  convertibility  into 
money  causes  a  transfer  of  stock  to  be,  in  a  great 
number  of  cases,  equivalent  to  a  payment  in  coin. 
And  where  it  does  not  happen  to  suit  the  party  who 
is  to  receive,  to  accept  a  transfer  of  stock,  the  party 
who  is  to  pay  is  never  at  a  loss  to  find,  elsewhere,  a 
purchaser  of  his  stock,  who  will  furnish  him,  in  lieu 
of  it,  with  the  coin  of  which  he  stands  in  need. 

Hence,  in  a  sound  and  settled  state  of  the  public 
funds,  a  man  possessed  of  a  sum  in  them,  can  em 
brace  any  scheme  of  business  which  offers,  with  as 
much  confidence  as  if  he  were  possessed  of  an  equal 
sum  in  coin. 

This  operation  of  public  funds  as  capital,  is  too 
obvious  to  be  denied;  but  it  is  objected  to  the  idea 
of  their  operating  as  an  augmentation  of  the  capital 


Industry  and  Commerce  119 

of  the  community,  that  they  serve  to  occasion  the 
destruction  of  some  other  capital,  to  an  equal 
amount. 

The  capital,  which  alone  they  can  be  supposed  to 
destroy,  must  consist  of — 

The  annual  revenue,  which  is  applied  to  the  pay 
ment  of  interest  on  the  debt,  and  to  the  gradual  re 
demption  of  the  principal;  the  amount  of  the  coin 
which  is  employed  in  circulating  the  funds,  or,  in 
other  words,  in  effecting  the  different  alienations 
which  they  undergo. 

But  the  following  appears  to  be  the  true  and  accu 
rate  view  of  this  matter. 

i  st.  As  to  the  point  of  the  annual  revenue  re 
quisite  for  payment  of  interest  and  redemption  of 
principal. 

As  a  determinate  proportion  will  tend  to  per 
spicuity  in  the  reasoning,  let  it  be  supposed,  that  the 
annual  revenue  to  be  applied,  corresponding  with 
the  modification  of  the  six  per  cent,  stock  of  the 
United  States,  is  in  the  ratio  of  eight  upon  the  hun 
dred  that;  is,  in  the  first  instance,  six  on  account  of 
interest,  and  two  on  account  of  principal. 

Thus  far,  it  is  evident  that  the  capital  destroyed,  to 
the  capital  created,  would  bear  no  greater  proportion 
than  eight  to  one  hundred.  There  would  be  with 
drawn,  from  the  total  mass  of  other  capitals,  a  sum 
of  eight  dollars  to  be  paid  to  the  public  creditor; 
while  he  would  be  possessed  of  a  sum  of  one  hun 
dred  dollars,  ready  to  be  applied  to  any  purpose,  to 
be  embarked  in  any  enterprise  which  might  appear 
to  him  eligible.  Here,  then,  the  augmentation  of 


120  Alexander  Hamilton 

capital,  or  the  excess  of  that  which  is  produced  be 
yond  that  which  is  destroyed,  is  equal  to  ninety-two 
dollars. 

To  this  conclusion  it  may  be  objected,  that  the 
sum  of  eight  dollars  is  to  be  withdrawn  annually, 
until  the  whole  hundred  is  extinguished ;  and  it  may 
be  inferred,  that,  in  process  of  time,  a  capital  will  be 
destroyed  equal  to  that  which  is  at  first  created. 

But  it  is  nevertheless  true,  that,  during  the  whole 
of  the  interval,  between  the  creation  of  the  capital 
of  one  hundred  dollars,  and  its  reduction  to  a  sum 
not  greater  than  that  of  the  annual  revenue  appro 
priated  to  its  redemption,  there  will  be  a  greater 
active  capital  in  existence  than  if  no  debt  had  been 
contracted.  The  sum  drawn  from  other  capitals  in 
any  one  year  will  not  exceed  eight  dollars;  but 
there  will  be,  at  every  instant  of  time  during  the 
whole  period  in  question,  a  sum  corresponding  with 
so  much  of  the  principal  as  remains  unredeemed,  in 
the  hands  of  some  person  or  other,  employed,  or 
ready  to  be  employed,  in  some  profitable  under 
taking.  There  will,  therefore,  constantly  be  more 
capital  in  capacity  to  be  employed,  than  capital 
taken  from  employment.  The  excess,  for  the  first 
year,  has  been  stated  to  be  ninety-two  dollars;  it 
will  diminish  yearly;  but  there  always  will  be  an 
excess,  until  the  principal  of  the  debt  is  brought  to 
a  level  with  the  redeeming  annuity;  that  is,  in  the 
case  which  has  been  assumed,  by  way  of  example, 
to  eight  dollars.  The  reality  of  this  excess  becomes 
palpable,  if  it  be  supposed,  as  often  happens,  that 
the  citizen  of  a  foreign  country  imports  into  the 


Industry  and  Commerce  121 

United  States  one  hundred  dollars  for  the  purchase 
of  an  equal  sum  of  public  debt — here  is  an  absolute 
augmentation  of  the  mass  of  circulating  coin  to  the 
extent  of  one  hundred  dollars.  At  the  end  of  the 
year,  the  foreigner  is  presumed  to  draw  back  eight 
dollars,  on  account  of  his  principal  and  interest,  but 
he  still  leaves  ninety-two  of  his  original  deposit  in 
circulation,  as  he,  in  like  manner,  leaves  eighty-four 
at  the  end  of  the  second  year,  drawing  back  then, 
also,  the  annuity  of  eight  dollars.  And  thus  the 
matter  proceeds;  the  capital  left  in  circulation 
diminishing,  in  each  year,  and  coming  nearer  to  the 
level  of  the  annuity  drawn  back.  There  are,  how 
ever,  some  differences  in  the  ultimate  operation  of 
the  part  of  the  debt  which  is  purchased  by  foreign 
ers,  and  that  which  remains  in  the  hands  of  citizens. 
But  the  general  effect  in  each  case,  though  in  differ 
ent  degrees,  is,  to  add  to  the  active  capital  of  the 
country. 

Hitherto,  the  reasoning  has  proceeded  on  a  con 
cession  of  the  position,  that  there  is  a  destruction  of 
some  other  capital,  to  the  extent  of  the  annuity  ap 
propriated  to  the  payment  of  the  interest  and  the 
redemption  of  the  principal  of  the  debt ;  but  in  this 
too  much  has  been  conceded.  There  is,  at  most,  a 
temporary  transfer  of  some  other  capital,  to  the 
amount  of  the  annuity,  from  those  who  pay,  to  the 
creditor,  who  receives;  which  he  again  restores  to 
the  circulation,  to  resume  the  offices  of  a  capital. 
This  he  does  either  immediately,  by  employing  the 
money  in  some  branch  of  industry,  or  mediately,  by 
lending  it  to  some  other  person,  who  does  so  employ 


122  Alexander  Hamilton 

it,  or  by  spending  it  on  his  own  maintenance.  In 
either  supposition,  there  is  no  destruction  of  capital; 
there  is  nothing  more  than  a  suspension  of  its  mo 
tion  for  a  time — that  is,  while  it  is  passing  from  the 
hands  of  those  who  pay  into  the  public  coffers,  and 
thence,  through  the  public  creditor,  into  some  other 
channel  of  circulation.  When  the  payments  of  in 
terest  are  periodical  and  quick,  and  made  by  the  in 
strumentality  of  banks,  the  diversion  of  suspension 
of  capital  may  almost  be  denominated  momentary. 
Hence  the  deduction,  on  this  account,  is  far  less 
than  it  at  first  sight  appears  to  be. 

There  is,  evidently,  as  far  as  regards  the  annuity, 
no  destruction  nor  transfer  of  any  other  capital  than 
that  portion  of  the  income  of  each  individual  which 
goes  to  make  up  the  annuity.  The  land  which  fur 
nishes  the  farmer  with  the  sum  which  he  is  to  con 
tribute,  remains  the  same;  and  the  like  may  be 
observed  of  other  capitals.  Indeed,  as  far  as  the 
tax,  which  is  the  object  of  contribution  (as  fre 
quently  happens,  when  it  does  not  oppress  by  its 
weight),  may  have  been  a  motive  to  greater  exertion 
in  any  occupation,  it  may  even  serve  to  increase  the 
contributory  capital.  This  idea  is  not  without  im 
portance  in  the  general  view  of  the  subject. 

It  remains  to  see  what  further  deduction  ought  to 
be  made  from  the  capital  which  is  created,  by  the 
existence  of  the  debt,  on  account  of  the  coin  which 
is  employed  in  its  circulation.  This  is  susceptible  of 
much  less  precise  calculation  than  the  article  which 
has  been  just  discussed.  It  is  impossible  to  say 
what  proportion  of  coin  is  necessary  to  carry  on  the 


Industry  and  Commerce  123 

alienations  which  any  species  of  property  usually 
undergoes.  The  quantity,  indeed,  varies  according 
to  circumstances.  But  it  may  still,  without  hesita 
tion,  be  pronounced,  from  the  quickness  of  the  rota 
tion,  or,  rather,  of  the  transitions,  that  the  medium 
of  circulation  always  bears  but  a  small  proportion 
to  the  amount  of  the  property  circulated.  And  it 
is  then  satisfactorily  deducible,  that  the  coin  em 
ployed  in  the  negotiations  of  the  funds,  and  which 
serves  to  give  them  activity,  as  capital,  is  incom 
parably  less  than  the  sum  of  the  debt  negotiated  for 
the  purpose  of  business. 

It  ought  not,  however,  to  be  omitted,  that  the 
negotiation  of  the  funds  becomes  itself  a  distinct 
business,  which  employs,  and,  by  employing,  diverts, 
a  portion  of  the  circulating  coin  from  other  pursuits. 
But,  making  due  allowance  for  this  circumstance, 
there  is  no  reason  to  conclude  that  the  effect  of  the 
diversion  of  coin,  in  the  whole  operation,  bears  any 
considerable  proportion  to  the  amount  of  the  capital 
to  which  it  gives  activity.  The  sum  of  the  debt  in 
circulation  is  continually  at  the  command  of  any 
useful  enterprise ;  the  coin  itself,  which  circulates  it, 
is  never  more  than  momentarily  suspended  from  its 
ordinary  functions.  It  experiences  an  incessant  and 
rapid  flux  and  reflux,  to  and  from  the  channels  of 
industry,  to  those  of  speculations  in  the  funds. 

There  are  strong  circumstances  in  confirmation  of 
this  theory.  The  force  of  moneyed  capital  which 
has  been  displayed  in  Great  Britain,  and  the  height 
to  which  every  species  of  industry  has  grown  up 
under  it,  defy  a  solution,  from  the  quantity  of  coin 


124  Alexander  Hamilton 

which  that  kingdom  has  ever  possessed.  Accord 
ingly,  it  has  been,  coeval  with  its  funding  system,  the 
prevailing  opinion  of  men  of  business,  and  of  the 
generality  of  the  most  sagacious  theorists  of  that 
country,  that  the  operation  of  the  public  funds,  as 
capital,  has  contributed  to  the  effect  in  question. 
Among  ourselves,  appearances,  thus  far,  favor  the 
same  conclusion.  Industry,  in  general,  seems  to 
have  been  re-animated.  There  are  symptoms  in 
dicating  an  extension  of  our  commerce.  Our  navi 
gation  has  certainly,  of  late,  had  a  considerable 
spring;  and  there  appears  to  be,  in  many  parts  of 
the  Union,  a  command  of  capital  which  till  lately, 
since  the  Revolution  at  least,  was  unknown.  But 
it  is,  at  the  same  time,  to  be  acknowledged,  that 
other  circumstances  have  concurred  (and  in  a  great 
degree)  in  producing  the  present  state  of  things,  and 
that  the  appearances  are  not  yet  sufficiently  decis 
ive  to  be  entirely  relied  upon. 

In  the  question  under  discussion,  it  is  important 
to  distinguish  between  an  absolute  increase  of 
capital,  or  an  accession  of  real  wealth,  and  an  arti 
ficial  increase  of  capital,  as  an  engine  of  business,  or 
as  an  instrument  of  industry  and  commerce.  In 
the  first  sense,  a  funded  debt  has  no  pretensions  to 
being  deemed  an  increase  of  capital;  in  the  last,  it 
has  pretensions  which  are  not  easy  to  be  contro 
verted.  Of  a  similar  nature  is  bank  credit;  and,  in 
an  inferior  degree,  every  species  of  private  credit. 

But  though  a  funded  debt  is  not,  in  the  first  in 
stance,  an  absolute  increase  of  capital,  or  an  aug 
mentation  of  real  wealth,  yet,  by  serving  as  a  new 


Industry  and  Commerce  125 

power  in  the  operations  of  industry,  it  has,  within 
certain  bounds,  a  tendency  to  increase  the  real 
wealth  of  a  community,  in  like  manner  as  money, 
borrowed  by  a  thrifty  farmer  to  be  laid  out  in  the 
improvement  of  his  farm,  may,  in  the  end,  add  to 
his  stock  of  real  riches. 

There  are  respectable  individuals  who,  from  a  just 
aversion  to  an  accumulation  of  public  debt,  are  un 
willing  to  concede  to  it  any  kind  of  utility;  who  can 
discern  no  good  to  alleviate  the  ill  with  which  they 
suppose  it  pregnant ;  who  cannot  be  persuaded  that 
it  ought,  in  any  sense,  to  be  viewed  as  an  increase  of 
capital,  lest  it  should  be  inferred  that,  the  more  debt 
the  more  capital,  the  greater  the  burthens  the 
greater  the  blessings  of  the  community. 

But  it  interests  the  public  councils  to  estimate 
every  object  as  it  truly  is;  to  appreciate  how  far 
the  good,  in  any  measure,  is  compensated  by  the  ill, 
or  the  ill  by  the  good:  either  of  them  is  seldom 
unmixed. 

Neither  will  it  follow  that  an  accumulation  of 
debt  is  desirable,  because  a  certain  degree  of  it  op 
erates  as  capital.  There  may  be  a  plethora  in  the 
political  as  in  the  natural  body;  there  may  be  a 
state  of  things  in  which  any  such  artificial  capital 
is  unnecessary.  The  debt,  too,  may  be  swelled  to 
such  a  size  as  that  the  greatest  part  of  it  may  cease 
to  be  useful  as  a  capital,  serving  only  to  pamper  the  Y 
dissipation  of  idle  and  dissolute  individuals ;  as  that  \ 
the  sums  required  to  pay  the  interest  upon  it  may 
become  oppressive,  and  beyond  the  means  which 
a  government  can  employ,  consistently  with  its 


126  Alexander  Hamilton 

tranquillity,  to  raise  them;  as  that  the  resources 
of  taxation  to  face  the  debt  may  have  been  strained 
too  far  to  admit  of  extensions  adequate  to  exigencies 
which  regard  the  public  safety. 

Where  this  critical  point  is,  cannot  be  pronounced ; 
but  it  is  impossible  to  believe  that  there  is  not  such 
a  point. 

And  as  the  vicissitudes  of  nations  beget  a  per 
petual  tendency  to  the  accumulation  of  debt,  there 
ought  to  be,  in  every  government,  a  perpetual, 
anxious,  and  unceasing  effort  to  reduce  that  which 
at  any  time  exists,  as  fast  as  shall  be  practicable, 
consistently  with  integrity  and  good  faith. 

Reasonings  on  a  subject  comprehending  ideas  so 
abstract  and  complex,  so  little  reducible  to  a  precise 
calculation,  as  those  which  enter  into  the  question 
just  discussed,  are  always  attended  with  a  danger  of 
running  into  fallacies.  Due  allowance  ought,  there 
fore,  to  be  made  for  this  possibility.  But,  as  far  as 
the  nature  of  the  subject  admits  of  it,  there  appears 
to  be  satisfactory  ground  for  a  belief  that  the  public 
funds  operate  as  a  resource  of  capital  to  the  citizens 
of  the  United  States;  and,  if  they  are  a  resource  at 
all,  it  is  an  extensive  one. 

To  all  the  arguments  which  are  brought  to  evince 
the  impracticability  of  success  in  manufacturing 
establishments  in  the  United  States,  it  might  have 
been  a  sufficient  answer  to  have  referred  to  the  ex 
perience  of  what  has  been  already  done.  It  is  cer 
tain  that  several  important  branches  have  grown 
up  and  flourished,  with  a  rapidity  which  surprises, 
affording  an  encouraging  assurance  of  success  in 


Industry  and  Commerce  127 

future  attempts.     Of  these  it  may  not  be  improper 
to  enumerate  the  most  considerable. 

1.  Of  Skins. — Tanned  and  tawed  leather,  dressed 
skins,  shoes,  boots,  and  slippers,  harness  and  sad 
dlery  of  all  kinds,  portmanteaus  and  trunks,  leather 
breeches,  gloves,  muffs,  and  tippets,  parchment  and 
glue. 

2.  Of  Iron. — Bar  and  sheet  iron,  steel,  nail  rods 
and  nails,  implements  of  husbandry,  stoves,  pots, 
and  other  household  utensils,  the  steel  and  iron  work 
of  carriages,  and  for  ship-building,  anchors,  scale 
beams  and  weights,  and  various  tools  of  artificers, 
arms  of  different  kinds;  though  the  manufacture  of 
these  last  has  of  late  diminished  for  want  of  demand. 

3.  Of  Wood. — Ships,  cabinet  wares,  and  turnery, 
wool  and  cotton  cards,   and  other  machinery  for 
manufactures  and  husbandry,  mathematical  instru 
ments,  coopers'  wares  of  every  kind. 

4.  Of  Flax  and  Hemp. — Cables,  sail  cloth,  cordage, 
twine,  and  pack  thread. 

5.  Bricks  and  coarse  tiles,  and  potters'  wares. 

6.  Ardent  spirits  and  malt  liquors. 

7.  Writing   and   printing   paper,    sheathing   and 
wrapping  paper,  pasteboard,  fullers'  or  press  papers, 
paper  hangings. 

8.  Hats  of  fur  and  wool,  and  mixtures  of  both; 
women's  stuff  and  silk  shoes. 

9.  Refined  sugars. 

10.  Oils  of  animals  and  seeds,  soap,  spermaceti 
and  tallow  candles. 

11.  Copper  and  brass  wires,  particularly  utensils 
for  distillers,  sugar  refiners,  and  brewers;   andirons 


128  Alexander  Hamilton 

and  other  articles  for  household  use,  philosophical 
apparatus. 

12.  Tin  wares  for  most  purposes  of  ordinary  use. 

13.  Carriages  of  all  kinds. 

14.  SnufT,  chewing  and  smoking  tobacco. 

15.  Starch  and  hair-powder. 

1 6.  Lampblack,  and  other  painters'  colors. 

17.  Gunpowder. 

Besides  manufactories  of  these  articles,  which  are 
carried  on  as  regular  trades,  and  have  attained  to  a 
considerable  degree  of  maturity,  there  is  a  vast 
scene  of  household  manufacturing,  which  contributes 
more  largely  to  the  supply  of  the  community  than 
could  be  imagined  without  having  made  it  an  ob 
ject  of  particular  inquiry.  This  observation  is  the 
pleasing  result  of  the  investigation  to  which  the 
subject  of  this  report  has  led,  and  is  applicable  as 
well  to  the  Southern  as  to  the  Middle  and  Northern 
States.  Great  quantities  of  coarse  cloths,  coatings, 
serges,  and  flannels,  linsey  woolseys,  hosiery  of  wool, 
cotton,  and  thread,  coarse  fustians,  jeans,  and  mus 
lins,  checked  and  striped  cotton  and  linen  goods,  bed- 
ticks,  coverlets  and  counterpanes,  tow  linens,  coarse 
shirtings,  sheetings,  towelling,  and  table  linen,  and 
various  mixtures  of  wool  and  cotton,  and  of  cotton 
and  flax,  are  made  in  the  household  way,  and,  in 
many  instances,  to  an  extent  not  only  sufficient  for 
the  supply  of  the  families  in  which  they  are  made, 
but  for  sale,  and  even,  in  some  cases,  for  exporta 
tion.  It  is  computed  in  a  number  of  districts  that 
two  thirds,  three  fourths,  and  even  four  fifths  of  all 
the  clothing  of  the  inhabitants  are  made  by  them- 


Industry  and  Commerce  129 

selves.  The  importance  of  so  great  a  progress  as 
appears  to  have  been  made  in  family  manufactures, 
within  a  few  years,  both  in  a  moral  and  political 
view,  renders  the  fact  highly  interesting. 

Neither  does  the  above  enumeration  comprehend 
all  the  articles  that  are  manufactured,  as  regular 
trades.  Many  others  occur,  which  are  equally  well 
established,  but  which,  not  being  of  equal  impor 
tance,  have  been  omitted.  And  there  are  many 
attempts,  still  in  their  infancy,  which,  though  at 
tended  with  very  favorable  appearances,  could  not 
have  been  properly  comprised  in  an  enumeration 
of  manufactories  already  established.  There  are 
other  articles,  also,  of  great  importance,  which, 
though,  strictly  speaking,  manufactures,  are  omitted, 
as  being  immediately  connected  with  husbandry: 
such  are  flour,  pot-  and  pearl-ashes,  pitch,  tar,  tur 
pentine,  and  the  like. 

There  remains  to  be  noticed  an  objection  to  the 
encouragement  of  manufactures,  of  a  nature  differ 
ent  from  those  which  question  the  probability  of 
success.  This  is  derived  from  its  supposed  ten 
dency  to  give  a  monopoly  of  advantages  to  par 
ticular  classes,  at  the  expense  of  the  rest  of  the 
community,  who,  it  is  affirmed,  would  be  able 
to  procure  the  requisite  supplies  of  manufactured 
articles  on  better  terms  from  foreigners  than  from 
our  own  citizens;  and  who,  it  is  alleged,  are  reduced 
to  the  necessity  of  paying  an  enhanced  price  for 
whatever  they  want,  by  every  measure  which  ob 
structs  the  free  competition  of  foreign  commodities. 

It  is  not  an  unreasonable  supposition,  that  meas- 


VOL.  IV.— Q. 


130  Alexander  Hamilton 

ures  which  serve  to  abridge  the  free  competition  of 
foreign  articles,  have  a  tendency  to  occasion  an  en 
hancement  of  prices ;  and  it  is  not  to  be  denied  that 
such  is  the  effect,  in  a  number  of  cases;  but  the  fact 
does  not  uniformly  correspond  with  the  theory.  A 
reduction  of  prices  has,  in  several  instances,  imme 
diately  succeeded  the  establishment  of  a  domestic 
manufacture.  Whether  it  be  that  foreign  manu 
facturers  endeavor  to  supplant,  by  underselling  our 
own,  or  whatever  else  be  the  cause,  the  effect  has 
been  such  as  is  stated,  and  the  reverse  of  what 
might  have  been  expected. 

But,  though  it  were  true  that  the  immediate  and 
certain  effect  of  regulations  controlling  the  com 
petition  of  foreign  with  domestic  fabrics  was  an 
increase  of  price,  it  is  universally  true  that  the  con 
trary  is  the  ultimate  effect  with  every  successful 
manufacture.  When  a  domestic  manufacture  has 
attained  to  perfection,  and  has  engaged  in  the 
prosecution  of  it  a  certain  number  of  persons,  it 
invariably  becomes  cheaper.  Being  free  from  the 
heavy  charges  which  attend  the  importation  of 
foreign  commodities,  it  can  be  afforded,  and  accord 
ingly  seldom  or  never  fails  to  be  sold,  cheaper,  in  pro 
cess  of  time,  than  was  the  foreign  article  for  which 
it  is  a  substitute.  The  internal  competition  which 
takes  place  soon  does  away  with  every  thing  like 
monopoly,  and  by  degrees  reduces  the  price  of  the 
article  to  the  minimum  of  a  reasonable  profit  on  the 
capital  employed.  This  accords  with  the  reason  of 
the  thing,  and  with  experience. 

Whence  it  follows,  that  it  is  the  interest  of  a  com- 


Industry  and  Commerce  131 

munity,  with  a  view  to  eventual  and  permanent 
economy,  to  encourage  the  growth  of  manufactures. 
In  a  national  view,  a  temporary  enhancement  of 
price  must  always  be  well  compensated  by  a  per 
manent  reduction  of  it. 

It  is  a  reflection  which  may  with  propriety  be  in 
dulged  here,  that  this  eventual  diminution  of  the 
prices  of  manufactured  articles,  which  is  the  result 
of  internal  manufacturing  establishments,  has  a  di 
rect  and  very  important  tendency  to  benefit  agri 
culture.  It  enables  the  farmer  to  procure,  with  a 
smaller  quantity  of  his  labor,  the  manufactured 
produce  of  which  he  stands  in  need,  and  conse 
quently  increases  the  value  of  his  income  and  prop 
erty. 

The  objections  which  are  commonly  made  to  the 
expediency  of  encouraging,  and  to  the  probability  of 
succeeding  in,  manufacturing  pursuits,  in  the  United 
States,  having  now  been  discussed,  the  considera 
tions,  which  have  appeared  in  the  course  of  the  dis 
cussion,  recommending  that  species  of  industry  to 
the  patronage  of  the  government,  will  be  materially 
strengthened  by  a  few  general  and  some  particular 
topics,  which  have  been  naturally  reserved  for  sub 
sequent  notice. 

i.  There  seems  to  be  a  moral  certainty  that  the 
trade  of  a  country  which  is  both  manufacturing  and 
agricultural,  will  be  more  lucrative  and  prosperous 
than  that  of  a  country  which  is  merely  agricultural. 

One  reason  for  this  is  found  in  that  general  effort 
of  nations  (which  has  been  already  mentioned)  to 
procure  from  their  own  soils  the  articles  of  prime 


132  Alexander  Hamilton 

necessity  requisite  to  their  own  consumption  and 
use,  and  which  serves  to  render  their  demand  for  a 
foreign  supply  of  such  articles,  in  a  great  degree, 
occasional  and  contingent.  Hence,  while  the  neces 
sities  of  nations  exclusively  devoted  to  agriculture, 
for  the  fabrics  of  manufacturing  states,  are  constant 
and  regular,  the  wants  of  the  latter  for  the  products 
of  the  former  are  liable  to  very  considerable  fluc 
tuations  and  interruptions.  The  great  inequalities 
resulting  from  difference  of  seasons  have  been,  else 
where,  remarked.  This  uniformity  of  demand  on 
one  side,  and  unsteadiness  of  it  on  the  other,  must 
necessarily  have  a  tendency  to  cause  the  general 
course  of  the  exchange  of  commodities  between  the 
parties  to  turn  to  the  disadvantage  of  the  merely 
agricultural  states.  Peculiarity  of  situation,  a  cli 
mate  and  soil  adapted  to  the  production  of  peculiar 
commodities,  may,  sometimes,  contradict  the  rule, 
but  there  is  every  reason  to  believe  that  it  will  be 
found,  in  the  main,  a  just  one. 

Another  circumstance,  which  gives  a  superiority 
of  commercial  advantages  to  states  that  manufacture 
as  well  as  cultivate,  consists  in  the  more  numerous 
attractions  which  a  more  diversified  market  offers 
to  foreign  customers,  and  in  the  greater  scope  which 
it  affords  to  mercantile  enterprise.  It  is  a  position 
of  indisputable  truth,  in  commerce,  depending  too 
on  very  obvious  reasons,  that  the  greatest  resort  will 
ever  be  to  those  marts  where  commodities,  while 
equally  abundant,  are  most  various.  Each  differ 
ence  of  kind  holds  out  an  additional  inducement; 
and  it  is  a  position  not  less  clear,  that  the  field  of 


Industry  and  Commerce  133 

enterprise  must  be  enlarged  to  the  merchants  of  a 
country,  in  proportion  to  the  variety  as  well  as  the 
abundance  of  commodities  which  they  find  at  home 
for  exportation  to  foreign  markets. 

A  third  circumstance,  perhaps  not  inferior  to 
either  of  the  other  two,  conferring  the  superiority 
which  has  been  stated,  has  relation  to  the  stagnations 
of  demand  for  certain  commodities,  which,  at  some 
time  or  other,  interfere  more  or  less  with  the  sale  of 
all.  The  nation  which  can  bring  to  market  but 
few  articles  is  likely  to  be  more  quickly  and  sen 
sibly  affected  by  such  stagnations,  than  one  which 
is  always  possessed  of  a  great  variety  of  commodi 
ties;  the  former  frequently  finds  too  great  a  pro 
portion  of  its  stock  of  materials  for  sale  or  exchange 
lying  on  hand,  or  is  obliged  to  make  injurious  sacri 
fices  to  supply  its  wants  of  foreign  articles,  which  are 
numerous  and  urgent  in  proportion  to  the  smallness 
of  the  number  of  its  own.  The  latter  commonly 
finds  itself  indemnified,  by  the  high  prices  of  some 
articles,  for  the  low  prices  of  others ;  and  the  prompt 
and  advantageous  sale  of  those  articles  which  are  in 
demand,  enables  its  merchants  the  better  to  wait 
for  a  more  favorable  change  in  respect  to  those 
which  are  not.  There  is  ground  to  believe  that  a 
difference  of  situation,  in  this  particular,  has  im 
mensely  different  effects  upon  the  wealth  and  pros 
perity  of  nations. 

From  these  circumstances,  collectively,  two  im 
portant  inferences  are  to  be  drawn :  one,  that 
there  is  always  a  higher  probability  of  a  favorable 
balance  of  trade,  in  regard  to  countries  in  which 


134  Alexander  Hamilton 

manufactures,  founded  on  the  basis  of  a  thriving 
agriculture,  flourish,  than  in  regard  to  those  which 
are  confined  wholly,  or  almost  wholly,  to  agriculture ; 
the  other  (which  is  also  a  consequence  of  the  first), 
that  countries  of  the  former  description  are  likely 
to  possess  more  pecuniary  wealth,  or  money,  than 
those  of  the  latter. 

Facts  appear  to  correspond  with  this  conclusion. 
The  importations  of  manufactured  supplies  seem  in 
variably  to  drain  the  merely  agricultural  people  of 
their  wealth.  Let  the  situation  of  the  manufac 
turing  countries  of  Europe  be  compared,  in  this  par 
ticular,  with  that  of  countries  which  only  cultivate, 
and  the  disparity  will  be  striking.  Other  causes,  it 
is  true,  help  to  account  for  this  disparity  between 
some  of  them;  and  among  these  causes,  the  relative 
state  of  agriculture;  but  between  others  of  them, 
the  most  prominent  circumstance  of  dissimilitude 
arises  from  the  comparative  state  of  manufactures. 
In  corrobation  of  the  same  idea,  it  ought  not  to  es 
cape  remark,  that  the  West  India  Islands,  the  soils 
of  which  are  the  most  fertile,  and  the  nation  which, 
in  the  greatest  degree,  supplies  the  rest  of  the  world 
with  the  precious  metals,  exchange  to  a  loss  with 
almost  every  other  country. 

As  far  as  experience  at  home  may  guide,  it  will 
lead  to  the  same  conclusion.  Previous  to  the  Revo 
lution,  the  quantity  of  coin  possessed  by  the  colonies 
which  now  compose  the  United  States  appeared  to 
be  inadequate  to  their  circulation ;  and  their  debt  to 
Great  Britain  was  progressive.  Since  the  Revolu 
tion,  the  States  in  which  manufactures  have  most 


Industry  and  Commerce  135 

increased  have  recovered  fastest  from  the  injuries 
of  the  late  war,  and  abound  most  in  pecuniary 
resources. 

It  ought  to  be  admitted,  however,  in  this,  as  in 
the  preceding  case,  that  causes  irrelative  to  the 
state  of  manufactures,  account,  in  a  degree,  for  the 
phenomena  remarked.  The  continual  progress  of 
new  settlements  has  a  natural  tendency  to  occasion 
an  unfavorable  balance  of  trade,  though  it  indemni 
fies  for  the  inconvenience,  by  that  increase  of  the 
national  capital  which  flows  from  the  conversion  of 
waste  into  improved  lands,  and  the  different  degrees 
of  external  commerce  which  are  carried  on  by  the 
different  States,  may  make  material  differences  in 
the  comparative  state  of  their  wealth.  The  first 
circumstance  has  reference  to  the  deficiency  of  coin 
and  the  increase  of  debt  previous  to  the  Revolution ; 
the  last,  to  the  advantages  which  the  most  manu 
facturing  States  appear  to  have  enjoyed  over  the 
others  since  the  termination  of  the  late  war. 

But  the  uniform  appearance  of  an  abundance  of 
specie,  as  the  concomitant  of  a  flourishing  state  of 
manufactures,  and  of  the  reverse,  where  they  do  not 
prevail,  afford  a  strong  presumption  of  their  favor 
able  operation  upon  the  wealth  of  a  country. 

Not  only  the  wealth  but  the  independence  and 
security  of  a  country  appear  to  be  materially  con 
nected  with  the  prosperity  of  manufactures.  Every 
nation,  with  a  view  to  those  great  objects,  ought  to 
endeavor  to  possess  within  itself,  all  the  essentials 
of  national  supply.  These  comprise  the  means  of 
subsistence,  habitation,  clothing,  and  defence. 


136  Alexander  Hamilton 

The  possession  of  these  is  necessary  to  the  perfec 
tion  of  the  body  politic;  to  the  safety  as  well  as  to 
the  welfare  of  the  society.  The  want  of  either  is 
the  want  of  an  important  organ  of  political  life  and 
motion;  and  in  the  various  crises  which  await  a 
state,  it  must  severely  feel  the  effects  of  any  such 
deficiency.  The  extreme  embarrassments  of  the 
United  States  during  the  late  war,  from  an  incapa 
city  of  supplying  themselves,  are  still  matter  of  keen 
recollection;  a  future  war  might  be  expected  again 
to  exemplify  the  mischiefs  and  dangers  of  a  situation 
to  which  that  incapacity  is  still,  in  too  great  a  de 
gree,  applicable,  unless  changed  by  timely  and  vigor 
ous  exertion.  To  effect  this  change,  as  fast  as  shall 
be  prudent,  merits  all  the  attention  and  all  the  zeal 
of  our  public  councils:  't  is  the  next  great  work  to 
be  accomplished. 

The  want  of  a  navy,  to  protect  our  external  com 
merce,  as  long  as  it  shall  continue,  must  render  it  a 
peculiarly  precarious  reliance  for  the  supply  of  es 
sential  articles,  and  must  serve  to  strengthen  pro 
digiously  the  arguments  in  favor  of  manufactures. 

To  these  general  considerations  are  added  some  of 
a  more  particular  nature. 

Our  distance  from  Europe,  the  great  fountain  of 
manufactured  supply,  subjects  us,  in  the  existing 
state  of  things,  to  inconvenience  and  loss,  in  two 
ways. 

The  bulkiness  of  those  commodities,  which  are  the 
chief  productions  of  the  soil,  necessarily  imposes  very 
heavy  charges  on  their  transportation  to  distant 
markets.  These  charges,  in  the  cases  in  which  the 


Industry  and  Commerce  137 

nations  to  whom  our  products  are  sent,  maintain  a 
competition  in  the  supply  of  their  own  markets, 
principally  fall  upon  us,  and  form  material  deduc 
tions  from  the  primitive  value  of  the  articles  fur 
nished.  The  charges  on  manufactured  supplies, 
brought  from  Europe,  are  greatly  enhanced  by  the 
same  circumstances  of  distance.  These  charges, 
again,  in  the  cases  in  which  our  own  industry  main 
tains  no  competition  in  our  own  markets,  also  prin 
cipally  fall  upon  us,  and  are  an  aditional  cause  of 
extraordinary  deduction  from  the  primitive  value 
of  our  own  products;  these  being  the  materials  of 
exchange  for  the  foreign  fabrics  which  we  consume. 

The  equality  and  moderation  of  individual  prop 
erty,  and  the  growing  settlements  of  new  districts, 
occasion,  in  this  country,  an  unusual  demand  for 
coarse  manufactures;  the  charges  of  which,  being 
greater  in  proportion  to  their  greater  bulk,  augment 
the  disadvantage  which  has  been  just  described. 

As  in  most  countries,  domestic  supplies  maintain 
a  very  considerable  competition  with  such  foreign 
productions  of  the  soil  as  are  imported  for  sale,  if  the 
extensive  establishment  of  manufactories  in  the 
United  States  does  not  create  a  similar  competition 
in  respect  to  manufactured  articles,  it  appears  to 
be  clearly  deducible,  from  the  considerations  which 
have  been  mentioned,  that  they  must  sustain  a 
double  loss  in  their  exchanges  with  foreign  nations, 
strongly  conducive  to  an  unfavorable  balance  of 
trade,  and  very  prejudicial  to  their  interests. 

These  disadvantages  press,  with  no  small  weight, 
on  the  landed  interest  of  the  country.  In  seasons 


138  Alexander  Hamilton 

of  peace,  they  cause  a  serious  deduction  from  the 
intrinsic  value  of  the  products  of  the  soil.  In  the 
time  of  a  ^ar,  which  should  either  involve  ourselves, 
or  another  nation  possessing  a  considerable  share  of 
our  carrying  trade,  the  charges  on  the  transporta 
tion  of  our  commodities,  bulky  as  most  of  them  are, 
could  hardly  fail  to  prove  a  grievous  burthen  to  the 
farmer,  while  obliged  to  depend,  in  so  great  a  degree 
as  he  now  does,  upon  foreign  markets,  for  the  vent 
of  the  surplus  of  his  labor. 

As  far  as  the  prosperity  of  the  fisheries  of  the 
United  States  is  impeded  by  the  want  of  an  adequate 
market,  there  arises  another  special  reason  for  de 
siring  the  extension  of  manufactures.  Besides  the 
fish,  which,  in  many  places,  would  be  likely  to  make 
a  part  of  the  subsistence  of  the  persons  employed, 
it  is  known  that  the  oils,  bones,  and  skins  of  marine 
animals,  are  of  extensive  use  in  various  manufac 
tures.  Hence,  the  prospect  of  an  additional  de 
mand  for  the  produce  of  the  fisheries. 

One  more  point  of  view  only  remains,  in  which  to 
consider  the  expediency  of  encouraging  manufac 
tures  in  the  United  States. 

It  is  not  uncommon  to  meet  with  an  opinion,  that, 
though  the  promoting  of  manufactures  may  be  the 
interest  of  a  part  of  the  Union,  it  is  contrary  to  that 
of  another  part.  The  Northern  and  Southern  re 
gions  are  sometimes  represented  as  having  adverse 
interests  in  this  respect.  Those  are  called  manu 
facturing,  these  agricultural  States;  and  a  species 
of  opposition  is  imagined  to  subsist  between  the 
manufacturing  and  agricultural  interests. 


Industry  and  Commerce  139 

This  idea  of  an  opposition  between  those  two  in 
terests  is  the  common  error  of  the  early  periods  of 
every  country;  but  experience  gradually  dissipates 
it.  Indeed,  they  are  perceived  so  often  to  succor 
and  befriend  each  other,  that  they  come  at  length  to 
be  considered  as  one — a  supposition  which  has  been 
frequently  abused,  and  is  not  universally  true.  Par 
ticular  encouragements  of  particular  manufactures 
may  be  of  a  nature  to  sacrifice  the  interests  of  land 
holders  to  those  of  manufacturers;  but  it  is  never 
theless  a  maxim,  well  established  by  experience, 
and  generally  acknowledged,  where  there  has  been 
sufficient  experience,  that  the  aggregate  prosperity 
of  manufactures  and  the  aggregate  prosperity  of 
agriculture  are  intimately  connected.  In  the  course 
of  the  discussion  which  has  had  place,  various 
weighty  considerations  have  been  adduced,  operat 
ing  in  support  of  that  maxim.  Perhaps  the  superior 
steadiness  of  the  demand  of  a  domestic  market,  for 
the  surplus  produce  of  the  soil,  is,  alone,  a  convincing 
argument  of  its  truth. 

Ideas  of  a  contrariety  of  interests  between  the 
Northern  and  Southern  regions  of  the  Union  are,  in 
the  main,  as  unfounded  as  they  are  mischievous. 
The  diversity  of  circumstances,  on  which  such  con 
trariety  is  usually  predicated,  authorizes  a  directly 
contrary  conclusion.  Mutual  wants  constitute  one 
of  the  strongest  links  of  political  connection;  and 
the  extent  of  these  bears  a  natural  proportion  to 
the  diversity  in  the  means  of  mutual  supply. 

Suggestions  of  an  opposite  complexion  are  ever  to 
be  deplored,  as  unfriendly  to  the  steady  pursuit  of 


140  Alexander  Hamilton 

one  great  common  cause,  and  to  the  perfect  harmony 
of  all  the  parts. 

In  proportion  as  the  mind  is  accustomed  to  trace 
the  intimate  connection  of  interest  which  subsists 
between  all  the  parts  of  a  society  united  under  the 
same  government,  the  infinite  variety  of  channels 
will  serve  to  circulate  the  prosperity  of  each,  to  and 
through  the  rest, — in  that  proportion  will  be  little 
apt  to  be  disturbed  by  solicitudes  and  apprehen 
sions  which  originate  in  local  discriminations. 

It  is  a  truth,  as  important  as  it  is  agreeable,  and 
one  to  which  it  is  not  easy  to  imagine  exceptions, 
that  every  thing  tending  to  establish  substantial 
and  permanent  order  in  the  affairs  of  a  country,  to 
increase  the  total  mass  of  industry  and  opulence,  is 
ultimately  beneficial  to  every  part  of  it.  On  the 
credit  of  this  great  truth,  an  acquiescence  may 
safely  be  accorded,  from  every  quarter,  to  all  in 
stitutions  and  arrangements  which  promise  a  con 
firmation  of  public  order  and  an  augmentation  of 
national  resource. 

But  there  are  more  particular  considerations 
which  serve  to  fortify  the  idea  that  the  encourage 
ment  of  manufactures  is  the  interest  of  all  parts  of 
the  Union.  If  the  Northern  and  Middle  States 
should  be  the  principal  scenes  of  such  establishments, 
they  would  immediately  benefit  the  more  Southern, 
by  creating  a  demand  for  productions,  some  of 
which  they  have  in  common  with  the  other  States, 
and  others,  which  are  either  peculiar  to  them,  or 
more  abundant,  or  of  better  quality,  than  else 
where.  These  productions,  principally,  are  timber, 


Industry  and  Commerce  141 

flax,  hemp,  cotton,  wool,  raw  silk,  indigo,  iron,  lead, 
furs,  hides,  skins,  and  coal;  of  these  articles,  cotton 
and  indigo  are  peculiar  to  the  Southern  States,  as 
are,  hitherto,  lead  and  coal;  flax  and  hemp  are,  or 
may  be,  raised  in  greater  abundance  there  than  in 
the  more  Northern  States ;  and  the  wool  of  Virginia  is 
said  to  be  of  better  quality  than  that  of  any  other 
State — a  circumstance  rendered  the  more  probable 
by  the  reflection,  that  Virginia  embraces  the  same 
latitudes  with  the  finest  wool  countries  of  Europe. 
The  climate  of  the  South  is  also  better  adapted  to 
the  production  of  silk. 

The  extensive  cultivation  of  cotton  can,  perhaps, 
hardly  be  expected  but  from  the  previous  establish 
ment  of  domestic  manufactories  of  the  article ;  and  the 
surest  encouragement  and  vent  for  the  others  would 
result  from  similar  establishments  in  respect  to  them. 

If,  then,  it  satisfactorily  appears,  that  it  is  the  in 
terest  of  the  United  States,  generally,  to  encourage 
manufactures,  it  merits  particular  attention,  that 
there  are  circumstances  which  render  the  present  a 
critical  moment  for  entering,  with  zeal,  upon  the 
important  business.  The  effort  cannot  fail  to  be 
materially  seconded  by  a  considerable  and  increasing 
influx  of  money,  in  consequence  of  foreign  specula 
tions  in  the  funds,  and  by  the  disorders  which  exist 
in  different  parts  of  Europe. 

The  first  circumstance  not  only  facilitates  the  exe 
cution  of  manufacturing  enterprises,  but  it  indicates 
them  as  a  necessary  means  to  turn  the  thing  itself 
to  advantage,  and  to  prevent  its  being  eventually 
an  evil.  If  useful  employment  be  not  found  for  the 


142  Alexander  Hamilton 

money  of  foreigners,  brought  to  the  country  to  be 
invested  in  purchases  of  the  public  debt,  it  will 
quickly  be  re-exported,  to  defray  the  expense  of  an 
extraordinary  consumption  of  foreign  luxuries;  and 
distressing  drains  of  our  specie  may,  hereafter,  be 
experienced,  to  pay  the  interest  and  redeem  the 
principal  of  the  purchased  debt. 

This  useful  employment,  too,  ought  to  be  of  a  na 
ture  to  produce  solid  and  permanent  improvements. 
If  the  money  merely  serves  to  give  a  temporary 
spring  to  foreign  commerce;  as  it  cannot  procure 
new  and  lasting  outlets  for  the  products  of  the 
country,  there  will  be  no  real  or  durable  advantage 
gained.  As  far  as  it  shall  find  its  way  in  agricul 
tural  meliorations,  in  opening  canals,  and  in  similar 
improvements,  it  will  be  productive  of  substantial 
utility.  But  there  is  reason  to  doubt,  whether,  in 
such  channels,  it  is  likely  to  find  sufficient  employ 
ment;  and  still  more,  whether  many  of  those  who 
possess  it  would  be  as  readily  attracted  to  objects 
of  this  nature,  as  to  manufacturing  pursuits,  which 
bear  greater  analogy  to  those  to  which  they  are  ac 
customed,  and  to  the  spirit  generated  by  them. 

To  open  the  one  field,  as  well  as  the  other,  will  at 
least  secure  a  better  prospect  of  useful  employment  for 
whatever  accession  of  money  there  has  been  or  maybe. 

There  is,  at  the  present  juncture,  a  certain  fer 
mentation  of  mind,  a  certain  activity  of  speculation 
and  enterprise  which,  if  properly  directed,  may  be 
made  subservient  to  useful  purposes;  but  which,  if 
left  entirely  to  itself,  may  be  attended  with  per 
nicious  effects. 


Industry  and  Commerce  143 

The  disturbed  state  of  Europe  inclining  its  citizens 
to  emigration,  the  requisite  workmen  will  be  more 
easily  acquired  than  at  another  time ;  and  the  effect 
of  multiplying  the  opportunities  of  employment  to 
those  who  emigrate,  may  be  an  increase  of  the  num 
ber  and  extent  of  valuable  acquisitions  to  the  popu 
lation,  arts,  and  industry  of  the  country. 

To  find  pleasure  in  the  calamities  of  other  nations 
would  be  criminal ;  but  to  benefit  ourselves,  by  open 
ing  an  asylum  to  those  who  suffer  in  consequence  of 
them,  is  as  justifiable  as  it  is  politic. 

A  full  view  having  now  been  taken  of  the  induce 
ments  to  the  promotion  of  manufactures  in  the 
United  States,  accompanied  with  an  examination  of 
the  principal  objections  which  are  commonly  urged 
in  opposition,  it  is  proper,  in  the  next  place,  to  con 
sider  the  means  by  which  it  may  be  effected,  as  in 
troductory  to  a  specification  of  the  objects,  which,  in 
the  present  state  of  things,  appear  the  most  fit  to  be 
encouraged,  and  of  the  particular  measures  which  it 
may  be  advisable  to  adopt,  in  respect  to  each. 

In  order  to  a  better  judgment  of  the  means  proper 
to  be  resorted  to  by  the  United  States,  it  will  be  of 
use  to  advert  to  those  which  have  been  employed 
with  success  in  other  countries.  The  principal  of 
these  are: 

i.  Protecting  duties — or  duties  on  those  foreign  ar 
ticles  which  are  the  rivals  of  the  domestic  ones 
intended  to  be  encouraged 

Duties  of  this  nature  evidently  amount  to  a  virtual 
bounty  on  the  domestic  fabrics ;  since,  by  enhancing 


144  Alexander  Hamilton 

the  charges  on  foreign  articles,  they  enable  the  na 
tional  manufacturers  to  undersell  all  their  foreign 
competitors.  The  propriety  of  this  species  of  en 
couragement  need  not  be  dwelt  upon,  as  it  is  not 
only  a  clear  result  from  the  numerous  topics  which 
have  been  suggested,  but  is  sanctioned  by  the  laws 
of  the  United  States,  in  a  variety  of  instances;  it 
has  the  additional  recommendation  of  being  a  re 
source  of  revenue.  Indeed,  all  the  duties  imposed 
on  imported  articles,  though  with  an  exclusive  view 
to  revenue,  have  the  effect,  in  contemplation,  and, 
except  where  they  fall  on  raw  materials,  wear  a 
beneficent  aspect  toward  the  manufacturers  of  the 
country. 

2.     Prohibitions  of  rival  articles,  or  duties  equivalent 
to  prohibitions 

This  is  another  and  an  efficacious  mean  of  en 
couraging  national  manufactures;  but,  in  general, 
it  is  only  fit  to  be  employed  when  a  manufacture 
has  made  such  progress,  and  is  in  so  many  hands,  as 
to  insure  a  due  competition,  and  an  adequate  supply 
on  reasonable  terms.  Of  duties  equivalent  to  pro 
hibitions,  there  are  examples  in  the  laws  of  the 
United  States ;  and  there  are  other  cases  to  which 
the  principle  may  be  advantageously  extended,  but 
they  are  not  numerous. 

Considering  a  monopoly  of  the  domestic  market 
to  its  own  manufacturers  as  the  reigning  policy  of 
manufacturing  nations,  a  similar  policy,  on  the  part 
of  the  United  States,  in  every  proper  instance,  is 
dictated,  it  might  almost  be  said,  by  the  principles 


Industry  and  Commerce  145 

of  distributive  justice;  certainly,  by  the  duty  of 
endeavoring  to  secure  to  their  own  citizens  a  reci 
procity  of  advantages. 

j.     Prohibitions  of  the  exportation  of  the  materials  of 

manufactures 

The  desire  of  securing  a  cheap  and  plentiful  supply 
for  the  national  workmen,  and  where  the  article  is 
either  peculiar  to  the  country,  or  of  peculiar  quality 
there,  the  jealousy  of  enabling  foreign  workmen  to 
rival  those  of  the  nation  with  its  own  materials,  are 
the  leading  motives  to  this  species  of  regulation.  It 
ought  not  to  be  affirmed  that  it  is  in  no  instance 
proper;  but  is,  certainly,  one  which  ought  to  be 
adopted  with  great  circumspection,  and  only  in  very 
plain  cases.  It  is  seen  at  once,  that  its  immediate 
operation  is  to  abridge  the  demand,  and  keep  down 
the  price  of  the  produce  of  some  other  branch  of 
industry — generally  speaking,  of  agriculture — to  the 
prejudice  of  those  who  carry  it  on ;  and  though,  if  it 
be  really  essential  to  the  prosperity  of  any  very  im 
portant  national  manufacture,  it  may  happen  that 
those  who  are  injured,  in  the  first  instance,  may  be, 
eventually,  indemnified  by  the  superior  steadiness 
of  an  extensive  domestic  market,  depending  on  that 
prosperity;  yet,  in  a  matter  in  which  there  is  so 
much  room  for  nice  and  difficult  combinations,  in 
which  such  opposite  considerations  combat  each 
other,  prudence  seems  to  dictate  that  the  expedient 
in  question  ought  to  be  indulged  with  a  sparing 
hand. 


VOL.  IV.— 10. 


146  Alexander  Hamilton 

4.  Pecuniary  bounties 

This  has  been  found  one  of  the  most  efficacious 
means  of  encouraging  manufactures,  and  is,  in 
some  views,  the  best.  Though  it  has  not  yet  been 
practised  upon  by  the  Government  of  the  United 
States  (unless  the  allowance  on  the  exportation  of 
dried  and  pickled  fish  and  salted  meat  could  be  con 
sidered  as  a  bounty),  and  though  it  is  less  favored 
by  public  opinion  than  some  other  modes,  its  ad 
vantages  are  these: 

1.  It  is  a  species  of  encouragement  more  positive 
and  direct  than  any  other,  and,  for  that  very  reason, 
has  a  more  immediate  tendency  to  stimulate  and  up 
hold   new   enterprises,    increasing   the    chances    of 
profit,  and  diminishing  the  risks  of  loss,  in  the  first 
attempts. 

2.  It  avoids  the  inconvenience  of  a  temporary 
augmentation  of  price,  which  is  incident  to  some 
other  modes ;  or  it  produces  it  to  a  less  degree,  either 
by  making  no  addition  to  the  charges  on  the  rival 
foreign  article,  as  in  the  case  of  protecting  duties, 
or  by  making  a  smaller  addition.     The  first  happens 
when  the  fund  for  the  bounty  is  derived  from  a 
different  object  (which  may  or  may  not  increase  the 
price  of  some  other  article,  according  to  the  nature 
of  that  object) ;  the  second,  when  the  fund  is  derived 
from  the  same  or  a  similar  object,  of  foreign  manu 
facture.     One  per  cent,  duty  on  the  foreign  article, 
converted  into  a  bounty  on  the  domestic,  will  have 
an  equal  effect  with  a  duty  of  two  per  cent.,  ex 
clusive  of  such  bounty;  and  the  price  of  the  foreign 


Industry  and  Commerce  147 

commodity  is  liable  to  be  raised,  in  the  one  case,  in 
the  proportion  of  one  per  cent. ;  in  the  other,  in  that 
of  two  per  cent.  Indeed  the  bounty,  when  drawn 
from  another  source,  is  calculated  to  promote  a  re 
duction  of  price;  because,  without  laying  any  new 
charge  on  the  foreign  article,  it  serves  to  introduce 
a  competition  with  it,  and  to  increase  the  total 
quantity  of  the  article  in  the  market. 

3.  Bounties  have  not,  like  high  protecting  duties, 
a  tendency  to  produce  scarcity.     An  increase   of 
price  is  not  always  the  immediate,  though,  where 
the  progress  of  a  domestic  manufacture  does  not 
counteract  a  rise,  it  is,   commonly,   the  ultimate, 
effect  of  an  additional  duty.     In  the  interval  be 
tween  the  laying  of  the  duty  and  the  proportional 
increase  of  price,  it  may  discourage  importation,  by 
interfering  with  the  profits  to  be  expected  from  the 
sale  of  the  article. 

4.  Bounties  are,  sometimes,  not  only  the  best  but 
the  only  proper  expedient  for  uniting  the  encourage 
ment  of  a  new  object  of  agriculture  with  that  of  a 
new  object  of  manufacture.     It  is  the  interest  of  the 
farmer  to  have  the  production  of  the  raw  material 
promoted  by  counteracting  the  interference  of  the 
foreign  material  of  the  same  kind.     It  is  the  interest 
of  the  manufacturer  to  have  the  material  abundant 
and  cheap.     If,  prior  to  the  domestic  production  of 
the  material,  in  sufficient  quantity  to  supply  the 
manufacturer  on  good  terms,  a  duty  be  laid  upon 
the  importation  of  it  from  abroad,  with  a  view  to 
promote  the  raising  of  it  at  home,  the  interest  both 
of  the  farmer  and  manufacturer  will  be  disserved. 


148  Alexander  Hamilton 

By  either  destroying  the  requisite  supply,  or  raising 
the  price  of  the  article  beyond  what  can  be  afforded 
to  be  given  for  it  by  the  conductor  of  an  infant 
manufacture,  it  is  abandoned  or  fails,  and  there 
being  no  domestic  manufactories  to  create  a  demand 
for  the  raw  material,  which  is  raised  by  the  farmer, 
it  is  in  vain  that  the  competition  of  the  like  foreign 
article  may  have  been  destroyed. 

It  cannot  escape  notice,  that  the  duty  upon  the 
importation  of  an  article  can  no  otherwise  aid  the 
domestic  production  of  it,  than  by  giving  the  latter 
greater  advantages  in  the  home  market.  It  can 
have  no  influence  upon  the  advantageous  sale  of  the 
article  produced  in  foreign  markets — no  tendency, 
therefore,  to  promote  its  exportation. 

The  true  way  to  conciliate  these  two  interests  is  to 
lay  a  duty  on  foreign  manufactures  of  the  material, 
the  growth  of  which  is  desired  to  be  encouraged,  and 
to  apply  the  produce  of  that  duty,  by  way  of  bounty, 
either  upon  the  production  of  the  material  itself,  or 
upon  its  manufacture  at  home,  or  upon  both.  In 
this  disposition  of  the  thing,  the  manufacturer  com 
mences  his  enterprise  under  every  advantage  which 
is  attainable,  as  to  quantity  or  price  of  the  raw  ma 
terial  ;  and  the  farmer,  if  the  bounty  be  immediately 
to  him,  is  enabled  by  it  to  enter  into  a  successful 
competition  with  the  foreign  material.  If  the 
bounty  be  to  the  manufacturer,  on  so  much  of  the 
domestic  material  as  he  consumes,  the  operation  is 
nearly  the  same;  he  has  a  motive  of  interest  to 
prefer  the  domestic  commodity,  if  of  equal  quality, 
even  at  a  higher  price  than  the  foreign,  so  long  as  the 


Industry  and  Commerce  149 

difference  of  price  is  any  thing  short  of  the  bounty 
which  is  allowed  upon  the  article. 

Except  the  simple  and  ordinary  kinds  of  household 
manufacture  or  those  for  which  there  are  very  com 
manding  local  advantages,  pecuniary  bounties  are, 
in  most  cases,  indispensable  to  the  introduction  of 
a  new  branch.  A  stimulus  and  a  support,  not  less 
powerful  and  direct,  is,  generally  speaking,  essential 
to  the  overcoming  of  the  obstacles  which  arise  from 
the  competitions  of  superior  skill  and  maturity  else 
where.  Bounties  are  especially  essential  in  regard 
to  articles  upon  which  those  foreigners,  who  have 
been  accustomed  to  supply  a  country,  are  in  the 
practice  of  granting  them. 

The  continuance  of  bounties  on  manufactures  long 
established  must  almost  always  be  of  questionable 
policy;  because  a  presumption  would  arise,  in  every 
such  case,  that  there  were  natural  and  inherent  im 
pediments  to  success.  But,  in  new  undertakings, 
they  areas  justifiable  as  they  are  oftentimes  necessary. 

There  is  a  degree  of  prejudice  against  bounties, 
from  an  appearance  of  giving  away  the  public  money 
without  an  immediate  consideration,  and  from  a 
supposition  that  they  serve  to  enrich  particular 
classes  at  the  expense  of  the  community. 

But  neither  of  these  sources  of  dislike  will  bear  a 
serious  examination.  There  is  no  purpose  to  which 
public  money  can  be  more  beneficially  applied  than 
to  the  acquisition  of  a  new  and  useful  branch  of  in 
dustry;  no  consideration  more  valuable  than  a  per 
manent  addition  to  the  general  stock  of  productive 
labor. 


150  Alexander  Hamilton 

As  to  the  second  source  of  objection,  it  equally  lies 
against  other  modes  of  encouragement,  which  are 
admitted  to  be  eligible.  As  often  as  a  duty  upon  a 
foreign  article  makes  an  addition  to  its  price,  it 
causes  an  extra  expense  to  the  community  for  the 
benefit  of  the  domestic  manufacturer.  A  bounty 
does  no  more.  But  it  is  the  interest  of  the  society, 
in  each  case,  to  submit  to  the  temporary  expense — 
which  is  more  than  compensated  by  an  increase  of 
industry  and  wealth,  by  an  augmentation  of  re 
sources  and  independence,  and  by  the  circumstance 
of  eventual  cheapness,  which  has  been  noticed  in 
another  place. 

It  would  deserve  attention,  however,  in  the  em 
ployment  of  this  species  of  encouragement  in  the 
United  States,  as  a  reason  for  moderating  the  degree 
of  it  in  the  instances  in  which  it  might  be  deemed 
eligible,  that  the  great  distance  of  this  country 
from  Europe  imposes  very  heavy  charges  on  all  the 
fabrics  which  are  brought  from  thence,  amounting 
to  from  fifteen  to  thirty  per  cent,  on  their  value, 
according  to  their  bulk. 

A  question  has  been  made  concerning  the  con 
stitutional  right  of  the  Government  of  the  United 
States  to  apply  this  species  of  encouragement,  but 
there  is  certainly  no  good  foundation  for  such  a 
question.  The  National  Legislature  has  express  au 
thority  "to  lay  and  collect  taxes,  duties,  imposts, 
and  excises,  to  pay  the  debts,  and  provide  for  the 
common  defence  and  general  welfare,"  with  no  other 
qualifications  than  that  "all  duties,  imposts,  and 
excises  shall  be  uniform  throughout  the  United 


Industry  and  Commerce  151 

States;  and  that  no  capitation  or  other  direct  tax 
shall  be  laid,  unless  in  proportion  to  numbers  ascer 
tained  by  a  census  or  enumeration,  taken  on  the 
principles  prescribed  in  the  Constitution,"  and  that 
"no  tax  or  duty  shall  be  laid  on  articles  exported 
from  any  State." 

These  three  qualifications  excepted,  the  power  to 
raise  money  is  plenary  and  indefinite,  and  the  objects 
to  which  it  may  be  appropriated  are  no  less  com 
prehensive  than  the  payment  of  the  public  debts, 
and  the  providing  for  the  common  defence  and  gen 
eral  welfare.  The  terms  " general  welfare"  were 
doubtless  intended  to  signify  more  than  was  ex 
pressed  or  imported  in  those  which  preceded ;  other 
wise,  numerous  exigencies  incident  to  the  affairs  of 
a  nation  would  have  been  left  without  a  provision. 
The  phrase  is  as  comprehensive  as  any  that  could 
have  been  used,  because  it  was  not  fit  that  the  con 
stitutional  authority  of  the  Union  to  appropriate  its 
revenues  should  have  been  restricted  within  narrower 
limits  than  the  "general  welfare,"  and  because  this 
necessarily  embraces  a  vast  variety  of  particulars, 
which  are  susceptible  neither  of  specification  nor  of 
definition. 

It  is,  therefore,  of  necessity,  left  to  the  discretion 
of  the  National  Legislature  to  pronounce  upon  the 
objects  which  concern  the  general  welfare,  and  for 
which,  under  that  description,  an  appropriation  of 
money  is  requisite  and  proper.  And  there  seems  to 
be  no  room  for  a  doubt  that  whatever  concerns  the 
general  interests  of  learning,  of  agriculture,  of 
manufactures,  and  of  commerce,  are  within  the 


152  Alexander  Hamilton 

sphere  of  the  national  councils,  as  far  as  regards  an 
application  of  money. 

The  only  qualification  of  the  generality  of  the 
phrase  in  question,  which  seems  to  be  admissible,  is 
this:  That  the  object  to  which  an  appropriation  of 
money  is  to  be  made  be  general,  and  not  local ;  its 
operation  extending  in  fact  or  by  possibility  through 
out  the  Union,  and  not  being  confined  to  a  particular 
spot. 

No  objection  ought  to  arise  to  this  construction, 
from  a  supposition  that  it  would  imply  a  power  to 
do  whatever  else  should  appear  to  Congress  con 
ducive  to  the  general  welfare.  A  power  to  appropri 
ate  money  with  this  latitude,  which  is  granted,  too, 
in  express  terms,  would  not  carry  a  power  to  do 
any  other  thing  not  authorized  in  the  Constitution, 
either  expressly  or  by  fair  implication. 

5.  Premiums 

These  are  of  a  nature  allied  to  bounties,  though 
distinguishable  from  them  in  some  important  fea 
tures. 

Bounties  are  applicable  to  the  whole  quantity  of 
an  article  produced,  or  manufactured,  or  exported, 
and  involve  a  correspondent  expense.  Premiums 
serve  to  reward  some  particular  excellence  or  su 
periority,  some  extraordinary  exertion  or  skill,  and 
are  dispensed  only  in  a  small  number  of  cases.  But 
their  effect  is  to  stimulate  general  effort;  contrived 
so  as  to  be  both  honorary  and  lucrative,  they  ad 
dress  themselves  to  different  passions — touching  the 
chords,  as  well  of  emulation  as  of  interest.  They 


Industry  and  Commerce  153 

are,  accordingly,  a  very  economical  means  of  excit 
ing  the  enterprise  of  a  whole  community. 

There  are  various  societies,  in  different  countries, 
whose  object  is  the  dispensation  of  premiums  for  the 
encouragement  of  agriculture,  arts,  manufactures, 
and  commerce;  and  though  they  are,  for  the  most 
part,  voluntary  associations,  with  comparatively 
slender  funds,  their  utility  has  been  immense.  Much 
has  been  done,  by  this  means,  in  Great  Britain. 
Scotland,  in  particular,  owes,  materially  to  it,  a 
prodigious  amelioration  of  condition.  From  a  simi 
lar  establishment  in  the  United  States,  supplied  and 
supported  by  the  Government  of  the  Union,  vast 
benefits  might,  reasonably,  be  expected.  Some  fur 
ther  ideas  on  this  head  shall,  accordingly,  be  sub 
mitted  in  the  conclusion  of  this  report. 

6.     The  exemption  of  the  materials  of  manufactures 

from  duty 

The  policy  of  that  exemption,  as  a  general  rule, 
particularly  in  reference  to  new  establishments,  is 
obvious.  It  can  hardly  ever  be  advisable  to  add  the 
obstructions  of  fiscal  burthens  to  the  difficulties 
which  naturally  embarrass  a  new  manufacture ;  and 
where  it  is  matured,  and  in  condition  to  become  an 
object  of  revenue,  it  is,  generally  speaking,  better 
that  the  fabric,  than  the  material,  should  be  the 
subject  of  taxation.  Ideas  of  proportion  between 
the  quantum  of  the  tax  and  the  value  of  the  article, 
can  be  more  easily  adjusted  in  the  former  than  in 
the  latter  case.  An  argument  for  exemptions  of 
this  kind,  in  the  United  States,  is  to  be  derived  from 


154  Alexander  Hamilton 

the  practice,  as  far  as  their  necessities  have  per 
mitted,  of  those  nations  whom  we  are  to  meet  as 
competitors  in  our  own  and  in  foreign  markets. 

There  are,  however,  exceptions  to  it,  of  which 
some  examples  will  be  given  under  the  next  head. 

The  laws  of  the  Union  afford  instances  of  the  ob 
servance  of  the  policy  here  recommended,  but  it  will 
probably  be  found  advisable  to  extend  it  to  some 
other  cases.  Of  a  nature  bearing  some  affinity  to 
that  policy,  is  the  regulation  which  exempts  from 
duty  the  tools  and  implements,  as  well  as  the  books, 
clothes,  and  household  furniture,  of  foreign  artists 
who  come  to  reside  in  the  United  States — an  advan 
tage  already  secured  to  them  by  the  laws  of  the 
Union,  and  which  it  is,  in  every  view,  proper  to 
continue. 

7.     Drawbacks  of  the  duties  which  are  imposed  on  the 
materials  of  manufactures 

It  has  already  been  observed,  as  a  general  rule, 
that  duties  on  those  materials  ought,  with  certain 
exceptions,  to  be  forborne.  Of  these  exceptions, 
three  cases  occur,  which  may  serve  as  examples. 
One,  where  the  material  is  itself  an  object  of  general 
or  extensive  consumption,  and  a  fit  and  productive 
source  of  revenue.  Another,  where  a  manufacture  of 
a  simpler  kind,  the  competition  of  which,  with  a  like 
domestic  article,  is  desired  to  be  restrained,  partakes 
of  the  nature  of  a  raw  material,  from  being  capable, 
by  a  further  process,  to  be  converted  into  a  manu 
facture  of  a  different  kind,  the  introduction  or 
growth  of  which  is  desired  to  be  encouraged.  A 


Industry  and  Commerce  155 

third,  where  the  material  itself  is  a  production  of 
the  country,  and  in  sufficient  abundance  to  fur 
nish  a  cheap  and  plentiful  supply  to  the  national 
manufacturers . 

Under  the  first  description  comes  the  article  of 
molasses.  It  is  not  only  a  fair  object  of  revenue, 
but,  being  a  sweet,  it  is  just  that  the  consumers  of  it 
should  pay  a  duty  as  well  as  the  consumers  of  sugar. 

Cottons  and  linens,  in  their  white  state,  fall  under 
the  second  description.  A  duty  upon  such  as  are 
imported  is  proper,  to  promote  the  domestic  manu 
facture  of  similar  articles  in  the  same  state.  A 
drawback  of  that  duty  is  proper,  to  encourage  the 
printing  and  staining,  at  home,  of  those  which  are 
brought  from  abroad.  When  the  first  of  these 
manufactures  has  attained  sufficient  maturity  in  a 
country  to  furnish  a  full  supply  for  the  second,  the 
utility  of  the  drawback  ceases. 

The  article  of  hemp  either  now  does,  or  may  be 
expected  soon  to,  exemplify  the  third  case  in  the 
United  States. 

Where  duties  on  the  materials  of  manufactures 
are  not  laid  for  the  purpose  of  preventing  a  com 
petition  with  some  domestic  production,  the  same 
reasons  which  recommend,  as  a  general  rule,  the 
exemption  of  those  materials  from  duties,  would  re 
commend,  as  a  like  general  rule,  the  allowance  of 
drawbacks  in  favor  of  the  manufacturer.  Accord 
ingly,  such  drawbacks  are  familiar  in  countries 
which  systematically  pursue  the  business  of  manu 
factures;  which  furnishes  an  argument  for  the  ob 
servance  of  a  similar  policy  in  the  United  States; 


156  Alexander  Hamilton 

and  the  idea  has  been  adopted  by  the  laws  of  the 
Union,  in  the  instances  of  salt  and  molasses.  It  is 
believed  that  it  will  be  found  advantageous  to  ex 
tend  it  to  some  other  articles. 

8.  The  encouragement  of  new  inventions  and  dis 
coveries  at  home,  and  of  the  introduction  into 
the  United  States  of  such  as  may  have  been 
made  in  other  countries;  particularly  those 
which  relate  to  machinery 

This  is  among  the  most  useful  and  unexception 
able  of  the  aids  which  can  be  given  to  manufactures. 
The  usual  means  of  that  encouragement  are  pe 
cuniary  rewards,  and,  for  a  time,  exclusive  privileges. 
The  first  must  be  employed  according  to  the  occa 
sion  and  the  utility  of  the  invention  or  discovery. 
For  the  last,  so  far  as  respects  "  authors  and  invent 
ors,"  provision  has  been  made  by  law.  But  it  is 
desirable,  in  regard  to  improvements,  and  secrets 
of  extraordinary  value,  to  be  able  to  extend  the  same 
benefit  to  introducers,  as  well  as  authors  and  in 
ventors;  a  policy  which  has  been  practised  with 
advantage  in  other  countries.  Here,  however,  as  in 
some  other  cases,  there  is  cause  to  regret  that  the 
competency  of  the  authority  of  the  National  Gov 
ernment  to  the  good  which  might  be  done,  is  not 
without  a  question.  Many  aids  might  be  given  to 
industry,  many  internal  improvements  of  primary 
magnitude  might  be  promoted,  by  an  authority 
operating  throughout  the  Union,  which  cannot  be 
effected  as  well,  if  at  all,  by  an  authority  confined 
within  the  limits  of  a  single  State. 


Industry  and  Commerce  157 

But,  if  the  Legislature  of  the  Union  cannot  do  all 
the  good  that  might  be  wished,  it  is,  at  least,  de 
sirable  that  all  may  be  done  which  is  practicable. 
Means  for  promoting  the  introduction  of  foreign 
improvements,  though  less  efficaciously  than  might 
be  accomplished  with  more  adequate  authority,  will 
form  a  part  of  the  plan  intended  to  be  submitted  in 
the  close  of  this  report. 

It  is  customary  with  manufacturing  nations  to 
prohibit,  under  severe  penalties,  the  exportation  of 
implements  and  machines  which  they  have  either 
invented  or  improved.  There  are  already  objects 
for  a  similar  regulation  in  the  United  States;  and 
others  may  be  expected  to  occur  from  time  to  time. 
The  adoption  of  it  seems  to  be  dictated  by  the  prin 
ciple  of  reciprocity.  Greater  liberality,  in  such  re 
spects,  might  better  comport  with  the  general  spirit 
of  the  country;  but  a  selfish  exclusive  policy,  in 
other  quarters,  will  not  always  permit  the  free  in 
dulgence  of  a  spirit  which  would  place  us  upon  an 
unequal  footing.  As  far  as  prohibitions  tend  to 
prevent  foreign  competitors  from  deriving  the  benefit 
of  the  improvements  made  at  home,  they  tend  to 
increase  the  advantages  of  those  by  whom  they  may 
have  been  introduced,  and  operate  as  an  encourage 
ment  to  exertion. 

p.     Judicious  regulations  for  the  inspection  of  manu 
factured  commodities 

This  is  not  among  the  least  important  of  the  means 
by  which  the  prosperity  of  manufactures  may  be 
promoted.  It  is,  indeed,  in  many  cases,  one  of  the 


158  Alexander  Hamilton 

most  essential.  Contributing  to  prevent  frauds 
upon  consumers  at  home  and  exporters  to  foreign 
countries,  to  improve  the  quality  and  preserve  the 
character  of  the  national  manufactures,  it  cannot 
fail  to  aid  the  expeditious  and  advantageous  sale  of 
them,  and  to  serve  as  a  guard  against  successful 
competition  from  other  quarters.  The  reputation 
of  the  flour  and  lumber  of  some  States,  and  of  the 
potash  of  others,  has  been  established  by  an  atten 
tion  to  this  point.  And  the  like  good  name  might 
be  procured  for  those  articles,  wheresoever  produced, 
by  a  judicious  and  uniform  system  of  inspection 
throughout  the  ports  of  the  United  States.  A  like 
system  might  also  be  extended  with  advantage  to 
other  commodities. 

10.     The  facilitating  of  pecuniary  remittances  from 
place  to  place — 

Is  a  point  of  considerable  moment  to  trade  in 
general,  and  to  manufacturers  in  particular,  by  ren 
dering  more  easy  the  purchase  of  raw  materials  and 
provisions,  and  the  payment  for  manufactured  sup 
plies.  A  general  circulation  of  bank  paper,  which 
is  to  be  expected  from  the  institution  lately  estab 
lished,  will  be  a  most  valuable  means  to  this  end. 
But  much  good  would  also  accrue  from  some  addi 
tional  provisions  respecting  inland  bills  of  exchange. 
If  those  drawn  in  one  State,  payable  in  another, 
were  made  negotiable  everywhere,  and  interest  and 
damages  allowed  in  case  of  protest,  it  would  greatly 
promote  negotiations  between  the  citizens  of  differ 
ent  States,  by  rendering  them  more  secure,  and  with 


Industry  and  Commerce  159 

it  the  convenience  and  advantage  of  the  merchants 
and  manufacturers  of  each. 

n.     The  facilitating  of  the  transportation  of  com 
modities 

Improvements  favoring  this  object  intimately  con 
cern  all  the  domestic  interests  of  a  community;  but 
they  may,  without  impropriety,  be  mentioned  as 
having  an  important  relation  to  manufactures. 
There  is,  perhaps,  scarcely  anything  which  has  been 
better  calculated  to  assist  the  manufacturers  of 
Great  Britain  than  the  melioration  of  the  public 
roads  of  that  kingdom,  and  the  great  progress  which 
has  been  of  late  made  in  opening  canals.  Of  the 
former,  the  United  States  stand  much  in  need;  for 
the  latter,  they  present  uncommon  facilities. 

The  symptoms  of  attention  to  the  improvement  of 
inland  navigation  which  have  lately  appeared  in 
some  quarters,  must  fill  with  pleasure  every  breast 
warmed  with  a  true  zeal  for  the  prosperity  of  the 
country.  These  examples,  it  is  to  be  hoped,  will 
stimulate  the  exertions  of  the  government  and  citi 
zens  of  every  State.  There  can  certainly  be  no 
object  more  worthy  of  the  cares  of  the  local  adminis 
trations;  and  it  were  to  be  wished  that  there  was  no 
doubt  of  the  power  of  the  National  Government  to 
lend  its  direct  aid  on  a  comprehensive  plan.  This  is 
one  of  those  improvements  which  could  be  prose 
cuted  with  more  efficacy  by  the  whole  than  by  any 
part  or  parts  of  the  Union.  There  are  cases  in  which 
the  general  interest  will  be  in  danger  to  be  sacrificed 
to  the  collision  of  some  supposed  local  interests. 


160  Alexander  Hamilton 

Jealousies,  in  matters  of  this  kind,  are  as  apt  to 
exist  as  they  are  apt  to  be  erroneous. 

The  following  remarks  are  sufficiently  judicious 
and  pertinent  to  deserve  a  literal  quotation : 

"Good  roads,  canals,  and  navigable  rivers,  by 
diminishing  the  expense  of  carriage,  put  the  remote 
parts  of  a  country  more  nearly  upon  a  level  with 
those  in  the  neighborhood  of  the  town.  They  are, 
upon  that  account,  the  greatest  of  all  improvements. 
They  encourage  the  cultivation  of  the  remote,  which 
must  always  be  the  most  extensive,  circle  of  the 
country.  They  are  advantageous  to  the  town,  by 
breaking  down  the  monopoly  of  the  country  in  its 
neighborhood.  They  are  advantageous,  even  to 
that  part  of  the  country.  Though  they  introduce 
some  rival  commodities  into  the  old  market,  they 
open  many  new  markets  to  its  produce.  Monopoly, 
besides,  is  a  great  enemy  to  good  management, 
which  can  never  be  universally  established,  but  in 
consequence  of  that  free  and  universal  competition, 
which  forces  every  body  to  have  recourse  to  it  for  the 
sake  of  self-defence.  It  is  not  more  than  fifty  years 
ago  that  some  of  the  counties  in  the  neighborhood 
of  London  petitioned  the  Parliament  against  the  ex 
tension  of  the  turnpike  roads  into  the  remoter  coun 
ties.  Those  remoter  counties,  they  pretended,  from 
the  cheapness  of  labor,  would  be  able  to  sell  their 
grass  and  corn  cheaper  in  the  London  market  than 
themselves,  and  they  would  thereby  reduce  their 
rents,  and  ruin  their  cultivation.  Their  rents,  how 
ever,  have  risen,  and  their  cultivation  has  improved 
since  that  time." 


Industry  and  Commerce  161 

Specimens  of  a  spirit  similar  to  that  which  gov 
erned  the  counties  here  spoken  of,  present  them 
selves  too  frequently  to  the  eye  of  an  impartial 
observer,  and  render  it  a  wish  of  patriotism,  that  the 
body  in  this  country,  in  whose  councils  a  local  or 
partial  spirit  is  least  likely  to  predominate,  were  at 
liberty  to  pursue  and  promote  the  general  interest, 
in  those  instances  in  which  there  might  be  danger 
of  the  interference  of  such  a  spirit. 

The  foregoing  are  the  principal  of  the  means  by 
which  the  growth  of  manufactures  is  ordinarily  pro 
moted.  It  is,  however,  not  merely  necessary  that 
the  measures  of  government  which  have  a  direct 
view  to  manufactures,  should  be  calculated  to  assist 
and  protect  them,  but  that  those  which  only  col 
laterally  affect  them  in  the  general  course  of  the  ad 
ministration,  should  be  guarded  from  any  peculiar 
tendency  to  injure  them. 

There  are  certain  species  of  taxes,  which  are  apt 
to  be  oppressive  to  different  parts  of  the  community, 
and,  among  other  ill  effects,  have  a  very  unfriendly 
aspect  towards  manufactures.  All  poll  or  capita 
tion  taxes  are  of  this  nature.  They  either  proceed 
according  to  a  fixed  rate,  which  operates  unequally 
and  injuriously  to  the  industrious  poor,  or  they  vest 
a  discretion,  in  certain  officers,  to  make  estimates 
and  assessments,  which  are  necessarily  vague,  con 
jectural,  and  liable  to  abuse.  They  ought,  therefore, 
to  be  abstained  from  in  all  but  cases  of  distressing 
emergency. 

All  such  taxes  (including  all  taxes  on  occupations) 
which  proceed  according  to  the  amount  of  capital 


VOL.    IV.— II 


1 62  Alexander  Hamilton 

supposed  to  be  employed  in  a  business,  or  of  profits 
supposed  to  be  made  in  it,  are  unavoidably  hurtful 
to  industry.  It  is  in  vain  that  the  evil  may  be  en 
deavored  to  be  mitigated,  by  leaving  it,  in  the  first 
instance,  in  the  option  of  the  party  to  be  taxed,  to 
declare  the  amount  of  his  capital  or  profits. 

Men  engaged  in  any  trade  or  business  have  com 
monly  weighty  reasons  to  avoid  disclosures  which 
would  expose,  with  anything  like  accuracy,  the  real 
state  of  their  affairs.  They  most  frequently  find  it 
better  to  risk  oppression,  than  to  avail  themselves 
of  so  inconvenient  a  refuge,  and  the  consequence  is, 
that  they  often  suffer  oppression. 

When  the  disclosure,  too,  if  made,  is  not  definite, 
but  controllable  by  the  discretion,  or,  in  other  words, 
by  the  passions  and  prejudices,  of  the  revenue 
officers,  it  is  not  only  an  ineffectual  protection,  but 
the  possibility  of  its  being  so,  is  an  additional  reason 
for  not  resorting  to  it. 

Allowing  to  the  public  officers  the  most  equitable 
dispositions,  yet,  where  they  are  to  exercise  a  dis 
cretion  without  certain  data,  they  cannot  fail  to  be 
often  misled  by  appearances.  The  quantity  of  busi 
ness  which  seems  to  be  going  on  is,  in  a  vast  number 
of  cases,  a  very  deceitful  criterion  of  the  profits  which 
are  made;  yet  it  is,  perhaps,  the  best  they  can  have, 
and  it  is  the  one  on  which  they  will  most  naturally 
rely.  A  business,  therefore,  which  may  rather  re 
quire  aid  from  the  government,  than  be  in  a  capacity 
to  be  contributory  to  it,  may  find  itself  crushed  by 
the  mistaken  conjectures  of  the  assessors  of  taxes. 

Arbitrary  taxes,  under  which  denomination  are 


Industry  and  Commerce  163 

comprised  all  those  that  leave  the  quantum  of  the 
tax  to  be  raised  on  each  person  to  the  discretion  of 
certain  officers,  are  as  contrary  to  the  genius  of  lib 
erty  as  to  the  maxims  of  industry.  In  this  light 
they  have  been  viewed  by  the  most  judicious  ob 
servers  on  government,  who  have  bestowed  upon 
them  the  severest  epithets  of  reprobation,  as  con 
stituting  one  of  the  worst  features  usually  to  be  met 
with  in  the  practice  of  despotic  governments. 

It  is  certain,  at  least,  that  such  taxes  are  par 
ticularly  inimical  to  the  success  of  manufacturing 
industry,  and  ought  carefully  to  be  avoided  by  a 
government  which  desires  to  promote  it. 

The  great  copiousness  of  the  subject  of  this  report 
has  insensibly  led  to  a  more  lengthy  preliminary 
discussion  than  was  originally  contemplated  or  in 
tended.  It  appeared  proper  to  investigate  prin 
ciples,  to  consider  objections,  and  to  endeavor  to 
establish  the  utility  of  the  thing  proposed  to  be  en 
couraged,  previous  to  a  specification  of  the  objects 
which  might  occur,  as  meriting  or  requiring  en 
couragement,  and  of  the  measures  which  might  be 
proper  in  respect  to  each.  The  first  purpose  having 
been  fulfilled,  it  remains  to  pursue  the  second. 

In  the  selection  of  objects,  five  circumstances 
seem  entitled  to  particular  attention:  the  capacity 
of  the  country  to  furnish  the  raw  material;  the  de 
gree  in  which  the  nature  of  the  manufacture  admits 
of  a  substitute  for  manual  labor  in  machinery;  the 
facility  of  execution;  the  extensiveness  of  the  uses 
to  which  the  article  can  be  applied;  its  subservi 
ency  to  other  interests,  particularly  the  great  one 


164  Alexander  Hamilton 

of  national  defence.  There  are,  however,  objects 
to  which  these  circumstances  are  little  applicable, 
which,  for  some  special  reasons,  may  have  a  claim 
to  encouragement. 

A  designation  of  the  principal  raw  material  of 
which  each  manufacture  is  composed,  will  serve  to 
introduce  remarks  upon  it;  as,  in  the  first  place, 

IRON 

The  manufactures  of  this  article  are  entitled  to 
pre-eminent  rank.  None  are  more  essential  in  their 
kinds,  nor  so  extensive  in  their  uses.  They  consti 
tute,  in  whole,  or  in  part,  the  implements  or  the  ma 
terials,  or  both,  of  almost  every  useful  occupation. 
Their  instrumentality  is  everywhere  conspicuous. 

It  is  fortunate  for  the  United  States  that  they 
have  peculiar  advantages  for  deriving  the  full  benefit 
of  this  most  valuable  material,  and  they  have  every 
motive  to  improve  it  with  systematic  care.  It  is  to 
be  found  in  various  parts  of  the  United  States,  in 
great  abundance,  and  of  almost  every  quality;  and 
fuel,  the  chief  instrument  in  manufacturing  it,  is  both 
cheap  and  plenty.  This  particularly  applies  to  char 
coal  ;  but  there  are  productive  coal  mines  already  in 
operation,  and  strong  indications  that  the  material 
is  to  be  found  in  abundance  in  a  variety  of  other 
places. 

The  inquiries  to  which  the  subject  of  this  report 
has  led  have  been  answered  with  proofs  that  manu 
factories  of  iron,  though  generally  understood  to  be 
extensive,  are  far  more  so  than  is  commonly  sup 
posed.  The  kinds  in  which  the  greatest  progress 


Industry  and  Commerce  165 

has  been  made  have  been  mentioned  in  another 
place,  and  need  not  be  repeated;  but  there  is  little 
doubt  that  every  other  kind,  with  due  cultivation, 
will  rapidly  succeed.  It  is  worthy  of  remark,  that 
several  of  the  particular  trades  of  which  it  is  the 
basis  are  capable  of  being  carried  on  without  the  aid 
of  large  capitals. 

Iron-works  have  greatly  increased  in  the  United 
States,  and  are  prosecuted  with  much  more  advan 
tage  than  formerly.  The  average  price,  before  the 
Revolution,  was  about  sixty-four  dollars  per  ton; 
at  present  it  is  about  eighty — a  rise  which  is  chiefly 
to  be  attributed  to  the  increase  of  manufactures  of 
the  material. 

The  still  further  extension  and  multiplication  of 
such  manufactures  will  have  the  double  effect  of 
promoting  the  extraction  of  the  metal  itself,  and 
of  converting  it  to  a  greater  number  of  profitable 
purposes. 

Those  manufactures,  too,  unite,  in  a  greater  degree 
than  almost  any  others,  the  several  requisites  which 
have  been  mentioned  as  proper  to  be  consulted  in 
the  selection  of  objects. 

The  only  further  encouragement  of  manufactories 
of  this  article,  the  propriety  of  which  may  be  con 
sidered  as  unquestionable,  seems  to  be  an  increase 
of  the  duties  on  foreign  rival  commodities. 

Steel  is  a  branch  which  has  already  made  a  con 
siderable  progress,  and  it  is  ascertained  that  some 
new  enterprises,  on  a  more  extensive  scale,  have 
been  lately  set  on  foot.  The  facility  of  carrying  it 
to  an  extent  which  will  supply  all  internal  demands, 


1 66  Alexander  Hamilton 

and  furnish  a  considerable  surplus  for  exportation, 
cannot  be  doubted.  The  duty  upon  the  importation 
of  this  article,  which  is,  at  present,  seventy-five  cents 
per  cwt.,  may,  it  is  conceived,  be  safely  and  ad 
vantageously  extended  to  one  hundred  cents.  It  is 
desirable,  by  decisive  arrangements,  to  second  the 
efforts  which  are  making  in  so  very  valuable  a  branch. 

The  United  States  already,  in  a  great  measure, 
supply  themselves  with  nails  and  spikes.  They  are 
able,  and  ought  certainly,  to  do  it  entirely.  The 
first  and  most  laborious  operation,  in  this  manu 
facture,  is  performed  by  water-mills;  and  of  the 
persons  afterwards  employed,  a  great  proportion  are 
boys,  whose  early  habits  of  industry  are  of  importance 
to  the  community,  to  the  present  support  of  their 
families,  and  to  their  own  future  comfort.  It  is  not 
less  curious  than  true,  that,  in  certain  parts  of  the 
country,  the  making  of  nails  is  an  occasional  family 
manufacture. 

The  expediency  of  an  additional  duty  on  these 
articles  is  indicated  by  an  important  fact.  About 
1,800,000  pounds  of  them  were  imported  into  the 
United  States  in  the  course  of  a  year,  ending  the 
3oth  of  September,  1790.  A  duty  of  two  cents  per 
pound  would,  it  is  presumable,  speedily  put  an  end 
to  so  considerable  an  importation.  And  it  is,  in 
every  view,  proper  that  an  end  should  be  put  to  it. 

The  manufacture  of  these  articles,  like  that  of 
some  others,  suffers  from  the  carelessness  and  dis 
honesty  of  a  part  of  those  who  carry  it  on.  An  in 
spection  in  certain  cases  might  tend  to  correct  the 
evil.  It  will  deserve  consideration  whether  a  regu- 


Industry  and  Commerce  167 

lation  of  this  sort  cannot  be  applied,  without  incon 
venience,  to  the  exportation  of  the  articles,  either 
to  foreign  countries,  or  from  one  State  to  another. 

The  implements  of  husbandry  are  made  in  several 
States  in  great  abundance.  In  many  places  it  is 
done  by  the  common  blacksmiths.  And  there  is  no 
doubt  that  an  ample  supply  for  the  whole  country 
can,  with  great  ease,  be  procured  among  ourselves. 

Various  kinds  of  edged  tools  for  the  use  of  me 
chanics  are  also  made ;  and  a  considerable  quantity 
of  hollow  wares,  though  the  business  of  castings  has 
not  yet  attained  the  perfection  which  might  be 
wished.  It  is,  however,  improving,  and  as  there  are 
respectable  capitals,  in  good  hands,  embarked  in  the 
prosecution  of  those  branches  of  iron  manufacture 
which  are  yet  in  their  infancy,  they  may  all  be  con 
templated  as  objects  not  difficult  to  be  acquired. 

To  insure  the  end  it  seems  equally  safe  and  pru 
dent  to  extend  the  duty,  ad  valorem,  upon  all  manu 
factures  of  iron,  or  of  which  iron  is  the  article  of 
chief  value,  to  ten  per  cent. 

Fire-arms  and  other  military  weapons  may,  it  is 
conceived,  be  placed,  without  inconvenience,  in  the 
class  of  articles  rated  at  fifteen  per  cent.  There  are 
already  manufactories  of  these  articles,  which  only 
require  the  stimulus  of  a  certain  demand  to  render 
them  adequate  to  the  supply  of  the  United  States. 

It  would  also  be  a  material  aid  to  manufactures  of 
this  nature,  as  well  as  a  means  of  public  security,  if 
provision  should  be  made  for  an  annual  purchase  of 
military  weapons,  of  home  manufacture,  to  a  certain 
determinate  extent,  in  order  to  the  formation  of 


1 68  Alexander  Hamilton 

arsenals;  and  to  replace,  from  time  to  time,  such  as 
should  be  drawn  for  use,  so  as  always  to  have  in 
store  the  quantity  of  each  kind  which  should  be 
deemed  a  competent  supply. 

But  it  may,  hereafter,  deserve  legislative  consid 
eration,  whether  manufactories  of  all  the  necessary 
weapons  of  war  ought  not  to  be  established  on 
account  of  the  government  itself.  Such  establish 
ments  are  agreeable  to  the  usual  practice  of  nations, 
and  that  practice  seems  founded  on  sufficient  reason. 

There  appears  to  be  an  improvidence  in  leaving 
these  essential  implements  of  national  defence  to 
the  casual  speculations  of  individual  adventure — a 
resource  which  can  less  be  relied  upon,  in  this  case, 
than  in  most  others;  the  articles  in  question  not 
being  objects  of  ordinary  and  indispensable  private 
consumption  or  use.  As  a  general  rule,  manufac 
tories  on  the  immediate  account  of  government  are 
to  be  avoided;  but  this  seems  to  be  one  of  the  few 
exceptions  which  that  rule  admits,  depending  on 
very  special  reasons. 

Manufactures  of  steel,  generally,  or  of  which  steel 
is  the  article  of  chief  value,  may,  with  advantage, 
be  placed  in  the  class  of  goods  rated  at  seven  and  a 
half  per  cent.  As  manufactures  of  this  kind  have 
not  yet  made  any  considerable  progress,  it  is  a  reason 
for  not  rating  them  as  high  as  those  of  iron ;  but,  as 
this  material  is  the  basis  of  them,  and  as  their  ex 
tension  is  not  less  practicable  than  important,  it  is 
desirable  to  promote  it  by  a  somewhat  higher  duty 
than  the  present. 

A  question  arises  how  far  it  might  be  expedient  to 


Industry  and  Commerce  169 

permit  the  importation  of  iron,  in  pigs  and  bars,  free 
from  duty.  It  would  certainly  be  favorable  to 
manufactures  of  the  article;  but  the  doubt  is, 
whether  it  might  not  interfere  with  its  production. 

Two  circumstances,  however,  abate,  if  they  do  not 
remove,  apprehension  on  this  score:  one  is  the  con 
siderable  increase  of  price  which  has  been  already 
remarked,  and  which  renders  it  probable  that  the 
free  admission  of  foreign  iron  would  not  be  incon 
sistent  with  an  adequate  profit  to  the  proprietors  of 
iron- works ;  the  other  is  the  augmentation  of  demand 
which  would  be  likely  to  attend  the  increase  of 
manufactures  of  the  article,  in  consequence  of  the 
additional  encouragements  proposed  to  be  given. 
But  caution,  nevertheless,  in  a  matter  of  this  kind  is 
most  advisable.  The  measure  suggested  ought,  per 
haps,  rather  to  be  contemplated  subject  to  the  lights 
of  further  experience,  than  immediately  adopted. 

COPPER 

The  manufactures  of  which  this  article  is  suscep 
tible  are,  also,  of  great  extent  and  utility.  Under 
this  description,  those  of  brass,  of  which  it  is  the 
principal  ingredient,  are  intended  to  be  included. 

The  material  is  a  natural  production  of  the 
country.  Mines  of  copper  have  actually  been 
wrought,  and  with  profit  to  the  undertakers,  though 
it  is  not  known  that  any  are  now  in  this  condition. 
And  nothing  is  easier  than  the  introduction  of  it 
from  other  countries,  on  moderate  terms  and  in 
great  plenty. 

Coppersmiths  and  brass  founders,  particularly  the 


17°  Alexander  Hamilton 

former,  are  numerous  in  the  United  States;  some  of 
whom  carry  on  business  to  a  respectable  extent. 

To  multiply  and  extend  manufactories  of  the  ma 
terials  in  question,  is  worthy  of  attention  and  effort. 
In  order  to  this,  it  is  desirable  to  facilitate  a  plentiful 
supply  of  the  materials;  and  a  proper  mean  to  this 
end  is,  to  place  them  in  the  class  of  free  articles. 
Copper,  in  plates,  and  brass,  are  already  in  this 
predicament:  but  copper,  in  pigs  and  bars,  is  not; 
neither  is  lapis  calaminaris;  which,  together  with 
copper  and  charcoal,  constitute  the  component  in 
gredients  of  brass.  The  exemption  from  duty,  by 
parity  of  reason,  ought  to  embrace  all  such  of  these 
articles  as  are  objects  of  importation. 

An  additional  duty  on  brass  wares  will  tend  to 
the  general  end  in  view.  These  now  stand  at  five 
per  cent.,  while  those  of  tin,  pewter,  and  copper  are 
rated  at  seven  and  a  half.  There  appears  to  be  a 
propriety,  in  every  view,  in  placing  brass  wares  upon 
the  same  level  with  them;  and  it  merits  considera 
tion,  whether  the  duty  upon  all  of  them  ought  not 
be  raised  to  ten  per  cent. 

LEAD 

There  are  numerous  proofs  that  this  material 
abounds  in  the  United  States,  and  requires  little  to 
unfold  it  to  an  extent  more  than  equal  to  every  do 
mestic  occasion.  A  prolific  mine  of  it  has  long  been 
open  in  the  southwestern  parts  of  Virginia,  and 
under  a  public  administration,  during  the  late  war, 
yielded  a  considerable  supply  for  military  use.  This 
is  now  in  the  hands  of  individuals,  who  not  only 


Industry  and  Commerce  171 

carry  it  on  with  spirit,  but  have  established  manu 
factories  of  it  at  Richmond,  in  the  same  State. 

The  duties  already  laid  upon  the  importation  of 
this  article  either  in  its  unmanufactured  or  manu 
factured  state,  insure  it  a  decisive  advantage  in  the 
home  market,  which  amounts  to  considerable  en 
couragement.  If  the  duty  on  pewter  wares  should 
be  raised,  it  would  afford  a  further  encouragement. 
Nothing  else  occurs  as  proper  to  be  added. 

FOSSIL  COAL 

This,  as  an  important  instrument  of  manufactures, 
may,  without  impropriety,  be  mentioned  among  the 
subjects  of  this  report. 

A  copious  supply  of  it  would  be  of  great  conse 
quence  to  the  iron  branch.  As  an  article  of  house 
hold  fuel,  also,  it  is  an  interesting  production,  the 
utility  of  which  must  increase  in  proportion  to  the 
decrease  of  wood,  by  the  progress  of  settlement  and 
cultivation.  And  its  importance  to  navigation,  as 
an  immense  article  of  transportation  coastwise,  is 
signally  exemplified  in  Great  Britain. 

It  is  known  that  there  are  several  coal  mines  in 
Virginia,  now  worked;  and  appearances  of  their 
existence  are  familiar  in  a  number  of  places. 

The  expediency  of  a  bounty  on  all  this  species  of 
coal,  of  home  production,  and  of  premiums  on  the 
opening  of  new  mines,  under  certain  qualifications, 
appears  to  be  worthy  of  particular  examination. 
The  great  importance  of  the  article  will  amply  jus 
tify  a  reasonable  expense  in  this  way,  if  it  shall 


172  Alexander  Hamilton 

appear  to  be  necessary  to,  and  shall  be  thought  likely 
to  answer,  the  end. 

WOOD 

Several  manufactures  of  this  article  flourish  in  the 
United  States.  Ships  are  nowhere  built  in  greater 
perfection,  and  cabinet  wares  generally  are  made 
little,  if  at  all,  inferior  to  those  of  Europe.  Their 
extent  is  such  as  to  have  admitted  of  considerable 
exportation. 

An  exemption  from  duty  of  the  several  kinds  of 
wood  ordinarily  used  in  these  manufactures,  seems 
to  be  all  that  is  requisite,  by  way  of  encouragement. 
It  is  recommended  by  the  consideration  of  a  similar 
policy  being  pursued  in  other  countries,  and  by  the 
expediency  of  giving  equal  advantages  to  our  own 
workmen  in  wood.  The  abundance  of  timber,  prop 
er  for  ship-building  in  the  United  States,  does  not 
appear  to  be  any  objection  to  it.  The  increasing 
scarcity  and  growing  importance  of  that  article,  in 
the  European  countries,  admonish  the  United  States 
to  commence,  and  systematically  to  pursue,  measures 
for  the  preservation  of  their  stock.  Whatever  may 
promote  the  regular  establishment  of  magazines  of 
ship  timber,  is  in  various  views  desirable. 

SKINS 

There  are  scarcely  any  manufactories  of  greater 
importance  than  of  this  article.  Their  direct  and 
very  happy  influence  upon  agriculture,  by  promoting 
the  raising  of  cattle  of  different  kinds,  is  a  very  ma 
terial  recommendation. 


Industry  and  Commerce  173 

It  is  pleasing,  too,  to  observe  the  extensive  pro 
gress  they  have  made  in  their  principal  branches, 
which  are  so  far  matured  as  almost  to  defy  foreign 
competition.  Tanneries,  in  particular,  are  not  only 
carried  on  as  a  regular  business,  in  numerous  in 
stances,  and  in  various  parts  of  the  country,  but 
they  constitute,  in  some  places,  a  valuable  item  of 
incidental  family  manufactures. 

Representations,  however,  have  been  made,  im 
porting  the  expediency  of  further  encouragement  to 
the  leather  branch,  in  two  ways:  one  by  increasing 
the  duty  on  the  manufactures  of  it  which  are  im 
ported;  the  other,  by  prohibiting  the  exportation  of 
bark.  In  support  of  the  latter,  it  is  alleged,  that 
the  price  of  bark,  chiefly  in  consequence  of  large 
exportations,  has  risen,  within  a  few  years,  from 
about  three  dollars  to  four  and  a  half  per  cord. 

These  suggestions  are  submitted,  rather  as  intima 
tions  which  merit  consideration,  than  as  matters 
the  propriety  of  which  is  manifest.  It  is  not  clear 
that  an  increase  of  duty  is  necessary;  and  in  regard 
to  the  prohibitions  desired,  there  is  no  evidence  of 
any  considerable  exportation  hitherto;  and  it  is 
most  probable,  that  whatever  augmentation  of  price 
may  have  taken  place,  is  to  be  attributed  to  an  ex 
tension  of  the  home  demand,  from  the  increase  of 
manufactures,  and  to  a  decrease  of  the  supply,  in 
consequence  of  the  progress  of  settlement,  rather 
than  to  the  quantities  which  have  been  exported. 

It  is  mentioned,  however,  as  an  additional  reason 
for  the  prohibition,  that  one  species  of  the  bark 
usually  exported,  is  in  some  sort  peculiar  to  the 


174  Alexander  Hamilton 

country,  and  the  material  of  a  very  valuable  dye,  of 
great  use  in  some  other  manufactures,  in  which  the 
United  States  have  begun  a  competition. 

There  may  also  be  this  argument  in  favor  of  an  in 
crease  of  duty.  The  object  is  of  importance  enough 
to  claim  decisive  encouragement,  and  the  progress 
which  has  been  made  leaves  no  room  to  apprehend 
any  inconvenience  on  the  score  of  supply,  from  such 
an  increase. 

It  would  be  of  benefit  to  this  branch,  if  glue,  which 
is  now  rated  at  five  per  cent.,  were  made  the  object 
of  an  excluding  duty.  It  is  already  made,  in  large 
quantities,  at  various  tanneries,  and,  like  paper,  is 
an  entire  economy  of  materials,  which,  if  not  manu 
factured,  would  be  left  to  perish.  It  may  be  placed, 
with  advantage,  in  the  class  of  articles  paying  fifteen 
per  cent. 

GRAIN 

Manufactures  of  the  several  species  of  this  article 
have  a  title  to  peculiar  favor,  not  only  because  they 
are,  most  of  them,  immediately  connected  with  the 
subsistence  of  the  citizens,  but  because  they  enlarge 
the  demand  for  the  most  precious  products  of  the 
soil. 

Though  flour  may  with  propriety  be  noticed  as  a 
manufacture  of  grain,  it  were  useless  to  do  it  but  for 
the  purpose  of  submitting  the  expediency  of  a  general 
system  of  inspection  throughout  the  ports  of  the 
United  States,  which,  if  established  upon  proper 
principles,  would  be  likely  to  improve  the  quality  of 
our  flour  everywhere,  and  to  raise  its  reputation  in 


Industry  and  Commerce  175 

foreign  markets.  There  are,  however,  considera 
tions  which  stand  in  the  way  of  such  an  arrangement. 

Ardent  spirits  and  malt  liquors  are,  next  to  flour, 
the  two  principal  manufactures  of  grain.  The  first 
has  made  a  very  extensive,  the  last  a  considerable 
progress  in  the  United  States.  In  respect  to  both, 
an  exclusive  possession  of  the  home  market  ought 
to  be  secured  to  the  domestic  manufacturers  as  fast 
as  circumstances  will  admit.  Nothing  is  more  prac 
ticable,  and  nothing  more  desirable. 

The  existing  laws  of  the  United  States  have  done 
much  toward  attaining  this  valuable  object,  but  some 
additions  to  the  present  duties  on  foreign  distilled 
spirits  and  foreign  malt  liquors,  and  perhaps  an 
abatement  of  those  on  home-made  spirits,  would 
more  effectually  secure  it,  and  there  does  not  occur 
any  very  weighty  objection  to  either. 

An  augmentation  of  the  duties  on  imported  spirits 
would  favor  as  well  the  distillation  of  spirits  from 
molasses  as  that  from  grain;  and  to  secure  to  the 
nation  the  benefit  of  a  manufacture,  even  of  foreign 
materials,  is  always  of  great,  though  perhaps  of 
secondary  importance. 

A  strong  impression  prevails  in  the  minds  of  those 
concerned  in  distilleries  (including,  too,  the  most 
candid  and  enlightened),  that  greater  differences  in 
the  rates  of  duty  on  foreign  and  domestic  spirits  are 
necessary  completely  to  secure  the  successful  manu 
facture  of  the  latter,  and  there  are  facts  which  en 
title  this  impression  to  attention. 

It  is  known  that  the  price  of  molasses  for  some 
years  past  has  been  successively  rising  in  the  West 


176  Alexander  Hamilton 

India  markets,  owing  partly  to  a  competition  which 
did  not  formerly  exist,  and  partly  to  an  extension  of 
demand  in  this  country;  and  it  is  evident  that  the 
late  disturbances  in  those  islands,  from  which  we 
draw  our  principal  supply,  must  so  far  interfere  with 
the  production  of  the  article  as  to  occasion  a  ma 
terial  enhancement  in  price.  The  destruction  and 
devastation  attendant  on  the  insurrection  in  His- 
paniola  in  particular,  must  not  only  contribute  very 
much  to  that  effect,  but  may  be  expected  to  give  it 
some  duration.  These  circumstances,  and  the  duty 
of  three  cents  per  gallon  on  molasses,  may  render  it 
difficult  for  the  distillers  of  that  material  to  maintain 
with  adequate  profit  a  competition  with  the  rum 
brought  from  the  West  Indies,  the  quality  of  which 
is  so  considerably  superior. 

The  consumption  of  geneva,  or  gin,  in  this  country 
is  extensive.  It  is  not  long  since  distilleries  of  it 
have  grown  up  among  us  to  any  importance.  They 
are  now  becoming  of  consequence,  but  being  still  in 
their  infancy  they  require  protection. 

It  is  represented  that  the  price  of  some  of  the 
materials  is  greater  here  than  in  Holland,  from 
which  place  large  quantities  are  brought;  the  price 
of  labor  considerably  greater;  capitals  engaged  in 
the  business  there  much  larger  than  those  which 
are  employed  here ;  the  rate  of  profits  at  which  the 
undertakers  can  afford  to  carry  it  on  much  less ;  the 
prejudices  in  favor  of  imported  gin  strong.  These 
circumstances  are  alleged  to  outweigh  the  charges 
which  attend  the  bringing  of  the  article  from  Europe 
to  the  United  States  and  the  present  difference  of 


Industry  and  Commerce  177 

duty,  so  as  to  obstruct  the  prosecution  of  the  manu 
facture  with  due  advantage. 

Experiment  could,  perhaps,  alone  decide  with  cer 
tainty  the  justness  of  the  suggestions  which  are  made ; 
but,  in  relation  to  branches  of  manufacture  so  im 
portant,  it  would  seem  inexpedient  to  hazard  an  un 
favorable  issue,  and  better  to  err  on  the  side  of  too 
great  than  of  too  small  a  difference  in  the  particular 
in  question. 

It  is,  therefore,  submitted,  that  an  addition  of  two 
cents  per  gallon  be  made  to  the  duty  on  imported 
spirits  of  the  first  class  of  proof,  with  a  proportion 
able  increase  on  those  of  higher  proof ;  and  that  a  de 
duction  of  one  cent  per  gallon  be  made  from  the 
duty  on  spirits  distilled  within  the  United  States, 
beginning  with  the  first  class  of  proof,  and  a  propor 
tionable  deduction  from  the  duty  on  those  of  higher 
proof. 

It  is  ascertained  that  by  far  the  greatest  part  of 
the  malt  liquors  consumed  in  the  United  States,  are 
the  produce  of  domestic  breweries.  It  is  desirable, 
and  in  all  likelihood  attainable,  that  the  whole  con 
sumption  should  be  supplied  by  ourselves. 

The  malt  liquors  at  home,  though  inferior  to  the 
best,  are  equal  to  a  great  part  of  those  which  have 
been  usually  imported.  The  progress  already  made 
is  an  earnest  of  what  may  be  accomplished.  The 
growing  competition  is  an  assurance  of  improve 
ment.  This  will  be  accelerated  by  measures  tend 
ing  to  invite  a  greater  capital  into  this  channel  of 
employment. 

To  render  the  encouragement  of  domestic  brew- 


VOL.    IV.— 12 


178  Alexander  Hamilton 

cries  decisive,  it  may  be  advisable  to  substitute  to 
the  present  rates  of  duty,  eight  cents  per  gallon, 
generally;  and  it  will  deserve  to  be  considered  as 
a  guard  against  evasions,  whether  there  ought  not  to 
be  a  prohibition  of  their  importation,  except  in  casks 
of  considerable  capacity.  It  is  to  be  hoped,  that 
such  a  duty  would  banish  from  the  market  foreign 
malt  liquors  of  inferior  quality,  and  that  the  best 
kind  only  would  continue  to  be  imported,  till  it 
should  be  supplanted  by  the  efforts  of  equal  skill  or 
care  at  home. 

Till  that  period,  the  importation,  so  qualified, 
would  be  a  useful  stimulus  to  improvement,  and,  in 
the  meantime,  the  payment  of  the  increased  price 
for  the  enjoyment  of  a  luxury,  in  order  to  the  en 
couragement  of  a  most  useful  branch  of  domes 
tic  industry,  could  not  reasonably  be  deemed  a 
hardship. 

As  a  further  aid  to  manufactures  of  grain,  though 
upon  a  smaller  scale,  the  articles  of  starch,  hair- 
powder,  and  wafers,  may  with  great  propriety  be 
placed  among  those  which  are  rated  at  fifteen  per 
cent.  No  manufactures  are  more  simple,  nor  more 
completely  within  the  reach  of  a  full  supply  from 
domestic  sources ;  and  it  is  a  policy  as  common  as  it 
is  obvious,  to  make  them  the  objects  either  of  pro- 
hibitionary  duties  or  of  express  prohibition. 

FLAX    AND   HEMP 

Manufactures  of  these  articles  have  so  much  affin 
ity  to  each  other,  and  they  are  so  often  blended, 


Industry  and  Commerce  179 

that  they  may,  with  advantage,  be  considered  in  con 
junction.  The  importance  of  the  linen  branch  to 
agriculture,  its  precious  effects  upon  household  in 
dustry,  the  ease  with  which  the  materials  can  be 
produced  at  home,  to  any  requisite  extent,  the  great 
advances  which  have  been  already  made  in  the 
coarser  fabrics  of  them,  especially  in  the  family  way, 
constitute  claims  of  peculiar  force  to  the  patronage 
of  government. 

This  patronage  may  be  afforded  in  various  ways; 
by  promoting  the  growth  of  the  materials,  by  in 
creasing  the  impediments  to  an  advantageous  com 
petition  of  rival  foreign  articles,  by  direct  bounties, 
or  premiums  upon  the  home  manufactures. 

i st. — As  to  promoting  the  growth  of  the  materials. 

In  respect  to  hemp,  something  has  been  already 
done  by  the  high  duty  upon  foreign  hemp.  If  the 
facilities  for  domestic  production  were  not  unusually 
great,  the  policy  of  the  duty  on  the  foreign  raw  ma 
terial  would  be  highly  questionable,  as  interfering 
with  the  growth  or  manufactures  of  it.  But  making 
the  proper  allowances  for  those  facilities,  and  with 
an  eye  to  the  future  and  natural  progress  of  the 
country,  the  measure  does  not  appear,  upon  the 
whole,  exceptionable. 

A  strong  wish  naturally  suggests  itself,  that  some 
method  could  be  devised,  of  affording  a  more  direct 
encouragement  to  the  growth  both  of  flax  and  hemp ; 
such  as  would  be  effectual,  and,  at  the  same  time, 
not  attended  with  too  great  inconveniences.  To 
this  end,  bounties  and  premiums  offer  themselves 
to  consideration,  but  no  modification  of  them  has 


180  Alexander  Hamilton 

yet  occurred,  which  would  not  either  hazard  too 
much  expense,  or  operate  unequally,  in  reference  to 
the  circumstances  of  different  parts  of  the  Union; 
and  which  would  not  be  attended  with  very  great 
difficulties  in  the  execution. 

2d. — As  to  increasing  the  impediments  to  an  ad 
vantageous  competition  of  rival  foreign  articles. 

To  this  purpose  an  augmentation  of  the  duties  on 
importation  is  the  obvious  expedient,  which,  in  regard 
to  certain  articles,  appears  to  be  recommended  by 
sufficient  reasons. 

The  principal  of  these  articles  is  sail-cloth — one 
intimately  connected  with  navigation  and  defence, 
and  of  which  a  flourishing  manufactory  is  estab 
lished  at  Boston,  and  very  promising  ones  at  several 
other  places. 

It  is  presumed  to  be  both  safe  and  advisable  to 
place  this  in  the  class  of  articles  rated  at  ten  per  cent. 
A  strong  reason  for  it  results  from  the  consideration 
that  a  bounty  of  two  pence  sterling,  per  ell,  is  allowed 
in  Great  Britain,  upon  the  exportation  of  the  sail 
cloth  manufactured  in  that  kingdom. 

It  would  likewise  appear  to  be  good  policy  to  raise 
the  duty  to  seven  and  a  half  per  cent,  on  the  follow 
ing  articles:  Drillings,  osnaburgs,  ticklenburgs, 
dowals,  canvas,  brown  rolls,  bagging,  and  upon  all 
other  linens,  the  first  cost  of  which,  at  the  place  of 
exportation,  does  not  exceed  thirty-five  cents  per 
yard.  A  bounty  of  twelve  and  a  half  per  cent,  upon 
an  average,  on  the  exportation  of  such  or  similar 
linens  from  Great  Britain,  encourages  the  manu 
facture  of  them  in  that  country,  and  increases  the 


Industry  and  Commerce  181 

obstacles  to  a  successful  competition  in  the  countries 
to  which  they  are  sent. 

The  quantities  of  tow  and  other  household  linens, 
manufactured  in  different  parts  of  the  United  States, 
and  the  expectations  which  are  derived  from  some 
late  experiments,  of  being  able  to  extend  the  use  of 
labor-saving  machines,  in  the  coarser  fabrics  of  linen, 
obviate  the  danger  of  inconvenience  from  an  in 
crease  of  the  duty  upon  such  articles,  and  authorize 
a  hope  of  speedy  and  complete  success  to  the  en 
deavors  which  may  be  used  for  procuring  an  internal 
supply. 

3d. — As  to  direct  bounties  or  premiums  upon  the 
manufactured  articles. 

To  afford  more  effectual  encouragement  to  the 
manufacture,  and  at  the  same  time  to  promote  the 
cheapness  of  the  article,  for  the  benefit  of  naviga 
tion,  it  will  be  of  great  use  to  allow  a  bounty  of  two 
cents  per  yard  on  all  sail-cloth  which  is  made  in  the 
United  States,  from  materials  of  their  own  growth. 
This  would  also  assist  the  culture  of  those  materials. 
An  encouragement  of  this  kind,  if  adopted,  ought  to 
be  established  for  a  moderate  term  of  years,  to  invite 
to  new  undertakings,  and  to  an  extension  of  the  old. 
This  is  an  article  of  importance  enough  to  warrant 
the  employment  of  extraordinary  means  in  its  favor. 

COTTON 

There  is  something  in  the  texture  of  this  material 
which  adapts  it,  in  a  peculiar  degree,  to  the  appli 
cation  of  machines.  The  signal  utility  of  the  mill 
for  spinning  of  cotton,  not  long  since  invented  in 


1 82  Alexander  Hamilton 

England,  has  been  noticed  in  another  place;  but 
there  are  other  machines,  scarcely  inferior  in  utility, 
which,  in  the  different  manufactories  of  this  article, 
are  employed,  either  exclusively,  or  with  more  than 
ordinary  effect.  This  very  important  circumstance 
recommends  the  fabrics  of  cotton,  in  a  more  particu 
lar  manner,  to  a  country  in  which  a  defect  of  hands 
constitutes  the  greatest  obstacle  to  success. 

The  variety  and  extent  of  the  uses  to  which  the 
manufactures  of  this  article  are  applicable,  is  another 
powerful  argument  in  their  favor.  And  the  faculty 
of  the  United  States  to  produce  the  raw  material  in 
abundance,  and  of  a  quality  which,  though  alleged  to 
be  inferior  to  some  that  is  produced  in  other  quart 
ers,  is  nevertheless  capable  of  being  used  with  ad 
vantage  in  many  fabrics,  and  is  probably  susceptible 
of  being  carried  by  a  more  experienced  culture  to 
much  greater  perfection,  suggests  an  additional  and 
a  very  cogent  inducement  to  the  vigorous  pursuit  of 
the  cotton  branch  in  its  several  subdivisions.  How 
much  has  been  already  done  has  been  stated  in  a 
preceding  part  of  this  report. 

In  addition  to  this,  it  may  be  announced,  that  a 
society  is  forming,  with  a  capital  which  is  expected 
to  be  extended  to  at  least  half  a  million  of  dollars,  on 
behalf  of  which,  measures  are  already  in  train  for 
prosecuting,  on  a  large  scale,  the  making  and  print 
ing  of  cotton  goods. 

These  circumstances  conspire  to  indicate  the  ex 
pediency  of  removing  any  obstructions  which  may 
happen  to  exist,  to  the  advantageous  prosecution 
of  the  manufactories  in  question,  and  of  adding 


Industry  and  Commerce  183 

such  encouragements  as  may  appear  necessary  and 
proper. 

The  present  duty  of  three  cents  per  pound,  on  the 
foreign  raw  material,  is  undoubtedly  a  very  serious 
impediment  to  the  progress  of  those  manufactories. 

The  injurious  tendency  of  similar  duties,  either 
prior  to  the  establishment  or  in  the  infancy  of  the 
domestic  manufacture  of  the  article,  as  it  regards  the 
manufacture,  and  their  worse  than  inutility,  in  rela 
tion  to  the  home  production  of  the  material  itself, 
have  been  anticipated,  particularly  in  discussing  the 
subject  of  pecuniary  bounties. 

Cotton  has  not  the  same  pretensions  with  hemp,  to 
form  an  exception  to  the  general  rule. 

Not  being,  like  hemp,  a  universal  production  of 
the  country,  it  affords  less  assurance  of  an  adequate 
internal  supply;  but  the  chief  objection  arises  from 
the  doubts  which  are  entertained,  concerning  the 
quality  of  the  national  cotton.  It  is  alleged  that 
the  fibre  of  it  is  considerably  shorter  and  weaker 
than  that  of  some  other  places;  and  it  has  been 
observed,  as  a  general  rule,  that  the  nearer  the  place 
of  growth  to  the  equator,  the  better  the  quality  of  the 
cotton.  That  which  comes  from  Cayenne,  Surinam, 
and  Demarara,  is  said  to  be  preferable,  even  at  a 
material  difference  of  price,  to  the  cotton  of  the 
islands. 

While  a  hope  may  reasonably  be  indulged,  that 
with  due  care  and  attention,  the  national  cotton 
may  be  made  to  approach  nearer  than  it  now  does 
to  that  of  regions  somewhat  more  favored  by  climate ; 
and  while  facts  authorize  an  opinion  that  very  great 


184  Alexander  Hamilton 

use  may  be  made  of  it,  and  t^hat  it  is  a  resource  which 
gives  greater  security  to  the  cotton  fabrics  of  this 
country,  than  can  be  enjoyed  by  any  which  depends 
wholly  on  external  supply,  it  will  certainly  be  wise, 
in  every  view,  to  let  our  infant  manufactures  have 
the  full  benefit  of  the  best  materials,  on  the  cheapest 
terms.  It  is  obvious  that  the  necessity  of  having 
such  materials  is  proportioned  to  the  unskilfulness 
and  inexperience  of  the  workmen  employed,  who,  if 
inexpert,  will  not  fail  to  commit  great  waste,  where 
the  materials  they  are  to  work  with  are  of  an  in 
different  kind. 

To  secure  to  the  national  manufactures  so  essen 
tial  an  advantage,  a  repeal  of  the  present  duty  on 
imported  cotton  is  indispensable. 

A  substitute  for  this,  far  more  encouraging  to 
domestic  production,  will  be  to  grant  a  bounty  on 
the  national  cotton,  when  wrought  at  a  home  manu 
factory;  to  which  a  bounty  on  the  exportation  of  it 
may  be  added.  Either,  or  both,  would  do  much 
more  towards  promoting  the  growth  of  the  article, 
than  the  merely  nominal  encouragement,  which  it  is 
proposed  to  abolish.  The  first  would  also  have  a 
direct  influence  in  encouraging  the  manufacture. 

The  bounty  which  has  been  mentioned,  as  existing 
in  Great  Britain,  upon  the  exportation  of  coarse 
linens,  not  exceeding  a  certain  value,  applies  also  to 
certain  descriptions  of  cotton  goods  of  similar  value. 

This  furnishes  an  additional  argument  for  allow 
ing  to  the  national  manufactures,  the  species  of  en 
couragement  just  suggested,  and,  indeed,  for  adding 
some  other  aid. 


Industry  and  Commerce  185 

One  cent  per  yard,  not  less  than  of  a  given  width, 
on  all  goods  of  cotton,  or  of  cotton  and  linen  mixed, 
which  are  manufactured  in  the  United  States,  with 
the  addition  of  one  cent  per  pound  weight  of  the 
material,  if  made  of  national  cotton,  would  amount 
to  an  aid  of  considerable  importance,  both  to  the 
production  and  to  the  manufacture  of  that  valuable 
article.  And  it  is  conceived  that  the  expense  would 
be  well  justified  by  the  magnitude  of  the  object. 

The  printing  and  staining  of  cotton  goods  is  known 
to  be  a  distinct  business  from  the  fabrication  of  them. 
It  is  one  easily  accomplished,  and  which,  as  it  adds 
materially  to  the  value  of  the  article  in  its  white  state, 
and  prepares  it  for  a  variety  of  new  uses,  is  of  im 
portance  to  be  promoted. 

As  imported  cottons,  equally  with  those  which 
are  made  at  home,  may  be  the  objects  of  this  manu 
facture,  it  will  merit  consideration,  whether  the 
whole,  or  a  part  of  the  duty,  on  the  white  goods, 
ought  not  to  be  allowed  to  be  drawn  in  favor  of  those 
who  print  or  stain  them.  This  measure  would  cer 
tainly  operate  as  a  powerful  encouragement  to  the 
business ;  and  though  it  may,  in  a  degree,  counteract 
the  original  fabrication  of  the  articles,  it  would  prob 
ably  more  than  compensate  for  this  disadvantage,  in 
the  rapid  growth  of  a  collateral  branch,  which  is  of  a 
nature  sooner  to  attain  to  maturity.  When  a  suffi 
cient  progress  shall  have  been  made,  the  drawback 
may  be  abrogated,  and  by  that  time  the  domestic 
supply  of  the  articles  to  be  printed  or  stained  will 
have  been  extended. 

If  the  duty  of  seven  and  a  half  per  cent,  on  certain 


1 86  Alexander  Hamilton 

kinds  of  cotton  goods  were  extended  to  all  goods  of 
cotton,  or  of  which  it  is  the  principal  material,  it 
would  probably  more  than  counterbalance  the  effect 
of  the  drawback  proposed,  in  relation  to  the  fabrica 
tion  of  the  article.  And  no  material  objection  occurs 
to  such  an  extension.  The  duty,  then,  consider 
ing  all  the  circumstances  which  attend  goods  of 
this  description,  could  not  be  deemed  inconveni 
ently  high;  and  it  may  be  inferred,  from  various 
causes,  that  the  prices  of  them  would  still  continue 
moderate. 

Manufactories  of  cotton  goods,  not  long  since  es 
tablished  at  Beverly,  in  Massachusetts,  and  at 
Providence,  in  the  State  of  Rhode  Island,  and  con 
ducted  with  a  perseverance  corresponding  with  the 
patriotic  motives  which  began  them,  seem  to  have 
overcome  the  first  obstacles  to  success:  producing 
corduroys,  velverets,  fustians,  jeans,  and  other  simi 
lar  articles,  of  a  quality  which  will  bear  a  compari 
son  with  the  like  articles  brought  from  Manchester. 
The  one  at  Providence  has  the  merit  of  being 
the  first  introducing  into  the  United  States  the 
celebrated  cotton  mill,  which  not  only  furnishes  ma 
terials  for  that  manufactory  itself,  but  for  the  sup 
ply  of  private  families,  for  household  manufacture. 

Other  manufactories  of  the  same  material,  as 
regular  businesses,  have  also  been  begun  at  different 
places  in  the  State  of  Connecticut,  but  all  upon  a 
smaller  scale  than  those  above-mentioned.  Some 
essays  are  also  making  in  the  printing  and  staining 
of  cotton  goods.  There  are  several  small  establish 
ments  of  this  kind,  already  on  foot. 


Industry  and  Commerce  187 

WOOL 

In  a  country,  the  climate  of  which  partakes  of  so 
considerable  a  proportion  of  winter,  as  that  of  a 
great  part  of  the  United  States,  the  woollen  branch 
cannot  be  regarded  as  inferior  to  any,  which  relates 
to  the  clothing  of  the  inhabitants. 

Household  manufactures  of  this  material  are 
carried  on  in  different  parts  of  the  United  States, 
to  a  very  interesting  extent;  but  there  is  only  one 
branch,  which,  as  a  regular  business,  can  be  said  to 
have  acquired  maturity.  This  is  the  making  of  hats. 

Hats  of  wool,  and  of  wool  mixed  with  fur,  are 
made  in  large  quantities,  in  different  States;  and 
nothing  seems  wanting,  but  an  adequate  supply  of 
materials,  to  render  the  manufacture  commensurate 
with  the  demand. 

A  promising  essay,  towards  the  fabrication  of 
cloths,  cassimeres,  and  other  woollen  goods,  is  like 
wise  going  on  at  Hartford,  in  Connecticut.  Speci 
mens  of  the  different  kinds  which  are  made,  in  the 
possession  of  the  Secretary,  evince  that  these  fabrics 
have  attained  a  very  considerable  degree  of  per 
fection.  Their  quality  certainly  surpasses  any 
thing  that  could  have  been  looked  for  in  so  short  a 
time,  and  under  so  great  disadvantages;  and  con 
spires,  with  the  scantiness  of  the  means,  which  have 
been  at  the  command  of  the  directors,  to  form  the 
eulogium  of  that  public  spirit,  perseverance,  and 
judgment,  which  have  been  able  to  accomplish  so 
much. 

To  cherish  and  bring  to  maturity  this  precious 
embryo,  must  engage  the  most  ardent  wishes  and 


1 88  Alexander  Hamilton 

proportionable  regret,  as  far  as  the  means  of  doing 
it  may  appear  difficult  or  uncertain. 

Measures  which  should  tend  to  promote  an  abun 
dant  supply  of  wool,  of  good  quality,  would  prob 
ably  afford  the  most  efficacious  aid  that  present 
circumstances  permit. 

To  encourage  the  raising  and  improving  the  breed 
of  sheep,  at  home,  would  certainly  be  the  most 
desirable  expedient  for  that  purpose;  but  it  may 
not  be  alone  sufficient,  especially  as  it  is,  yet,  a 
problem,  whether  our  wool  be  capable  of  such  a 
degree  of  improvement  as  to  render  it  fit  for  the 
finer  fabrics. 

Premiums  would  probably  be  found  the  best 
means  of  promoting  the  domestic,  and  bounties  the 
foreign  supply.  The  first  may  be  within  the  com 
pass  of  the  institution,  hereafter  to  be  submitted. 
The  last  would  require  a  specific  legislative  pro 
vision.  If  any  bounties  are  granted,  they  ought,  of 
course,  to  be  adjusted  with  an  eye  to  quality  as 
well  as  quantity. 

A  fund  for  the  purpose  may  be  derived  from  the 
addition  of  two  and  a  half  per  cent,  to  the  present 
rate  of  duty  on  carpets  and  carpeting;  an  increase 
to  which  the  nature  of  the  articles  suggests  no 
objection,  and  which  may,  at  the  same  time,  fur 
nish  a  motive  the  more  to  the  fabrication  of  them 
at  home,  towards  which  some  beginnings  have  been 
made. 

SILK 

The  production  of  this  article  is  attended  with 
great  facility  in  most  parts  of  the  United  States. 


Industry  and  Commerce  189 

Some  pleasing  essays  are  making  in  Connecticut, 
as  well  towards  that,  as  towards  the  manufacture 
of  what  is  produced.  Stockings,  handkerchiefs,  rib 
bons,  and  buttons  are  made,  though  as  yet  but  in 
small  quantities. 

A  manufactory  of  lace,  upon  a  scale  not  very 
extensive,  has  been  long  memorable  at  Ipswich,  in 
the  State  of  Massachusetts. 

An  exemption  of  the  material  from  the  duty  which 
it  now  pays  on  importation,  and  premiums  upon  the 
production  to  be  dispensed  under  the  direction  of 
the  institution  before  alluded  to,  seem  to  be  the 
only  species  of  encouragement  advisable  at  so  early 
a  stage  of  the  thing. 

GLASS 

The  materials  for  making  glass  are  found  every 
where.  In  the  United  States  there  is  no  deficiency 
of  them.  The  sands  and  stones  called  tarso,  which 
include  flinty  and  crystalline  substances  generally, 
and  the  salts  of  various  plants,  particularly  of  the 
sea-weed  kali,  or  kelp,  constitute  the  essential  in 
gredients.  An  extraordinary  abundance  of  fuel  is  a 
particular  advantage  enjoyed  by  this  country  for 
such  manufactures.  They,  however,  require  large 
capitals,  and  involve  much  manual  labor. 

Different  manufactories  of  glass  are  now  on  foot  in 
the  United  States.  The  present  duty  of  twelve  and 
a  half  per  cent,  on  all  imported  articles  of  glass, 
amounts  to  a  considerable  encouragement  to  those 
manufactories.  If  any  thing  in  addition  is  judged 


190  Alexander  Hamilton 

eligible,   the  most  proper  would  appear  to  be   a 
direct  bounty  on  window-glass  and  black  bottles. 

The  first  recommends  itself  as  an  object  of  general 
convenience;  the  last  adds  to  that  character  the 
circumstance  of  being  an  important  item  in  brew 
eries.  A  complaint  is  made  of  great  deficiency  in 
this  respect. 

GUNPOWDER 

No  small  progress  has  been,  of  late,  made  in  the 
manufacture  of  this  very  important  article.  It 
may,  indeed,  be  considered  as  already  established; 
but  its  high  importance  renders  its  further  exten 
sion  very  desirable. 

The  encouragements  which  it  already  enjoys,  are 
a  duty  of  ten  per  cent,  on  the  foreign  rival  article, 
and  an  exemption  of  saltpetre,  one  of  the  principal 
ingredients  of  which  it  is  composed,  from  duty.  A 
like  exemption  of  sulphur,  another  chief  ingredient, 
would  appear  to  be  equally  proper.  No  quantity  of 
this  article  has  yet  been  produced  from  internal 
sources.  The  use  made  of  it  in  finishing  the  bot 
toms  of  ships,  is  an  additional  inducement  to  placing 
it  in  the  class  of  free  goods.  Regulations  for  the 
careful  inspection  of  the  article  would  have  a  favor 
able  tendency. 

PAPER 

Manufactories  of  paper  are  among  those  which 
are  arrived  at  the  greatest  maturity  in  the  United 
States,  and  are  most  adequate  to  national  supply. 


Industry  and  Commerce  191 

That  of  paper-hangings,  is  a  branch  in  which  re 
spectable  progress  has  been  made. 

Nothing  material  seems  wanting  to  the  further 
success  of  this  valuable  branch,  which  is  already 
protected  by  a  competent  duty  on  similar  imported 
articles. 

In  the  enumeration  of  the  several  kinds  made 
subject  to  that  duty,  sheathing  and  cartridge  paper 
have  been  omitted.  These  being  the  most  simple 
manufactures  of  the  sort,  and  necessary  to  military 
supply,  as  well  as  ship-building,  recommend  them 
selves  equally  with  those  of  other  descriptions,  to 
encouragement,  and  appear  to  be  as  fully  within  the 
compass  of  domestic  exertions. 

PRINTED   BOOKS 

The  great  number  of  presses  disseminated  through 
out  the  Union,  seem  to  afford  an  assurance  that 
there  is  no  need  of  being  indebted  to  foreign  countries 
for  the  printing  of  the  books  which  are  used  in  the 
United  States.  A  duty  of  ten  per  cent.,  instead  of 
five,  which  is  now  charged  upon  the  article,  would 
have  a  tendency  to  aid  the  business  internally. 

It  occurs  as  an  objection  to  this,  that  it  may  have 
an  unfavorable  aspect  toward  literature,  by  raising 
the  price  of  books  in  universal  use  in  private  families, 
schools,  and  other  seminaries  of  learning.  But  the 
difference,  it  is  conceived,  would  be  without  effect. 

As  to  books  which  usually  fill  the  libraries  of  the 
wealthier  classes  and  of  professional  men,  such  an 
augmentation  of  price  as  might  be  occasioned  by 


192  Alexander  Hamilton 

an  additional  duty  of  five  per  cent.,  would  be  too 
little  felt  to  be  an  impediment  to  the  acquisition. 

And  with  regard  to  books  which  may  be  specially 
imported  for  the  use  of  particular  seminaries  of 
learning,  and  of  public  libraries,  a  total  exemption 
from  duty  would  be  advisable,  which  would  go  far 
towards  obviating  the  objection  just  mentioned. 
They  are  now  subject  to  a  duty  of  five  per  cent. 

As  to  the  books  in  most  general  family  use,  the 
constancy  and  universality  of  the  demand  would 
insure  exertions  to  furnish  them  at  home,  and  the 
means  are  completely  adequate.  It  may  also  be 
expected  ultimately,  in  this  as  in  other  cases,  that 
the  extension  of  the  domestic  manufacture  would 
conduce  to  the  cheapness  of  the  article. 

It  ought  not  to  pass  unremarked,  that  to  encourage 
the  printing  of  books  is  to  encourage  the  manufac 
ture  of  paper. 

REFINED    SUGARS    AND   CHOCOLATE 

Are  among  the  number  of  extensive  and  prosperous 
domestic  manufactures. 

Drawbacks  of  the  duties  upon  the  materials  of 
which  they  are  respectively  made,  in  cases  of  ex 
portation,  would  have  a  beneficial  influence  upon 
the  manufacture,  and  would  conform  to  a  precedent 
which  has  been  already  furnished  in  the  instance  of 
molasses,  on  the  exportation  of  distilled  spirits. 

Cocoa,  the  raw  material,  now  pays  a  duty  of  one 
cent  per  pound,  while  chocolate,  which  is  a  pre 
vailing  and  very  simple  manufacture,  is  comprised 


Industry  and  Commerce  193 

in  the  mass  of  articles  rated  at  no  more  than  five 
per  cent. 

There  would  appear  to  be  a  propriety  in  encourag 
ing  the  manufacture  by  a  somewhat  higher  duty  on 
its  foreign  rival,  than  is  paid  on  the  raw  material. 
Two  cents  per  pound  on  imported  chocolate  would, 
it  is  presumed,  be  without  inconvenience. 

The  foregoing  heads  comprise  the  most  important 
of  the  several  kinds  of  manufactures  which  have 
occurred  as  requiring,  and,  at  the  same  time,  as 
most  proper  for  public  encouragement;  and  such 
measures  for  affording  it  as  have  appeared  best  cal 
culated  to  answer  the  end,  have  been  suggested. 

The  observations  which  have  accompanied  this 
delineation  of  objects,  supersede  the  necessity  of 
many  supplementary  remarks.  One  or  two,  how 
ever,  may  not  be  altogether  superfluous. 

Bounties  are,  in  various  instances,  proposed  as 
one  species  of  encouragement. 

It  is  a  familiar  objection  to  them  that  they  are 
difficult  to  be  managed,  and  liable  to  frauds.  But 
neither  that  difficulty  nor  this  danger  seems  suffi 
ciently  great  to  countervail  the  advantages  of  which 
they  are  productive  when  rightly  applied.  And  it 
is  presumed  to  have  been  shown  that  they  are,  in 
some  cases,  particularly  in  the  infancy  of  new 
enterprises,  indispensable. 

It  will,  however,  be  necessary  to  guard,  with  ex 
traordinary  circumspection,  the  manner  of  dispens 
ing  them.  The  requisite  precautions  have  been 
thought  of,  but  to  enter  into  the  detail  would  swell 


VOL.  iv. — 13. 


194  Alexander  Hamilton 

this  report,  already  voluminous,  to  a  size  too  in 
convenient. 

If  the  principle  shall  not  be  deemed  inadmissible, 
the  means  of  avoiding  an  abuse  of  it  will  not  be 
likely  to  present  unsurmountable  obstacles.  There 
are  useful  guides  from  practice  in  other  quarters. 

It  shall,  therefore,  only  be  remarked  here,  in  rela 
tion  to  this  point,  that  any  bounty  which  may  be 
applied  to  the  manufacture  of  an  article,  cannot, 
with  safety,  extend  beyond  those  manufactories  at 
which  the  making  of  the  article  is  a  regular  trade. 
It  would  be  impossible  to  annex  adequate  pre 
cautions  to  a  benefit  of  that  nature,  if  extended  to 
every  private  family  in  which  the  manufacture  was 
incidentally  carried  on;  and,  being  a  merely  inci 
dental  occupation  which  engages  a  portion  of  time 
that  would  otherwise  be  lost,  it  can  be  advanta 
geously  carried  on  without  so  special  an  aid. 

The  possibility  of  a  diminution  of  the  revenue  may 
also  present  itself  as  an  objection  to  the  arrange 
ments  which  have  been  submitted. 

But  there  is  no  truth  which  may  be  more  firmly 
relied  upon,  than  that  the  interests  of  the  revenue 
are  promoted  by  whatever  promotes  an  increase  of 
national  industry  and  wealth. 

In  proportion  to  the  degree  of  these,  is  the  capac 
ity  of  every  country  to  contribute  to  the  public 
treasury ;  and  where  the  capacity  to  pay  is  increased, 
or  even  is  not  decreased,  the  only  consequence  of 
measures  which  diminish  any  particular  resource,  is 
a  change  of  the  object.  If,  by  encouraging  the 
manufacture  of  an  article  at  home,  the  revenue 


Industry  and  Commerce  195 

which  has  been  wont  to  accrue  from  its  importation 
should  be  lessened,  an  indemnification  can  easily 
be  found,  either  out  of  the  manufacture  itself,  or 
from  some  other  object  which  may  be  deemed  more 
convenient. 

The  measures,  however,  which  have  been  sub 
mitted,  taken  aggregately,  will,  for  a  long  time  to 
come,  rather  augment  than  decrease  the  public 
revenue. 

There  is  little  room  to  hope,  that  the  progress  of 
manufactures  will  so  equally  keep  pace  with  the 
progress  of  population,  as  to  prevent  even  a  gradual 
augmentation  of  the  product  of  the  duties  on  im 
ported  articles. 

As,  nevertheless,  an  abolition  in  some  instances, 
and  a  reduction  in  others,  of  duties  which  have  been 
pledged  for  the  public  debt,  is  proposed,  it  is  essen 
tial  that  it  should  be  accompanied  with  a  com 
petent  substitute.  In  order  to  this,  it  is  requisite 
that  all  the  additional  duties  which  shall  be  laid, 
be  appropriated,  in  the  first  instance,  to  replace 
all  defalcations  which  may  proceed  from  any  such 
abolition  or  diminution.  It  is  evident,  at  first 
glance,  that  they  will  not  only  be  adequate  to  this, 
but  will  yield  a  considerable  surplus.  This  surplus 
will  serve: 

First.  To  constitute  a  fund  for  paying  the  boun 
ties  which  shall  have  been  decreed. 

Secondly.  To  constitute  a  fund  for  the  opera 
tions  of  a  board  to  be  established,  for  promoting  arts, 
agriculture,  manufactures,  and  commerce.  Of  this 
institution,  different  intimations  have  been  given  in 


196  Alexander  Hamilton 

the  course  of  this  report.  An  outline  of  a  plan  for 
it  shall  now  be  submitted. 

Let  a  certain  annual  sum  be  set  apart,  and  placed 
under  the  management  of  commissioners,  not  less 
than  three,  to  consist  of  certain  officers  of  the  gov 
ernment  and  their  successors  in  office. 

Let  these  commissioners  be  empowered  to  apply 
the  fund  confided  to  them,  to  defray  the  expenses 
of  the  emigration  of  artists  and  manufacturers 
in  particular  branches  of  extraordinary  importance ; 
to  induce  the  prosecution  and  introduction  of  useful 
discoveries,  inventions,  and  improvements,  by  pro 
portionate  rewards,  judiciously  held  out  and  ap 
plied;  to  encourage  by  premiums,  both  honorable 
and  lucrative,  the  exertions  of  individuals  and  of 
classes,  in  relation  to  the  several  objects  they  are 
charged  with  promoting;  and  to  afford  such  other 
aids  to  those  objects  as  may  be  generally  designated 
by  law. 

The  commissioners  to  render  to  the  Legislature  an 
annual  account  of  their  transactions  and  disburse 
ments  ;  and  all  such  sums  as  shall  not  have  been  ap 
plied  to  the  purposes  of  their  trust,  at  the  end  of 
every  three  years,  to  revert  to  the  treasury.  It 
may,  also,  be  enjoined  upon  them  not  to  draw  out 
the  money,  but  for  the  purpose  of  some  specific 
disbursement. 

It  may,  moreover,  be  of  use  to  authorize  them 
to  receive  voluntary  contributions,  making  it  their 
duty  to  apply  them  to  the  particular  objects  for 
which  they  may  have  been  made,  if  any  shall  have 
been  designated  by  the  donors. 


Industry  and  Commerce  197 

There  is  reason  to  believe  that  the  progress  of 
particular  manufactures  has  been  much  retarded 
by  the  want  of  skilful  workmen.  And  it  often  hap 
pens,  that  the  capitals  employed  are  not  equal  to 
the  purposes  of  bringing  from  abroad  workmen  of 
a  superior  kind.  Here,  in  cases  worthy  of  it,  the 
auxiliary  agency  of  government  would,  in  all  proba 
bility,  be  useful.  There  are  also  valuable  work 
men  in  every  branch,  who  are  prevented  from 
emigrating,  solely,  by  the  want  of  means.  Occa 
sional  aids  to  such  persons,  properly  administered, 
might  be  a  source  of  valuable  acquisitions  to  the 
country. 

The  propriety  of  stimulating  by  rewards  the  in 
vention  and  introduction  of  useful  improvements, 
is  admitted  without  difficulty.  But  the  success  of 
attempts  in  this  way  must  evidently  depend  much 
on  the  manner  of  conducting  them.  It  is  probable 
that  the  placing  of  the  dispensation  of  those  rewards 
under  some  proper  discretionary  direction,  where  they 
may  be  accompanied  by  collateral  expedients,  will 
serve  to  give  them  the  surest  efficacy.  It  seems  im 
practicable  to  apportion,  by  general  rules,  specific 
compensations  for  discoveries  of  unknown  and  dis 
proportionate  utility. 

The  great  use  which  may  be  made  of  a  fund  of 
this  nature,  to  procure  and  import  foreign  improve 
ments,  is  particularly  obvious.  Among  these,  the 
article  of  machines  would  form  a  most  important 
item. 

The  operation  and  utility  of  premiums  have  been 
adverted  to,  together  with  the  advantages  which 


198  Alexander  Hamilton 

have  resulted  from  their  dispensation,  under  the 
direction  of  certain  public  and  private  societies.  Of 
this,  some  experience  has  been  had,  in  the  instance 
of  the  Pennsylvania  Society  for  the  promotion  of 
manufactures  and  useful  arts ;  but  the  funds  of  that 
association  have  been  too  contracted  to  produce 
more  than  a  very  small  portion  of  the  good  to  which 
the  principles  of  it  would  have  led.  It  may  con 
fidently  be  affirmed,  that  there  is  scarcely  any 
thing  which  has  been  devised,  better  calculated  to 
excite  a  general  spirit  of  improvement  than  the  in 
stitutions  of  this  nature.  They  are  truly  invaluable. 
In  countries  where  there  is  great  private  wealth, 
much  may  be  effected  by  the  voluntary  contribu 
tions  of  patriotic  individuals;  but  in  a  community 
situated  like  that  of  the  United  States,  the  public 
purse  must  supply  the  deficiency  of  private  re 
source.  In  what  can  it  be  so  useful,  as  in  prompting 
and  improving  the  efforts  of  industry? ' 
All  which  is  humbly  submitted. 

ALEXANDER  HAMILTON, 
Secretary  of  the  Treasury. 

1  The  report  on  manufactures  is,  with  the  exception  of  the  first  report 
on  the  public  credit,  the  most  important  state  paper  written  by  Hamil 
ton,  and  to  say  this  is  to  say  a  great  deal.  Unlike  most  of  his  reports, 
it  produced  no  immediate  and  direct  results  in  legislation,  but  it  laid 
the  foundation  of  the  protective  policy  in  the  United  States;  and  was 
an  integral  part  of  that  national  system  of  measures  which  was  the  pole- 
star  of  Hamilton's  statemanship.  Its  principles  were  all  subsequently 
adopted;  its  doctrines  have  prevailed  as  a  rule  in  the  political  contests 
to  which  the  tariff  at  various  periods  has  given  birth,  and  it  has  colored 
and  guided  the  views  of  our  statesmen  and  the  economical  and  indus 
trial  policy  of  the  country  for  nearly  a  century.  For  many  years 
Hamilton  had  been  a  close  student  of  political-economical  questions. 
After  reading  all  the  earlier  writers,  he  read  Adam  Smith  with  great 
care,  and  wrote  in  1783,  while  a  member  of  Congress,  an  extended 


Industry  and  Commerce  199 

HAMILTON   TO   JEFFERSON 

JANUARY  i,  1792. 

Mr.  Hamilton  presents  his  compliments  to  Mr. 
Jefferson.     Being  engaged  in  making  a  comparative 

commentary,  no  longer  in  existence,  upon  the  Wealth  of  Nations. 
His  training  and  preparation  are  shown  fully  in  this  report,  not  only  in 
discussing  the  protection  principle,  but  in  the  able  treatment  of  the 
general  theory  of  taxation.  As  an  exposition  of  the  reasons  for  the 
protection  of  nascent  industries — a  doctrine  accepted  by  Mill — this 
report  has  never  been  surpassed,  and  as  an  argument  for  the  adoption 
of  the  protective  principle  as  the  true  policy  for  the  United  States, 
without  reference  to  other  countries,  it  has  never  been  successfully 
answered.  The  question,  under  very  different  conditions,  is  a  living 
one  to-day,*  and  it  is  therefore  desirable  to  give  very  briefly  the  facts 
which  show  the  rise  and  the  course  of  the  protective  policy  since  the 
day  when  Hamilton  first  developed  it  for  the  consideration  of  the 
American  people. 

The  question  of  giving  protection  to  industries  came  up  in  the  first 
Congress,  and  after  much  debate  and  constitutional  wrangling,  what 
might  be  called  the  theory  of  incidental  protection  prevailed,  and  was 
recognized  in  legislation.  This  policy,  very  mild  in  its  actual  applica 
tion,  received  an  immense  impetus  from  Hamilton's  report  to  the  next 
Congress  in  1791;  but  there  was  no  change  in  the  system  for  many 
years  to  come.  In  1800  there  was  an  increase  of  duties;  in  1804  some 
three  per  cent,  increase  over  the  tariff  of  1800,  but  in  both  cases  it  was 
for  purposes  of  taxation  and  not  avowedly  protectionist.  Jefferson, 
in  accordance  with  his  general  theories  of  government,  was  a  strict  con- 
structionist  and  a  free-trader.  Yet,  by  the  Louisiana  Purchase,  he  not 
only  strained  to  its  utmost,  but  actually  violated  the  Constitution, 
and  he  was  the  author  of  the  most  severely  protective  measure  this 
country  has  ever  known.  His  embargo  was  of  course  laid  without  any 
view  to  protection,  but  in  effect  it  was  the  highest  kind  of  absolutely 
prohibitory  tariff,  and  the  sharpest  stimulus  that  could  have  been  ap 
plied  to  nascent  industries.  Madison  was  a  modern  protectionist,  not 
differing  materially  from  Hamilton,  and  his  views  are  apparent  in  the 
tone  of  his  messages  and  in  his  strong  advocacy,  at  a  later  period,  of 
the  protective  tariff.  Henry  Clay,  too,  was  now  upon  the  stage  of 
public  life,  and  in  the  session  of  1809-10  made  a  protectionist  speech. 
The  policy  was  coming  nearer  and  nearer  to  open  and  confessed  exist 
ence.  In  1812,  just  before  hostilities  were  declared,  the  tariff  was 

*  Written  (by  the  editor)  in  1885. 


200  Alexander  Hamilton 

statement  of  the  trade  between  the  United  States 
and  France,  and  between  the  United  States  and 
Great  Britain,  and  being  desirous  of  rendering  it  as 
candid  as  possible,  Mr.  H.  will  be  obliged  to  Mr. 

again  raised — this  time  about  seven  per  cent,  higher  than  its  predeces 
sor.  Still  it  was  only  for  purposes  of  taxation.  The  war,  however, 
was  in  direct  continuation  of  the  embargo,  and  amounted,  of  course, 
to  prohibitory  protection.  Thus  stimulated  the  infant  industries 
rapidly  increased,  and  in  1814  Mr.  Calhoun  made  a  strong  speech  in 
favor  of  the  war  duties  as  protective  measures.  Two  years  later, 
when  the  country  was  struggling  in  a  sea  of  financial  difficulties,  and 
the  infant  industries  were  paralyzed  by  the  influx  of  English  goods, 
Mr.  Calhoun  brought  in  and  carried  through  the  famous  tariff  of  1816, 
an  open  and  avowed  measure  of  protection  and  the  beginning  of  the 
protective  policy.  There  was  another  tariff  in  1820  in  the  same  direc 
tion,  another  in  1824,  and  finally  the  tariff  of  1828,  known  as  the  "bill 
of  abominations,"  which  was  carried  through  at  the  instigation  of  the 
woollen  interests. 

Now  came  a  shifting  in  the  political  forces.  New  England,  under  the 
lead  of  Webster,  went  over  finally  and  definitely  to  the  side  of  protec 
tion,  while  the  South,  under  the  lead  of  Calhoun,  prepared  for  revolu 
tion  against  it.  The  embargo  was  a  Southern  measure,  so  was  the  War 
of  1812,  so  was  the  tariff  of  1816.  To  all  alike  New  England  had  been 
opposed,  and  as  the  commercial  part  of  the  country,  she  offered  a 
steady  resistance  to  the  advance  of  the  protective  system.  The 
Southern  policy  prevailed;  the  Southern  policy  built  up  New  England 
industries,  and  did  not  help  the  South.  Finally  the  interests  of  New 
England  swayed  heavily  over  to  protection,  the  Middle  States  and  the 
North  generally  went  with  her,  and  the  lines  were  drawn. 

Then  the  agitation  against  the  tariff  began.  A  bill  to  somewhat 
lighten  the  duties  passed  in  1832,  but  the  issue  had  become  too  deep  for 
such  a  measure.  South  Carolina,  guided  by  the  champion  of  protective 
tariff  of  1816,  had  nullified  the  existing  law.  The  upshot  was  the  Clay 
compromise,  providing  for  a  twenty-per-cent.  annual  reduction  for  ten 
years.  In  1842  the  country  was  again  in  financial  difficulties,  the 
compromise  was  swept  aside,  a  new  tariff  bill  passed,  and  the  duties 
were  raised  twenty  per  cent.  Reviving  business  and  increased  pro 
sperity  made  the  tariff  of  1842  popular,  and  to  retain  their  hold  upon 
Pennsylvania  the  Democrats  inscribed  on  their  banners  in  that  State : 
"Polk  and  Dallas  and  the  tariff  of  '42."  The  tariff  of  '42  had,  of 
course,  the  support  of  the  Whigs,  but  they  were  defeated,  while  the 
Democrats  in  power  soon  forgot  their  Pennsylvanian  promises,  and  the 


Industry  and  Commerce  201 

Jefferson  to  point  out  to  him  the  instances  in  which 
the  regulations  of  France  have  made  discriminations 
in  favor  of  the  United  States  as  compared  with 
other  foreign  powers.  Those  of  Great  Britain  ap- 

tariff  of  1846  practically  neutralized  its  predecessor.  It  was  a  tariff 
for  revenue  only,  made  in  accordance  with  the  recommendations  of 
the  Secretary  of  the  Treasury,  Robert  J.  Walker,  in  what  the  London 
Times  called  "the  only  properly  free-trade  report  ever  made  by  an 
American  Minister  of  Finance."  The  Mexican  War,  the  discovery  of 
gold,  and  the  darkening  clouds  of  the  slavery  question,  drew  men's 
minds  away  from  the  tariff,  and  the  policy  of  lowering  duties  was  con 
tinued  until,  in  Buchanan's  time,  we  had  reached  practical  free-trade. 
Then  came  the  financial  crash  of  1857,  and  public  attention  began  to 
revert  fitfully  to  the  tariff,  but  of  course  nothing  could  be  done  when 
the  country  was  distracted  by  the  raging  agitation  over  slavery  and  the 
approach  of  civil  war.  The  advent  of  the  Republican  party  and  the 
pressing  need  of  funds  brought  the  Morrill  tariff  of  1861,  which  was 
a  complete  embodiment  of  the  protective  principle.  There  have 
been  heavy  reductions  of  duties  in  various  directions  and  at  various 
times  since  then,  but  the  principle  of  protection  has  remained  pre 
dominant.  The  payment  of  the  debt,  the  increase  of  the  revenue, 
and  the  need  of  revision  and  reform  in  the  existing  system  of  duties, 
have  made  the  tariff  again  an  immediate  and  pressing  issue,  and  a  very 
living  question. 

This  brief  outline  suffices  to  show  that  Hamilton's  policy  has  been, 
in  the  main,  the  policy  of  the  country,  although  it  has  lacked  the  uni 
formity  and  steadiness,  and,  at  times,  the  moderation  which  he  would 
have  given  it.  But  the  importance  of  his  influence  in  this  direction 
cannot  be  overlooked  or  overestimated.  Apart  from  its  intrinsic 
merits  as  an  argument,  and  apart  from  the  principles  it  advocates, 
Hamilton's  report  on  manufactures,  especially  when  the  tariff  is  an 
immediate  issue,  is  very  wholesome  reading.  Whether  a  man  is  a  free 
trader,  a  tariff-reformer,  or  a  strong  protectionist,  he  will  do  well  to 
study  this  report,  for  it  contains  one  thoroughly  good  lesson.  It  clears 
the  mind  from  cant.  It  shows  the  true  way  in  which  this  subject 
should  be  discussed,  from  whatever  point  of  view  one  approaches  it. 
Hamilton  always  looked  facts  in  the  face.  He  knew  that  the  question 
of  free-trade  or  protection  was  purely  a  question  of  business  expedi 
ency,  and  as  such  he  discussed  it.  Probably  nothing  made  Carlyle 
more  violent  in  his  denunciations  of  the  "dismal  science,"  than  the 
cant  which  the  Manchester  school  brought  into  it,  which  became  well- 
nigh  universal  in  England.  Free-trade  was  good  business  policy  for 


2O2  Alexander  Hamilton 

pear  by  its  statutes,  which  are  in  the  hands  of  Mr. 
H.,  but  he  is  not  possessed  of  the  general  commercial 
regulations  of  France. 

Mr.  H.  also  wishes  to  be  informed  whether  the 
arret  of  the  gth  of  May,  1789,  mentioned  by  Mr.  J. 
in  the  notes  to  this  table,  be  the  same  with  the  or 
dinance  of  the  Governor-General  of  St.  Domingo, 
which  is  at  the  end  of  the  collection  of  arrets  which 
Mr.  J.  was  so  obliging  as  to  lend  to  Mr.  H.,  which  is 
of  that  date. 

England,  and  so  far  so  good,  but  when  its  supporters  undertook  to 
make  a  moral  question  out  of  it,  to  elevate  it  as  a  fetich  which  was 
to  cure  all  human  ills,  and  to  hold  up  the  "laissez  aller"  principle  as  a 
sort  of  religious  creed,  Carlyle  crying  in  the  wilderness  revolted.  He, 
like  others  who  had  studied  history,  knew  that  the  waste  places  of  the 
earth  had  not  been  built  up,  and  civilization  painfully  extracted  from 
barbarism,  by  "laissez  aller"  and  "laissez  faire,"  and  he  was  nauseated 
by  the  humbug  with  which  the  whole  matter  was  enveloped.  This 
is  why  Hamilton's  report  is  good  reading  for  any  one.  He  may  have 
been  hopelessly  wrong  in  his  views,  but  at  all  events  he  did  not  cant. 
He  did  not  attempt  to  treat  a  question  of  profit  or  loss  as  if  it  were  the 
Protestant  reformation  or  the  abolition  of  slavery.  He  wished  to 
advocate  a  policy  which  would  pay  best  for  the  United  States,  and  he 
argued  his  case  in  plain,  business  terms.  Whether  right  or  wrong  in 
his  opinions  he  was  supremely  right  in  his  method  of  discussion,  and 
the  sooner  his  method  is  adopted  by  all  sides  the  better,  and  the 
nearer  we  shall  be  to  a  proper  solution.  When  free-trade  paid,  Eng 
land  adopted  it,  and  not  one  instant  sooner.  The  business  sense  of  the 
American  people  is  unsurpassed;  they  have  protection  because  they 
think  it  pays,  and  when  they  are  convinced  that  free-trade  will  pay 
better  they  will  have  it  instead,  and  not  before. 


COMMERCIAL  RELATIONS 


203 


COMMERCIAL  RELATIONS 


OUTLINE  OF  SMITH'S  SPEECH  ON  MADISON'S  RESOLU 
TIONS   OP  JANUARY   3,  1794 

Draft  by  Hamilton 

January,  1794. 

TTHE  table  which  is  annexed  takes  the  year  1790  as 
the  proper  period  to  show  the  commercial  policy 
of  France  previous  to  the  revolution  just  terminated. 
The  notes  accompanying  that  table  explain  the 
alterations  which  have  since  taken  place.  There  is, 
however,  no  mention  of  the  expiration  of  the  time 
limited  for  the  premium  on  French  fish  imported 
into  the  French  colonies,  which  happened  in  1790, 
because  this  makes  no  alteration  in  the  general 
complexion  of  the  policy  of  France  in  this  particular. 
It  is  usual  for  greater  caution  to  limit  the  duration  of 
premiums  to  a  certain  period,  even  where  it  is  sup 
posed  that  a  further  continuation  may  be  necessary, 
and  if  the  premium  in  question  has  not  been  re 
newed,  it  affords  no  proof  of  an  intention  to  relin 
quish  it,  as  the  situation  of  France  at  the  time  of 
the  cessation,  and  since,  may  be  presumed  to  have 
precluded  arrangements  affecting  the  trade  of  the 
colonies. 

If  any  have  been  made,  it  may  be  inferred  from 

205 


206  Alexander  Hamilton 

Commeres'  pamphlet,  that  though  the  duty  on 
foreign  fish  has  been  reduced  from  five  to  three  livres, 
the  premium  on  French  fish  has  been  raised  from 
ten  to  twelve,  which  makes  the  aggregate  of  duty 
and  premium,  operating  as  a  bounty  on  French  fish, 
the  same  as  before,  namely,  fifteen  livres. 

General  Observations 

1.  The  commercial  system  of  Great  Britain  makes 
no  discriminations  to  the  prejudice  of  the  United 
States  as  compared  with  other  foreign  powers. 

There  is  therefore  no  ground  for  a  complaint  on 
the  part  of  the  United  States,  that  the  system  of 
Great  Britain  is  particularly  injurious  or  unfriendly 
to  them. 

2.  The  commercial  system  of  Great  Britain  makes 
important  discriminations  in  favor  of  the  United 
States    as    compared   with    other   foreign   nations. 
This  is  exemplified  in  the  instance  of  tobacco,  lum 
ber,  pot-  and  pearl-ash,  tar  and  pitch,  pig  and  bar 
iron,  which,  when  carried  from  the  United  States 
to  Great  Britain,  are  either  exempt  from  duties, 
which  are  paid  on  the  same  articles  brought  from 
other  foreign  countries,  or  pay  so  much  less  duty  as 
to  give  them  a  clear  advantage  in  the  competition 
for  the  British  market.     Our  vessels  in  the  direct 
trade  with  Great  Britain  are  in  various  instances 
exempted  from  duties,  which  are  paid  by  the  ships 
of  other  nations,  and  in  general  are  on  the  same  foot 
ing  in  that  trade  with  the  vessels  of  the  British 
colonies.     Admission  is  also  given  to  a  variety  of 
the  commodities  of  the  United  States  in  the  British 


Commercial  Relations  207 

West  Indies,  which  is  not  given  to  similar  commodi 
ties  of  other  foreign  countries. 

There  is  therefore  ground  to  assert,  that  the  com 
mercial  system  of  Great  Britain  is  more  favorable 
and  friendly  to  the  United  States  than  to  other 
foreign  countries. 

3.  The  commercial  system  of  France  previous  to 
the  revolution,  made  fewer  and  less  important  dis 
criminations  in  favor  of  the  United  States,  as  com 
pared  with  other  foreign  nations,  than  that  of  Great 
Britain.  In  the  West  Indies  our  privileges  were  the 
same.  The  same  commodities  only,  and  upon  the 
same  terms,  might  be  carried  thither  and  brought 
from  thence  from  and  to  the  United  States,  which 
might  be  carried  thither  and  brought  from  thence 
from  and  to  other  foreign  nations.  The  discrimina 
tions  in  favor  of  the  United  States  in  direct  trade 
with  France,  are  not  known  to  have  extended  be 
yond  the  articles  of  fish  oils 


and  vessels  of  the  build  of  the  United  States  when 
owned  by  French  subjects,  were  admitted  to  natural 
ization,  and  so  far  promoted  the  building  of  ships 
as  an  article  of  trade  with  France.  This  last  dis 
crimination  is  now  abolished,  and  no  new  ones  have 
been  made  in  our  favor. 

There  is  therefore  ground  to  assert  that  the  com 
mercial  system  of  France  towards  the  United  States 
as  compared  with  other  foreign  nations,  has  been 
and  now  is  less  favorable  and  friendly  than  that  of 
Great  Britain. 


208  Alexander  Hamilton 

Particular  Observations 

I. — As  to  flour.  This  article,  previous  to  the 
revolution  in  France,  was  subject  to  but  a  very  light 
duty  on  its  importation  there.  At  present  it  is  free 
to  all  the  world.  But  unless  material  changes  take 
place  in  the  state  of  France,  the  United  States  are 
likely  to  derive  little  benefit  from  this  circumstance. 

The  ordinary  price  of  flour  in  France  is  about 
$5.66  cents  per  barrel  (of  Pennsylvania). 

In  Pennsylvania  it  may  be  stated  at J 
upon  an  average ;  the  freight  to  France  is  x  ; 

other  charges  amount  to  about *  ,  which 

would  make  the  costs  and  charges  of  a  barrel  of 
American  flour  in  France  $6.33  cents;  of  course  it 
cannot,  except  on  extraordinary  occasions,  be  sent 
there  without  loss. 

In  Great  Britain  it  has  been  stated  that  flour  was 
subject  to  a  prohibitory  duty  till  the  price  there  was 
about  48  shillings  the  quarter.  The  flour  of  the 
United  States  can  therefore  only  be  carried  occa 
sionally  to  Great  Britain  as  well  as  to  France,  but 
the  occasions  have  hitherto  been  more  frequent  in 
Great  Britain  than  in  France. 

Accordingly,  in  the  course  of  the  years  1786  and 
1788,  the  whole  quantity  of  flour  sent  from  Penn 
sylvania  to  France  amounted  to  2,396  barrels;  that 
sent  to  Great  Britain,  to  828  barrels. 

But  the  act  of  Parliament  of  the  *  puts 

this  article  upon  a  worse  footing  than  heretofore, 
and  experience  only  can  decide,  whether  flour  can 

1  These  blanks  occur  in  the  original,  which  is  rough  and  incomplete. 


Commercial  Relations  209 

be  henceforth  sent  with  most  advantage  to  Great 
Britain  or  to  France. 

The  quarter,  however,  which  in  relation  to  both 
nations,  it  most  interests  the  United  States  to  have 
access  to,  as  a  market  for  their  flour,  is  the  West 
India  Islands.  Here  the  comparison  is  decidedly  in 
favor  of  Great  Britain.  The  general  system  of  France 
is  to  prohibit  the  reception  of  our  flour  in  her  West 
India  markets — that  of  Great  Britain  to  permit  it. 

It  is  true  that  occasional  suspensions  of  the  pro 
hibition  take  place ;  but  these  suspensions  being  con 
fined  to  cases  of  necessity,  the  system  of  France, 
which  excludes  us  as  far  as  possible,  cannot  on  this 
account  be  viewed  as  less  unfavorable  to  the  United 
States,  than  if  no  such  suspensions  took  place. 

Flour  appears  to  be  the  principal  staple  of  the 
United  States.  This  principal  staple  is,  upon  the 
whole,  more  favored  by  the  regulations  of  Great 
Britain  than  of  France.  Accordingly,  in  the  year 
1790,  the  exportations  to  the  British  dominions, 
amounted  to  $1,534,276;  to  the  French  dominions 
to  $1,483,195.  The  comparison  is  the  stronger  in 
favor  of  Great  Britain,  from  the  circumstance  that 
this  year  was  one  of  extreme  scarcity  in  France.  In 
ordinary  years  the  difference  must  be  far  greater. 

II. — As  to  tobacco.  It  may  be  presumed  that 
this  is  an  article  of  such  a  nature  that  it  is  immaterial 
to  the  United  States  what  duty  is  laid  upon  it  in 
either  of  the  two  countries,  if  the  same  duties  affect 
all  other  imported  tobacco.  'T  is  a  case  in  which 
neither  of  the  countries  produces  itself  the  article, 
to  enter  into  competition  with  that  of  the  United 


VOL.    IV.— 14 


210  Alexander  Hamilton 

States.  The  duty,  therefore,  must  essentially  fall 
upon  the  buyers,  not  the  sellers. 

Previous  to  the  French  Revolution,  there  was  no 
import  duty  in  France  upon  tobacco,  but  it  was 
under  a  monopoly  of  the  Farmers  General ;  a  situa 
tion  far  more  disadvantageous  to  the  United  States 
than  any  tolerable  duty  could  be,  by  destroying  a 
free  competition  among  purchasers. 

The  decree  of  January,  1791,  has  laid  a  duty  upon 
this  article,  if  brought  from  the  United  States  to 
France  in  American  vessels,  of  25  livres  per  kental; 
if  brought  in  French  ships,  of  only  18  livres  and  15 
sous.  The  tobacco  of  the  United  States  has  been, 
and  is,  upon  no  better  footing  than  that  of  some 
other  foreign  nations. 

In  Great  Britain,  as  has  been  stated,  a  considera 
bly  higher  duty  is  paid  on  other  foreign  tobacco 
than  on  that  of  the  United  States,  and  it  may  be 
carried  to  Great  Britain,  in  vessels  of  the  United 
States,  upon  the  same  terms  as  in  British  bottoms, 
while  the  ships  of  other  nations,  bringing  tobacco, 
are  subjected  to  a  greater  duty  on  the  tobacco  which 
they  bring  than  the  ships  of  Great  Britain. 

Although,  therefore,  there  is  a  higher  duty  on 
tobacco  in  Great  Britain  than  in  France,  yet  as  in 
France  the  duty  is  the  same  on  other  foreign  tobacco 
as  on  ours;  as  in  Great  Britain  a  higher  duty  is 
charged  on  other  foreign  tobacco  than  upon  ours; 
as  the  comparative  rate,  not  the  quantum,  of  the 
duty  in  either  country  is  the  only  thing  which  con 
cerns  us,  it  is  evident  that  our  tobacco  is  much  more 
favored  by  Great  Britain  than  by  France.  Indeed 


Commercial  Relations  211 

the  difference  of  duty  operates  as  a  positive  bounty 
upon  the  tobacco  of  the  United  States. 

As  it  regards  our  navigation,  the  comparison  is 
still  more  striking.  Here,  too,  we  are  more  favored 
by  Great  Britain  than  other  countries,  while  the 
existing  regulation  of  France  is  in  the  degree  the 
most  exceptionable  to  be  found  in  the  code  of  any 
country.  It  amounts  to  a  prohibition  of  carrying 
our  own  tobacco  to  France  in  our  own  ships. 

Several  European  nations  have  aimed  at  a  mono 
poly  of  the  carrying  trade  of  their  colonies,  but 
the  spirit  has  not  extended  to  their  home  dominions. 
Slight  differences  have  been  made  between  foreign 
and  national  ships  in  favor  of  the  latter,  but  a 
difference  amounting  to  an  exclusion  of  the  former  is 
perhaps  without  example,  except  in  the  regulation  in 
question. 

The  principle  of  this  regulation  would  prostrate 
the  navigation  of  the  United  States  more  effectually 
than  any  which  is  to  be  found  in  the  system  of  any 
other  country. 

Hence,  in  respect  to  the  article  of  tobacco,  the 
staple  of  the  United  States  which  may  be  deemed 
second  in  importance,  the  regulations  of  Great 
Britain  are  far  more  favorable  than  those  of  France. 

Great  Britain  took  from  us  in  the  year  1790,  $2,- 
777,808,  while  France  took  only  $427,746. 

Hence  also  it  appears  that  Great  Britain  is  a  far 
better  customer  for  the  article  than  France. 

III. — As  to  fish  and  fish  oil.  The  regulations  of 
France  as  to  these  articles  are  incomparably  more 
favorable  in  their  operation  than  those  in  Great 


212  Alexander  Hamilton 

Britain,  though  there  is  no  material  difference  in 
principle. 

Great  Britain  lays  a  prohibitory  duty  on  oil, 
which  excludes  all  but  the  finest  kinds  occasionally, 
and  absolutely  prohibits  fish. 

France  lays  such  duties  on  the  fish  and  oil  of  other 
countries,  and  grants  such  premiums  and  encourage 
ments  in  relation  to  the  products  of  her  own  fisheries, 
as  amount  completely  to  a  prohibition,  so  far  as  her 
capacity  to  supply  her  own  dominions  extends. 

The  duty  on  foreign  fish  in  the  French  West 
Indies,  and  the  premium  on  French  fish,  as  stated 
in  the  table,  amount  virtually  to  a  bounty  on  French 
fish  of  nearly  one  hundred  per  cent,  of  the  value. 
In  France  the  duty  is  alone  about  seventy-five 
per  cent.,  and  it  is  understood  that  the  premiums 
and  bounties  in  favor  of  the  French  fisheries  are 
enormous. 

The  distinctions,  nevertheless,  which  have  been 
made  in  favor  of  the  whale  fisheries  of  the  United 
States  have  been  of  material  aid  to  them;  but  there 
is  reason  to  apprehend,  from  the  means  which 
have  been  successfully  used  to  detach  our  fishermen, 
and  the  vast  encouragements  which  are  given  by  the 
government,  that  the  whale  fishery  of  France  is 
establishing  itself  on  the  ruins  of  that  of  the  United 
States. 

The  cod  fishery  stands  on  a  different  footing.  Our 
natural  advantages  are  so  great  as  to  render  it  diffi 
cult  to  supplant  us ;  but  as  far  as  we  have  been  able 
to  maintain,  in  this  respect,  a  competition  with  the 
French  fisheries  in  the  French  markets,  it  is  to 


Commercial  Relations  213 

be  attributed  to  their  incapacity  to  supply  them 
selves,  which  has  counteracted  the  effect  of  a  system 
manifestly  prohibitory  in  its  principle. 

The  real  spirit  of  the  system  of  France  on  this  head, 
not  only  appears  from  what  has  been  done,  but  from 
the  manner  of  doing  it. 

In  August,  1784,  the  arret  giving  admission  to 
foreign  fish  in  the  West  India  markets  was  passed. 
In  September,  1785,  another  arret  was  passed, 
granting  a  premium  of  ten  livres  per  kental  on 
French  fish.  Seven  days  after,  so  great  was  the 
anxiety,  another  arret  was  passed,  raising  the  duty 
on  foreign  fish  from  three  to  five  livres.  An  arret  of 
the  2 Qth  of  December,  1787,  grants  a  right  of  storing 
for  six  months  in  France  all  the  productions  of  the 
United  States,  in  order  to  re-exportation,  paying 
only  a  duty  of  one  per  cent.  In  February  following, 
another  arret  passed,  excepting  from  this  right  all 
the  products  of  the  fisheries,  evidently  from  a  jealousy 
of  our  interference  with  the  French  fisheries. 

A  further  explanation  of  the  spirit  of  the  French 
system  on  this  point,  is  to  be  found  in  the  passage 
of  a  report  to  the  National  Assembly,  in  the  year 
1789,  from  the  Committees  of  Agriculture  and 
Commerce.  After  stating  a  diminution  of  the  pro 
duct  of  the  French  cod  fishery,  during  the  year  1789, 
the  report  proceeds  thus:  "This  diminution  ought 
to  be  attributed  to  the  collusion  of  the  English  and 
free  Americans  who  contrived  to  disappoint  the 
French  fisheries,  by  finding  means  to  supply  us  with 
their  fish,  while  they  eluded  the  payment  of  the 
duty  imposed  on  importation,  in  order  to  establish 


214  Alexander  Hamilton 

a  preference  in  favor  of  the  cod  of  the  French 
fisheries. ' ' 

But  however  similar  the  principle  of  the  French 
and  English  regulations  may  be,  in  regard  to  their 
fisheries,  the  result  to  the  United  States  is  vastly 
different. 

The  dominions  of  France  take  of  the  fisheries  of 
the  United  States  to  the  extent  of  $724,224;  those 
of  Great  Britain,  to  the  extent  only  of  $88,371. 

IV. — As  to  wood,  particularly  lumber.  The  regu 
lations  of  France  have  not  made,  and  do  not  make, 
any  distinction  as  to  the  articles  of  this  kind  in  favor 
of  the  United  States. 

Those  of  Great  Britain  make  material  distinctions 
in  favor  of  the  United  States  and  their  ships,  putting 
the  citizens  and  ships  of  the  United  States,  in  this 
respect,  upon  the  same  footing  as  those  of  their  own 
colonies,  as  far  as  regards  the  European  market. 

Great  Britain  is  also  a  much  better  customer  than 
France  for  articles  of  this  kind. 

The  amount  in  value  taken  from  us  by  the  do 
minions  of  the  former  in  1790  was  $622,635;  that 
of  the  latter,  $476,039. 

V. — As  to  rice.  This  article  has  stood  and  now 
stands  upon  a  better  footing  in  France  than  in  Great 
Britain,  being  free  in  the  former  country,  and  sub 
ject  to  a  high  duty  in  the  latter,  and  there  being  no 
discrimination  in  either  country  in  favor  of  the  rice 
of  the  United  States. 

It  is  to  be  observed,  however,  that  as  the  article  is 
produced  in  neither  country,  and  as  the  rice  of  the 
United  States  is  on  the  same  footing  in  the  British 


Commercial  Relations  215 

market  as  that  of  other  countries,  the  observation 
made  in  respect  to  the  duty  on  tobacco  may  in  some 
sort  be  applied  to  this  article. 

But  it  applies  with  far  less  force,  because  tobacco 
has  no  competitor,  while  rice,  as  far  as  it  is  a  sub 
stitute  for  bread  or  vegetables,  has  competitors  in 
all  the  articles  which  fall  under  either  description. 

This  article,  however,  stands  upon  a  somewhat 
better  footing  in  the  British  than  in  the  French  West 
Indies,  being  free  in  the  former,  and  subject  to  a 
duty  of  one  per  cent,  in  the  latter.  The  difference, 
however,  is  not  considerable. 

The  British  dominions  took  in  1790  of  this  article, 
in  value,  $953,939;  the  French,  $322,926. 

VI. — As  to  grain,  namely,  wheat,  rye,  Indian 
corn,  oats.  As  they  respect  the  European  domin 
ions  of  France  and  Great  Britain,  they  may  be  con 
sidered  nearly  in  the  same  light  with  flour. 

All  these  articles  are  free  in  the  British  West  In 
dies;  wheat  and  rye  are  prohibited  in  the  French; 
but  Indian  corn  and  oats  are  admitted  upon  a  duty 
of  one  per  cent.  The  result  upon  the  whole  is,  that 
the  English  have  been  better  customers  than  the 
French. 

The  British  dominions  took  of  these  articles  in  the 
year  1790,  in  value,  $685,071;  the  French,  $280,792. 

The  act  of  Parliament  of 

is  likely  to  make  a  difference  hereafter  in  the  British 
European  market.     According  to  that  act 
But  experience  alone  can  determine  with  certainty 
the  effect. 

VII. — As  to  pot-  and  pearl-ash.     These  articles 


216  Alexander  Hamilton 

have  stood  and  still  stand  upon  a  better  footing  by 
the  British  regulations  than  by  the  French. 

By  the  regulations  of  France,  the  pot-  and  pearl- 
ash  of  other  countries  are  upon  the  same  footing 
with  those  of  the  United  States. 

By  the  regulations  of  Great  Britain,  those  of  the 
United  States  are  free,  while  those  of  other  countries 
are  subject  to  a  duty  of  about  five  per  cent. 

Great  Britain,  in  1790,  took  from  the  United  States 
of  these  articles,  in  value,  $747,078;  France,  $20,720. 

VIII. — As  to  indigo.  This  article  (eighth  in  value 
of  our  exports)  stands  upon  decidedly  a  better  foot 
ing  in  the  system  of  Great  Britain  than  in  that  of 
the  United  States.  France  is  herself  our  com 
petitor  in  the  supply  of  her  own  market,  and  she 
aims  at  securing  to  herself  the  monopoly  of  it,  by 
adding  to  the  advantage  of  a  superior  quality  of 
her  own  indigo,  as  stated  by  the  Secretary  of  State, 
the  discouragement  of  ours  of  double  the  duty  paid 
on  her  own.  Great  Britain  admits  the  article  into 
her  home  market  free  of  duty.  Both  countries  ex 
clude  it  from  their  West  India  markets.  Neither 
make  any  distinction  for  or  against  us. 

In  1790  Great  Britain  took  of  this  article,  in 
value,  $479,530;  France,  $12,649. 

IX. — As  to  live  animals.  The  regulations  of  both 
countries  may  be  considered  as  pretty  equal  in  re 
spect  to  these  articles ;  the  duty  of  one  per  cent,  paid 
in  the  French  West  Indies,  while  none  is  paid  in  the 
English,  being  of  no  consequence  in  relation  to  ar 
ticles  in  which  the  French  themselves  can  maintain 
no  competition. 


Commercial  Relations  217 

The  dominions  of  France  took  in  1790  of  these 
articles,  in  value,  $352,795;  those  of  Great  Britain, 
$62,415. 

X. — As  to  naval  stores,  namely,  pitch,  tar,  and 
turpentine,  the  regulations  of  Great  Britain  are  more 
favorable  than  those  of  France ;  for  though  the  duties 
are  higher  in  the  former  than  in  the  latter,  yet 
France  places  these  articles  from  all  countries  on 
the  same  footing,  while  England  lays  higher  duties 
on  them  when  brought  from  other  countries,  than 
when  brought  from  the  United  States.  The  differ 
ence  as  remarked  in  other  cases,  is  a  bounty  upon 
the  productions  of  the  United  States.  The  rate  of 
duty  here  is  of  no  consequence  for  the  reason  assigned 
in  respect  to  tobacco. 

Great  Britain,  in  1790,  took  from  us  of  these 
articles,  $196,832;  France,  $7,366. 

XI. — As  to  salted  provisions.  The  regulations  of 
France  as  to  these  articles  are  evidently  more  favor 
able  than  those  of  Great  Britain;  being  tolerated 
by  the  former,  and  prohibited  by  the  latter. 

The  duties,  however,  are  high,  and  even  in  respect 
to  beef,  are  a  serious  incumbrance  upon  the  sale 
with  a  living  profit.  In  respect  to  pork,  they 
amount  essentially  to  a  prohibition  in  France,  which 
has  great  means  of  internal  supply,  and  in  the  French 
West  Indies  the  article  is  prohibited. 

The  dominions  of  France  took  of  these  articles  in 
1790,  in  value,  $318,454;  those  of  Great  Britain, 
only  $7,557- 

XII. — As  to  flaxseed.  It  does  not  appear  that 
any  difference  exists  in  the  regulations  of  the  two 


2i8  Alexander  Hamilton 

countries  in  respect  to  this  article,  but  Great  Britain 
is  by  far  the  better  customer.  Her  dominions  took, 
in  value,  in  1790,  $219,924;  the  French,  $3,290. 

XIII. — As  to  iron.  The  regulations  of  Great 
Britain  are  more  favorable  to  the  United  States,  in 
respect  to  this  article,  than  those  of  France;  for 
France  admits  the  iron  of  other  countries  upon  the 
same  footing  with  that  of  the  United  States,  and 
lays  a  small  duty  upon  bar  iron. 

Great  Britain  admits  the  iron  of  the  United  States 
jree  from  duty,  and  lays  a  considerable  duty  on  the 
article  brought  from  other  countries. 

Great  Britain  took  from  us  of  this  article  in 
to  the  amount  of  $196,832;   France,  to  the  amount 
of  $2,143. 

XIV.— As  to  ships  built  in  the  United  States.  The 
regulations  of  France  did  favor  more  the  building  of 
ships  for  sale  than  those  of  Great  Britain;  for  ships 
built  in  the  United  States  and  purchased  by  the 
French,  were  capable  of  being  naturalized  in  France. 
This  distinction  in  our  favor  is  now  done  away.  In 
England  ships  built  in  the  United  States  have  been 
and  are  entitled  to  be  recorded,  and  being  recorded 
and  owned  by  British  subjects,  enjoy  the  same  privi 
lege  as  British-built  ships  in  the  trade  between  the 
United  States  and  Great  Britain. 

A  general  distinction  in  favor  of  the  United  States 
runs  through  the  regulations  of  Great  Britain  in  this 
particular,  that  most  articles  of  foreign  countries 
brought  in  foreign  ships,  pay  a  higher  duty  than  if 
brought  in  British  ships;  but  not  so  of  the  same 
articles  if  brought  in  ships  of  the  United  States. 


Commercial  Relations  219 

In  the  West  India  trade  of  France,  the  United 
States  stand  upon  the  same  footing  with  other 
foreign  nations;  in  one  instance,  perhaps  upon  a 
worse,  as  it  regards  the  operation  of  the  thing — 
namely,  as  to  salted  beef,  which,  though  foreign,  if 
brought  from  France  in  French  ships,  is  exempted 
from  the  duty  which  is  paid  on  the  same  article 
carried  from  the  United  States  directly  to  the 
islands.  The  proximity  of  Ireland  to  France  seems 
to  render  this  an  advantage  to  her  over  the  United 
States. 

In  the  West  India  trade  of  Great  Britain,  the 
United  States  have  the  peculiar  advantage  of  their 
commodities  being  introduced  upon  the  same  footing 
as  if  brought  from  the  British  dominions  in  America, 
except  as  to  the  article  of  salt  carried  in  ships  of  the 
United  States.  Here  is  a  distinction  in  favor  of  the 
United  States.1 

NOTE.  —  Mr.  Jefferson's  table  refers  to  an  arr£t  of  pth  of  May,  1789, 
as  making  certain  alterations  in  the  trade  of  the  United  States  with 
the  French  West  Indies. 

But  this  arrdt  (which  is  merely  an  ordinance  of  the  Governor- 
General  of  St.  Domingo)  is  confined  wholly  to  the  south  part  of  the 
island  of  St.  Domingo,  on  very  special  reasons  relative  to  the  improve 
ment  of  that  particular  spot,  and  with  very  severe  restrictions  to  pre 
vent  an  extension.  It  is  no  permanent  part  of  the  system  of  France 
— no  part  of  the  general  system  of  the  West  Indies,  and  is  not  known 
to  have  received  the  sanction  of  the  king.  It  was,  besides,  passed  at 
a  moment  of  revolution. 


1  This  draft  of  a  speech  is  the  only  exposition  we  have  of  Hamilton's 
views  upon  our  commercial  relations  and  foreign  trade,  and  is,  of 
course,  closely  allied  with  the  question  of  our  policy  in  regard  to  manu 
factures.  It  is  little  more  than  a  brief,  but  it  is  valuable  to  us  from 
what  it  indicates  and  suggests  rather  than  for  what  it  actually  is.  It 
is  in  reality  an  answer  to  Jefferson's  report  on  commerce,  embodying 
the  policy  of  the  Secretary  of  State.  In  January,  1794,  the  opposition 
opened  their  campaign  on  the  question  of  preference  to  France  as 


22O  Alexander  Hamilton 

SHIPS. — This  article  is  to  be  Viewed  in  a  twofold  light, 
as  a  salable  manufacture  and  as  a  vehicle  to  convey  the 
productions  of  the  country.  The  laws  of  France  at  the 
period  to  which  this  table  refers  permitted  vessels  built 
in  the  United  States,  when  purchased  and  owned  by 
French  citizens,  to  be  naturalized,  and  thereby  enjoy  the 
privileges  of  French  vessels.  The  laws  of  Great  Britain 
did  not  permit  the  same.  Our  vessels,  owned  by  our 
own  citizens,  in  the  trade  between  the  United  States  and 
France,  enjoyed  the  same  privileges  with  the  most 
favored  nations,  and  not  greater.  In  the  trade  between 
the  United  States  and  Great  Britain,  they  enjoyed  equal 
privileges  with  British  bottoms,  greater  than  the  vessels 
of  other  foreign  countries  in  the  trade  between  those 
countries  and  Great  Britain  (certain  productions  of  those 
countries  being  subject  to  higher  duties  when  carried  in 
their  own  than  when  carried  in  British  bottoms,  which 
was  and  is  not  the  case  in  respect  to  vessels  of  the  United 
States  carrying  their  own  productions).  In  the  trade  be 
tween  the  United  States  and  the  French  West  Indies, 
our  vessels  of  sixty  tons  and  under  might  carry  thither 
and  bring  from  thence  the  articles  permitted  to  be  im- 

against  Great  Britain,  and  Madison,  on  January  3d,  introduced  a 
series  of  resolutions  based  on  Jefferson's  report  and  proposing  duties 
discriminating  against  England.  It  was  an  attack  on  the  administra 
tion  from  what  was  deemed  advantageous  ground.  January  i3th, 
Mr.  Smith,  of  South  Carolina,  replied  with  the  speech  of  which  this 
is  an  outline  or  draft,  putting  the  question  on  business  and  commercial 
principles,  and  lifting  it  above  national  prejudices  and  resentments. 
The  effect  of  the  argument  was  very  great,  and  it  was  published  and 
widely  circulated  in  pamphlet  form.  The  speech  is  reported  in  the 
Annals  of  Congress,  1793-1795,  p.  174,  and  should  be  compared  with 
the  draft.  William  Smith  was  an  able  man,  well  known  in  his  day. 
He  was  a  stanch  Federalist,  and  a  warm  friend  and  admirer  of  Hamil 
ton.  He  was  a  representative  in  Congress  for  the  years  1789-1799, 
and  then  resigned  to  accept  the  mission  to  Portugal,  to  which  he  was 
appointed  by  John  Adams. 


Commercial  Relations 


221 


ported  and  exported — but  other  foreign  vessels  enjoyed 
the  same  privilege  with  ours.  Between  the  United  States 
and  the  British  West  Indies,  our  vessels  could  carry  no 
thing  except  salt  from  Turk's  Island. 

The  arr£t  of  the  29th  of  December,  1787,  gave  the 
citizens  of  the  United  States  like  privileges  with  French 
subjects  in  the  Asiatic  dominions  of  France.  It  is  also 
understood  that  our  citizens  enjoyed  useless  privileges 
in  the  Asiatic  dominions  of  Great  Britain. 

No  notice  is  taken  of  the  trade  of  exports  from  France 
and  Great  Britain  to  the  United  States,  because  the  policy 
of  each  country  was  in  that  respect  nearly  similar  and 
unexceptionable.  The  exceptions  made  from  time  to 
time  by  the  French  Colonial  Government  are  not  taken 
notice  of — because  they  were  exceptions  from  the  general 
system  of  the  mother  country,  founded  on  the  necessity 
of  particular  emergencies.  The  true  complexion  of  a 
system  is  to  be  determined  by  the  general  permanent 
rules  which  govern  it — not  by  special  exceptions  from 
fortuitous  circumstances  and  cases  of  necessity. 

The  special  authorities  upon  which  the  following  table 
has  been  formed  are,  with  regard  to  France,  the  arr6t  of 
the  29th  of  December,  1787;  with  regard  to  the  French 
West  Indies,  the  letters  patent  of  October,  1727,  and  the 
arrets  of  the  3oth  of  August,  1784,  and  the  i8th  and  2 5th 
of  September,  1785;  with  regard  to  Great  Britain,  the 
proclamation  of  the  26th  of  December,  1783,  yearly  con 
tinued,  explained  by  sundry  statutes ;  with  regard  to  the 
British  West  Indies,  the  Act  of  Parliament  of  the  a8th  of 
George  III.,  chap.  vi. 


Comparative  Footing  of  the  Commerce  of  the  United  States  with  the  Domin- 


EXPORTS 

OF  THB 

UNITED  STATES 

Arranged    accord 
ing  to  their  re 
spective    impor 
tance. 

FRANCE. 

GREAT  BRITAIN. 

FOOTING. 

DISCRIMINATIONS. 

FOOTING. 

DISCRIMINATIONS. 

Favor  of 
U.S. 

Against 
U.S. 

Favor  of 
U.S. 

Against 
U.  S. 

*°l 

8°  . 

H 

•ej| 

sl§ 

A  «-•  C 
tied  bo 

!U 

CQ 

1,2 
oj 

"S°S 
2°-B 

££c 

*ls 

>X5 
« 

By  lower  duties  on  like 
articles  of  other  for 
eign  nations. 

By  admission  of  articles 
of  other  for.  count, 
prohib.  from  U.  S. 

§J 

8°  . 

I*  a 

•M 
is* 

-SJ3S 
^y'g 
jal 

p^1—  »*•*• 

n 

By  prohibited  of  like 
articles  of  other  for 
eign  nations. 

§l 

to  O 

fss 

•§jl 

.|S 

llg 
5ll 

^—^ 
pq 

By  admission  of  articles 
of  other  foreign  coun. 
prohib.  from  U.  S. 

Bread  Stuffs,  say 
Flour    

Duty  15.  Sd.p.ct., 
ad  valorem   . 
Do. 

.  . 

Prohib.  duties(fe) 
Do.     ... 
Do.     ... 
Do 

Wheat          .    .    . 

•  • 

Rye    
Indian  Corn     .    . 
Oats          .... 

Do.     ... 
Do.     ... 

Do 

Do.     ... 

Duty  15.  sd.  p.lb. 
(*)  

Duty  35.  4d.  p.ct. 
Free 

35.  6d 

p.  Ib. 
85.  lod. 

high& 
fr.  pro. 
duties. 
(d) 

25.   3d. 

p.  ct, 

Tobacco    .... 

Rice  
Wood    

tfo  duty,  but  un 
der    monopoly 
to  the  Farmers 
General      .    . 

)uty  is.  8d.  per 
ct.,  ad  val.    . 

Duty  15.  8d.  p.  ct. 

)uty  8  livres  per 
kental  (a) 

•    • 

•    • 

Fisheries,  viz.: 
Salted  Fish  .    .    . 

Fish  Oil    .... 

Pot-  and  Pearl-Ash 

Salted  Meats,  viz.: 
Beef  

Prohibited     .    . 

Duty  of  i85.3<i.p 
tun  of  252  gal. 
Free 

•    • 

•   • 

•    • 

3uty7liv.  10  sous 
per  barrel  of  500 

Pro- 
hib'd 

is.Sd.p.  ct.ad  val. 

Duty  s  liv  p  ken 

Prohibited     .    . 

Do.     ... 
Free   

Pork 

)uty  5  liv.p.ken. 
in   some   ports, 
prohib.in  others 
)uty  5  liv.p.ken. 

. 

Indigo  

Live  Animals  .    . 
Flax-Seed     .    .    . 

Naval  Stores,  viz.: 
Tar  and  Pitch     . 

Turpentine  .    .    . 

Duty  15.  8d.  per 
ct.,  ad  val.     . 

Do 

Duty  2\d.  p.  ct., 
ad  val.    .    .    . 

Duty  1  15.  per  last 

Duty  25.  sd.  p.  ct. 
int  

Duty  i5.  6d.p.  ct. 
int  

i2s.  4d. 

p.  ct. 

125.   Q<f. 

p.  ct. 

•    • 

•  • 

Do.     ... 

Do.     ... 

•    • 

Iron  

25.   4d. 

p.  ct. 

.. 

Bar  Iron  .... 
Pig  Iron    .... 

Do.     ... 

Free 

565.  2d. 

675.    2. 

?6S36 

P-  3 

Do.     ... 

Free    

In  all  cases  where  nothing  is  inserted  in  a  column  under  the 
1  This  supplementary  paper  helps  to  fill  up  the  outline  of  the  speech  of  Wm.  Smith 
the  figures  cannot  be  vouched  for,  as  they  were  supplied  by  the  editor  from  that  speech 


222 


ions  of  France  and  Great  Britain  prior  to  the  pending  Revolution  of  France. ] 


FRENCH  WEST  INDIES. 

BRITISH  WEST  INDIES. 

REMARKS. 

DISCRIMINATIONS. 

FOOTING. 

DISCRIMINATIONS. 

Favor  of 

u.  s. 

Against 
U.  S. 

Favor  of 
U.   S. 

Against 
U.  S. 

FOOTING. 

§1 

III 

ill 

bocu  &d 
Efjj 

i 

11! 

lower  duties  on  like 
articles  of  other  for. 
coun.  pro.  from  U.  S. 

Cf  admission  of  articles 
of  other  foreign  coun. 
prohib.  from  U.  S. 

fell 
|1| 

pq 

M 

til 

ffl 

By  lower  duties  on 
like  articles  of  other 
foreign  nations. 

By  admission  of  articles 
of  other  foreign  coun. 
prohib.  from  U.  S. 

Q 

m 

n 

Prohibited 

Free 

Pro'd 
Do. 
Do. 
Do. 
Do. 

Do. 
Do. 

Do. 

•    • 

(a)  It  is  known  (though 
data    for    stating    them 
precisely    are    wanting)  , 
that  high  premiums  on 
French    fish    cooperated 
with  the  high  duty  on 
ours  to  exclude   us,   as 
far  as  possible,  from  the 
market  of  France. 
(6)  Great  Britain  has 
two  scales  of  duties,  one 
high,  the  other  low;   the 
former  prohibitory,   the 
latter  not  so;   but  these 
last    apply    only    when 
the  price  of  the  British 
article,    by    scarcity   or 
extraordinary  demands, 
is  particularly  high;  the 
rate    was    485.    str.    the 
quarter,  but  a  late  act 
has  increased  it.      The 
same  act  gives  a  right 
of    deposit    or    storing, 
without  paying  the  hign 
duties,   with   permission 
to  export  free  from  du 
ties  and  with  the  option 
of  waiting  for  the  market 
price    to   arrive   at    the 
point  at  which  the   low 
duties  take  place.      The 
same  system  essentially 
extends  to  other  kinds  of 
grain. 

(c)      The   rates  men 
tioned  in  this   and   the 
adjoining     column     are 
sterling  money. 
(d)     These  duties  on 
several    kinds    of    wood 
are    as    follows:        Oak 
boards  from  335.  lod.  to 
1055.  Sd.  the  120.     Ditto 
planks,  195.  the  50  cubic 
feet.      Ditto  timber,  95. 
nd.   the   50  cubic  feet. 
Deals  from  535.  to  2  3  8s. 
the   120.        Staves  from 
45.  to    175.   6d.  the  120. 
Timber      generally      6s. 
8d.  the  50  cubic  feet. 

i  per  ct.,  ad  val. 
Do 

Do.  . 

Do.  . 

Do. 

Do.  ... 
Do.  ... 

Do.  ... 
Do. 

Do.     ... 

Prohibited     .    . 
Dutyip.ct.adval 

Dutyip.ct.adval 

Duty   5   liv.    per 
kental,    with    a 
bounty  of  xoliv 
on  French  fish 

Prohibited     .    . 

. 

.  . 

.     . 

. 

Do 

Prohibited 

Do 

Prohibited     .    . 

i  p.ct.ad  val.  and 
5  liv.  p  kental 

Prohibited     .    . 
Do 

•  • 

Do.  .    . 

Do 

.. 

.. 

.. 

Do 

Do 

i  per  ct.  ad  val  . 

Free     . 

Prohibited 

Prohibited 

Dutyip.ct.adval 
Do.     ... 

Free     .    .    . 
Do.  .    .    . 

Pro'd 

Do. 
Do. 

•    • 

•    • 

Do 

Do 

Prohibited     .    . 
Do.     ... 

•    • 

:: 

Prohibited  . 
Do 

•    • 

word  "  Discriminations  "  it  is  to  be  understood  that  there  are  none. 

on  the  Madison  resolutions.     Like  the  main  draft  it  is  incomplete — and  the  accuracy  of 
to  fill  up  the  blanks.     They  are  believed  to  be  correct. 

223 


224 


Alexander  Hamilton 


Comparative  Footing  of  the  Commerce  of  the  United  States  with  the  Dominions 
of  France  and  Great  Britain  prior  to  the  pending  Revolution  of  France. 


IMPORTS 

PROM     THE     FRENCH 
AND  ENGLISH  WEST 
INDIES     INTO      THE 
UNITED  STATES. 

FRENCH   WEST   INDIES. 

BRITISH  WEST  INDIES. 

FOOTING. 

DISCRIMINATIONS. 

FOOTING. 

DISCRIMINATIONS. 

Favor  of 
U.S. 

Against 
U.S. 

Favor  of 
U.  S. 

Against 
U.S. 

s|1 

fc£c 

|]| 

Q 

IBy  prohibited  of  like 
articles  of  other  for 
eign  nations. 

IBy  lower  duties  on  like 
articles  of  other  for. 
coun.  pro.  from  U-  S. 

By  admission  of  articles 
of  other  foreign  coun. 
prohib.  from  U.  S. 

By  higher  duties  on 
like  articles  of  other 
foreign  nations. 

S<3o 

is! 

8.8  c 

P* 

By  lower  duties  on  like 
articles  of  other  for 
eign  nations. 

By  admission  of  articles 
of  other  foreign  coun. 
prohib.  from  U.  S. 

Sugar   

Prohibited 

Pro.  to  other 
for.  co.  ex. 
spec.,  which 
is  ob.  in  En. 

Rum  and  Cassia     . 
Molasses 

Duty  i  p.ct.ad  val 
Do 

Free  from  Grena 
da  and  Jamaica 

43dp.c.dutyfrom 
other  islands  . 

Prohi 
sent  tc 
for.  c< 

a.tobe 
)  other 
>. 

Coffee  

Prohibited    . 

E 
D 
E 

r 

0.  . 

.    . 

Cocoa  

Do. 

Ginger      

Do. 

o 

Pimento  

Do. 

Salt  

Do.       .    . 

May  be   brought 
from  Turk's  Is 
land  in  vessels 
of   the    U.    S., 
paying  duty  of 
2s.6d.  str.p.ton 
Prohibited 

Other  productions  . 

Do.       ... 

FOREIGN  RELATIONS 


VOL.IV.-XS. 


FOREIGN  RELATIONS 


SPEECH  ON  THE  TREATY  OF  PARIS  * 

Wednesday,  March  19,  1783. 

MR.  HAMILTON  urged  the  propriety  of  proceed 
ing  with  coolness  and  circumspection.  He 
thought  it  proper,  in  order  to  form  a  right  judgment 
of  the  conduct  of  our  ministers,  that  the  views  of  the 
French  and  British  courts  should  be  examined.  He 
admitted  it  as  not  improbable,  that  it  had  been  the 
policy  of  France  to  procrastinate  the  definite  ac 
knowledgment  of  our  independence  on  the  part  of 
Great  Britain,  in  order  to  keep  us  more  knit  to  her 
self,  and  until  her  own  interests  could  be  negotiated. 
The  arguments,  however,  urged  by  our  ministers  on 
this  subject,  although  strong,  were  not  conclusive, 
as  it  was  not  certain  that  this  policy,  and  not  a  de 
sire  of  excluding  obstacles  to  peace,  had  produced 
the  opposition  of  the  French  court  to  our  demands. 
Caution  and  vigilance,  he  thought,  were  justified 
by  the  appearance,  and  that  alone.  But  compare 
this  policy  with  that  of  Great  Britain;  survey  the 
past  cruelty  and  present  duplicity  of  her  councils; 
behold  her  watching  every  occasion  and  trying  every 

1  This  speech  was  delivered  in  Congress  during  the  debate  on  the 
treaty  of  peace  which  concluded  the  war  for  independence. — See 
Madison  Papers,  i.,  394. 

227 


228  Alexander  Hamilton 

project  for  dissolving  the  honorable  ties  which  bind 
the  United  States  to  their  ally,  and  then  say  on 
which  side  our  resentments  and  jealousies  ought  to 
lie. 

With  respect  to  the  instructions  submitting  our 
ministers  to  the  advice  of  France,  he  had  disap 
proved  it  uniformly  since  it  had  come  to  his  know 
ledge,  but  he  had  always  judged  it  improper  to 
repeal  it.  He  disapproved  highly  of  the  conduct  of 
our  ministers  in  not  showing  the  preliminary  articles 
to  our  ally  before  they  signed  them,  and  still  more  so 
of  their  agreeing  to  the  separate  article.  This  con 
duct  gave  an  advantage  to  the  enemy,  which  they 
would  not  fail  to  improve  for  the  purpose  of  in 
spiring  France  with  indignation  and  distrust  of  the 
United  States.  He  did  not  apprehend  (with  Mr. 
Mercer)  any  danger  of  a  coalition  between  France 
and  Great  Britain  against  America,  but  foresaw  the 
destruction  of  mutual  confidence  between  France 
and  the  United  States  which  would  be  likely  to 
ensue,  and  the  danger  which  would  result  from  it 
in  case  the  war  should  be  continued.  He  observed 
that  Spain  was  an  unwise  nation,  her  policy  narrow 
and  jealous,  her  king  old,  her  court  divided,  and  the 
heir  apparent  notoriously  attached  to  Great  Britain. 
From  these  circumstances  he  inferred  an  apprehen 
sion  that  when  Spain  should  come  to  know  the  part 
taken  by  America  with  respect  to  her,  a  separate 
treaty  of  peace  might  be  resorted  to.  He  thought  a 
middle  course  best  with  respect  to  our  ministers; 
that  they  ought  to  be  commended  in  general,  but 
that  the  communication  of  the  separate  article  ought 


Treaty  of  Paris  229 

to  take  place.  He  observed  that  our  ministers  were 
divided  as  to  the  policy  of  the  court  of  France,  but 
that  they  were  all  agreed  in  the  necessity  of  being  on 
the  watch  against  Great  Britain.  He  apprehended 
that  if  the  ministers  were  to  be  recalled  or  repre 
hended  that  they  would  be  disgusted,  and  head  and 
foment  parties  in  this  country.  He  observed,  par 
ticularly  with  respect  to  Mr.  Jay,  that,  although  he 
was  a  man  of  profound  sagacity  and  pure  integrity, 
yet  he  was  of  a  suspicious  temper,  and  that  this  trait 
might  explain  the  extraordinary  jealousies  which  he 
professed.  He  finally  proposed  that  the  ministers 
should  be  commended,  and  the  separate  article  com 
municated.  This  motion  was  seconded  by  Mr.  Os- 
good,  as  compared,  however,  with  the  proposition 
of  the  Secretary  for  Foreign  Affairs,  and  so  far  only 
as  to  be  referred  to  a  committee. 


Monday,  March  24th.1 

Mr.  Hamilton  said  that  whilst  he  despised  the  man 
who  would  enslave  himself  to  the  policy  even  of  our 
friends,  he  could  not  but  lament  the  overweening 
readiness  which  appeared  in  many  to  suspect  every 
thing  on  that  side,  and  to  throw  themselves  into  the 
bosom  of  our  enemies.  He  urged  the  necessity  of 
vindicating  our  public  honor  by  renouncing  that 
concealment  to  which  it  was  the  wish  of  so  many  to 
make  us  parties.2 

1  See  Madison  Papers,  i.,  411. 

2  These  two  speeches  show  that  Hamilton's  natural  inclination  was 
toward  France,  a  significant  commentary  on  Jefferson's  pet  accusation 
that  Hamilton  was  "British"  in  feeling. 


230  Alexander  Hamilton 

LETTERS  FROM  PHOCION ' 

To  the  Considerate  Citizens  of  New   York,  on  the 
Politics  of  the  Times,  in  Consequence  of  the  Peace 

1784 

LETTER   I 

While  not  only  every  personal  artifice  is  em 
ployed  by  a  few  heated  and  inconsiderate  spirits,  to 
practise  upon  the  passions  of  the  people,  but  the 
public  papers  are  made  the  channel  of  the  most  in 
flammatory  and  pernicious  doctrines,  tending  to  the 
subversion  of  all  private  security  and  genuine  lib 
erty,  it  would  be  culpable  in  those  who  understand 
and  value  the  true  interests  of  the  community  to 
be  silent  spectators.  It  is,  however,  a  common  ob 
servation,  that  men,  bent  upon  mischief,  are  more 
active  in  the  pursuit  of  their  object  than  those  who 
aim  at  doing  good.  Hence  it  is,  in  the  present 
moment,  we  see  the  most  industrious  efforts  made 
to  violate  the  Constitution  of  this  State,  to  trample 
upon  the  rights  of  the  subject,  and  to  chicane  or  in- 

1  These  letters  are  inserted  here  because  they  are  largely  devoted  to 
a  discussion  of  the  treaty  with  England,  and  our  relations  with  that 
country.  Feeling  in  New  York  against  those  who  had  been  Tories 
ran  very  high  and  Clinton  threw  all  his  weight  .into  the  scale  against 
them.  Bills  were  introduced  to  disfranchise  them  forever,  and  to 
confiscate  their  property;  while  there  was  still  another  to  confiscate 
the  property  of  the  Society  for  the  Propagation  of  the  Gospel.  Against 
these  measures,  which  were  in  violation  of  the  treaty  and  of  a  good  and 
generous  policy,  Hamilton  determined  to  protest,  and  in  order  to  check 
the  current  of  popular  feeling,  and  bring  about,  if  possible,  more 
moderate,  wiser,  and  more  magnanimous  counsels,  he  wrote  the  papers 
signed  "Phocion,"  an  act  requiring  much  courage  in  the  existing  con 
dition  of  popular  feeling.  These  two  essays  were  originally  published 
in  pamphlet  form. 


Letters  from  Phocion  231 

fringe  the  most  solemn  obligations  of  treaty ;  while  dis 
passionate  and  upright  men  almost  totally  neglect  the 
means  of  counteracting  these  dangerous  attempts. 
A  sense  of  duty  alone  calls  forth  the  observations, 
which  will  be  submitted  to  the  good  sense  of  the 
people,  in  this  paper,  from  one  who  has  more  in 
clination  than  leisure  to  serve  them;  and  who  has 
had  too  deep  a  share  in  the  common  exertions  in 
this  Revolution,  to  be  willing  to  see  its  fruits  blasted 
by  the  violence  of  rash  or  unprincipled  men,  without, 
at  least,  protesting  against  their  designs. 

The  persons  alluded  to  pretend  to  appeal  to  the 
spirit  of  Whigism;  while  they  endeavor  to  put  in 
motion  all  the  furious  and  dark  passions  of  the 
human  mind.  The  spirit  of  Whigism  is  generous, 
humane,  beneficent,  and  just.  These  men  inculcate 
revenge,  cruelty,  persecution,  and  perfidy.  The 
spirit  of  Whigism  cherishes  legal  liberty,  holds  the 
rights  of  every  individual  sacred,  condemns  or  pun 
ishes  no  man  without  regular  trial  and  conviction 
of  some  crime  declared  by  antecedent  laws;  re 
probates  equally  the  punishment  of  the  citizen  by 
arbitrary  acts  of  legislation,  as  by  the  lawless  com 
binations  of  unauthorized  individuals;  while  these 
men  are  advocates  for  expelling  a  large  number  of 
their  fellow-citizens  unheard,  untried;  or,  if  they 
cannot  effect  this,  are  for  disfranchising  them,  in  the 
face  of  the  Constitution,  without  the  judgment  of 
their  peers,  and  contrary  to  the  law  of  the  land. 

The  thirteenth  article  of  the  Constitution  declares, 
"that  no  member  of  the  State  shall  be  disfran 
chised,  or  defrauded  of  any  of  the  rights  or  privileges 


232  Alexander  Hamilton 

sacred  to  the  subjects  of  this  State  by  the  Constitu 
tion,  unless  by  the  law  of  the  land  or  the  judgment  of 
his  peers."  If  we  inquire  what  is  meant  by  the  law 
of  the  land,  the  best  commentators  will  tell  us,  that 
it  means  due  process  of  law;  that  is  by  indictment  or 
presentment  of  good  and  lawful  men*  and  trial  and 
conviction  in  consequence. 

It  is  true,  that  in  England,  on  extraordinary  occa 
sions,  attainders  for  high  treason,  by  act  of  Parlia 
ment,  have  been  practised;  but  many  of  the  ablest 
advocates  for  civil  liberty  have  condemned  this 
practice ;  and  it  has  commonly  been  exercised  with 
great  caution  upon  individuals  only  by  name,  never 
against  general  descriptions  of  men.  The  sense  of 
our  Constitution  on  this  practice,  we  may  gather 
from  the  forty-first  article,  where  all  attainders, 
other  than  for  crimes  committed  during  the  late  war, 
are  forbidden. 

If  there  had  been  no  treaty  in  the  way,  the  Legis 
lature  might,  by  name,  have  attainted  particular 
persons  of  high  treason  for  crimes  committed  during 
the  war;  but,  independent  of  the  treaty,  it  could 
not,  and  cannot,  without  tyranny,  disfranchise  or 
punish  whole  classes  of  citizens  by  general  descrip 
tions,  without  trial  and  conviction  of  offences  known 
by  laws  previously  established,  declaring  the  offence 
and  prescribing  the  penalty. 

This  is  a  dictate  of  natural  justice,  and  a  funda 
mental  principle  of  law  and  liberty. 

Nothing  is  more  common  than  for  a  free  people, 
in  times  of  heat  and  violence,  to  gratify  momentary 

1  Coke  upon  Magna  Charta,  chap.  29,  page  50. 


Letters  from  Phocion  233 

passions,  by  letting  into  the  government,  principles 
and  precedents  which  afterwards  prove  fatal  to 
themselves.  Of  this  kind  is  the  doctrine  of  dis 
qualification,  disfranchisement,  and  banishment,  by 
acts  of  Legislature.  The  dangerous  consequences  of 
this  power  are  manifest.  If  the  Legislature  can 
disfranchise  any  number  of  citizens  at  pleasure,  by 
general  descriptions,  it  may  soon  confine  all  the 
votes  to  a  small  number  of  partisans,  and  establish 
an  aristocracy  or  an  oligarchy.  If  it  may  banish  at 
discretion  all  those  whom  particular  circumstances 
render  obnoxious,  without  hearing  or  trial,  no  man 
can  be  safe,  nor  know  when  he  may  be  the  innocent 
victim  of  a  prevailing  faction.  The  name  of  liberty 
applied  to  such  a  government  would  be  a  mockery 
of  common  sense. 

The  English  Whigs,  after  the  Revolution,  from 
an  overweening  dread  of  popery  and  the  Pretender, 
from  triennial,  voted  the  Parliament  septennial. 
They  have  been  trying,  ever  since,  to  undo  this 
false  step  in  vain,  and  repenting  the  effects  of  their 
folly  in  the  over-grown  power  of  the  new  family. 
Some  imprudent  Whigs  among  us,  from  resentment 
to  those  who  have  taken  the  opposite  side  (and 
many  of  them  from  worse  motives),  would  corrupt 
the  principles  of  our  government,  and  furnish  pre 
cedents  for  future  usurpations  on  the  rights  of  the 
community. 

Let  the  people  beware  of  such  counsellors.  How 
ever  a  few  designing  men  may  rise  in  consequence, 
and  advance  their  private  interests  by  such  exped 
ients,  the  people,  at  large,  are  sure  to  be  the  losers, 


234  Alexander  Hamilton 

in  the  event,  whenever  they  suffer  a  departure  from 
the  rules  of  general  and  equal  justice,  or  from  the 
true  principles  of  universal  liberty. 

These  men  not  only  overleap  the  barriers  of  the 
Constitution  without  remorse,  but  they  advise  us  to 
become  the  scorn  of  nations,  by  violating  the  solemn 
engagements  of  the  United  States. 

They  endeavor  to  mould  the  treaty  with  Great 
Britain  into  such  forms  as  pleases  them,  and  to 
make  it  mean  any  thing  or  nothing,  as  suits  their 
views.  They  tell  us,  that  all  the  stipulations,  with 
respect  to  the  Tories,  are  merely  that  Congress  will 
recommend,  and  the  States  may  comply  or  not,  as 
they  please. 

But  let  any  man  of  sense  and  candor  read  the 
treaty,  and  it  will  speak  for  itself.  The  fifth  article 
is  indeed  recommendatory;  but  the  sixth  is  as  posi 
tive  as  words  can  make  it.  "  There  shall  be  no 
future  confiscations  made,  nor  prosecutions  com 
menced  against  any  person  or  persons,  for  or  by 
reason  of  the  part  which  he  or  they  may  have  taken 
in  the  present  war;  and  no  person  shall,  on  that 
account,  suffer  any  future  loss  or  damage,  either  in 
his  person,  liberty,  or  property." 

As  to  the  restoration  of  confiscated  property, 
which  is  the  subject  of  the  fifth  article,  the  States 
may  restore  or  not,  as  they  think  proper,  because 
Congress  engage  only  to  recommend;  but  there  is 
not  a  word  about  recommendation  in  the  sixth 
article. 

Quotations  are  made  from  the  debates  in  Parlia 
ment,  to  prove  that  the  whole  is  understood  as 


Letters  from  Phocion  235 

recommendatory;  but  the  expressions  in  those  quo 
tations  turn  altogether  upon  those  persons  who  have 
been  actually  proscribed,  and  their  property  con 
fiscated;  they  have  no  relation  to  those  who  come 
under  the  sixth  article,  or  who  might  be  the  objects 
of  future  prosecution  or  punishment.  And  to  this 
it  may  be  added,  that  it  is  absurd  and  inadmissible 
in  fair  reasoning,  to  combat  the  plain,  authentic 
language  of  solemn  treaty  by  loose  recitals  of  de 
bates  in  newspapers. 

The  sound  and  ingenious  construction  of  the  two 
articles,  taken  collectively,  is  this:  That  where  the 
property  of  any  persons,  other  than  those  who  have 
been  in  arms  against  the  United  States,  had  been 
actually  confiscated,  and  themselves  proscribed,  then 
Congress  are  to  recommend  a  restoration  of  estates, 
rights,  and  properties;  and,  with  respect  to  those 
who  had  been  in  arms,  they  are  to  recommend  per 
mission  for  them  to  remain  a  twelvemonth  in  the 
country,  to  solicit  a  like  restoration;  but  with  re 
spect  to  all  those  who  were  not  in  this  situation,  and 
who  had  not  already  been  the  objects  of  confisca 
tion  and  banishment,  they  were  to  be  absolutely  se 
cured  from  all  future  injury,  to  person,  liberty,  or 
property. 

To  say  that  this  exemption  from  positive  injury, 
does  not  imply  a  right  to  live  among  us  as  citizens, 
is  a  pitiful  sophistry;  it  is  to  say  that  the  banish 
ment  of  a  person  from  his  country,  connections,  and 
resources  (one  of  the  greatest  punishments  that  can 
befall  a  man),  is  no  punishment  at  all. 

The  meaning  of  the  word  liberty  has  been  con- 


236  Alexander  Hamilton 

tested.  Its  true  sense  must  be,  the  enjoyment  of 
the  common  privileges  of  subjects  under  the  same 
government.  There  is  no  middle  line  of  just  con 
struction  between  this  sense  and  a  mere  exemp 
tion  from  personal  imprisonment!  If  the  last  were 
adopted,  the  stipulation  would  become  nugatory; 
and,  by  depriving  those  who  are  the  subjects  of  it,  of 
the  protection  of  government,  it  would  amount  to  a 
virtual  confiscation  and  banishment;  for  they  could 
not  have  the  benefit  of  the  laws  against  those  who 
should  be  aggressors. 

Should  it  be  said,  that  they  may  receive  protection 
without  being  admitted  to  a  full  enjoyment  of  the 
privileges  of  citizens;  this  must  be  either  matter  of 
right  under  the  treaty,  or  matter  of  grace  in  the 
government.  If  the  latter,  the  government  may 
refuse  it;  and  then  the  objection  presents  itself, 
that  the  treaty  would,  by  this  construction,  be 
virtually  defeated ;  if  matter  of  right,  then  it  follows 
that  more  is  intended  by  the  word  liberty  than  a 
mere  exemption  from  imprisonment;  and  where 
shall  the  line  be  drawn?  not  a  capricious  and  arbi 
trary  line,  but  one  warranted  by  rational  and  legal 
construction  ? 

To  say  that,  by  espousing  the  cause  of  Great 
Britain,  they  became  aliens,  and  that  it  will  satisfy 
the  treaty  to  allow  them  the  same  protection  to 
which  aliens  are  entitled,  is  to  admit  that  subjects 
may,  at  pleasure,  renounce  their  allegiance  to  the 
State  of  which  they  are  members,  and  devote  them 
selves  to  a  foreign  jurisdiction ;  a  principle  contrary 
to  law  and  subversive  of  government.  But  even 


Letters  from  Phocion  237 

this  will  not  satisfy  the  treaty;  for  aliens  cannot 
hold  real  property  under  our  government;  and  if 
they  are  aliens,  all  their  real  estates  belong  to  the 
public.  This  will  be,  to  all  intents  and  purposes,  a 
confiscation  of  property.  But  this  is  not  all.  How 
does  it  appear  that  the  persons  who  are  thus  to  be 
stripped  of  their  citizenship,  have  been  guilty  of 
such  an  adherence  to  the  enemy,  as,  in  legal  con 
templation,  amounts  to  a  crime?  Their  merely  re 
maining  in  their  possessions,  under  the  power  of 
the  conqueror,  does  not  imply  this,  but  is  excepted 
by  the  laws  and  customs  of  all  civilized  nations. 
To  adjudge  them  culpable,  they  must  be  first  tried 
and  convicted;  and  this  the  treaty  forbids.  These 
are  the  difficulties  involved,  by  recurring  to  subtle 
and  evasive,  instead  of  simple  and  candid,  con 
struction,  which  will  teach  us,  that  the  stipulations 
in  the  treaty  amount  to  an  amnesty  and  act  of 
oblivion. 

There  is  a  very  simple  and  conclusive  point  of 
view  in  which  this  subject  may  be  placed.  No  citi 
zen  can  be  deprived  of  any  right  which  the  citizens 
in  general  are  entitled  to,  unless  forfeited  by  some 
offence.  It  has  been  seen  that  the  regular  and 
constitutional  mode  of  ascertaining  whether  this 
forfeiture  has  been  incurred,  is  by  legal  process, 
trial,  and  conviction.  This  ex  vi  termini  supposes 
prosecution.  Now,  consistent  with  the  treaty,  there 
can  be  no  future  prosecution  for  any  thing  done  on 
account  of  the  war.  Can  we  then  do,  by  act  of 
Legislature,  what  the  treaty  disables  us  from  doing 
by  due  course  of  law?  This  would  be  to  imitate  the 


238  Alexander  Hamilton 

Roman  general,  who,  having  promised  Antiochus 
to  restore  half  his  vessels,  caused  them  to  be  sawed 
in  two  before  their  delivery;  or  the  Platseans,  who, 
having  promised  the  Thebans  to  restore  their  pris 
oners,  had  them  first  put  to  death,  and  returned 
them  dead. 

Such  fraudulent  subterfuges  are  justly  considered 
more  odious  than  an  open  and  avowed  violation  of 
treaty. 

When  these  posture-masters  in  logic  are  driven 
from  this  first  ground  of  the  meaning  of  the  treaty, 
they  are  forced  to  that  of  attacking  the  right  of  Con 
gress  to  make  such  a  stipulation,  and  arraigning  the 
impudence  of  Great  Britain  in  attempting  to  make 
terms  for  our  own  subjects.  But  here,  as  every 
where  else,  they  are  only  successful  in  betraying 
their  narrowness  and  ignorance.  Does  not  the  act 
of  Confederation  place  the  exclusive  right  of  making 
war  and  peace  in  the  United  States  in  Congress? 
Have  they  not  the  sole  power  of  making  treaties 
with  foreign  nations?  Are  not  these  among  the  first 
rights  of  sovereignty?  And  does  not  the  delegation 
of  them  to  the  general  Confederacy  so  far  abridge 
the  sovereignty  of  each  particular  State?  Would 
not  a  different  doctrine  involve  the  contradiction  of 
imperium  in  imperio?  What  reasonable  limits  can 
be  assigned  to  these  prerogatives  of  the  Union, 
other  than  the  general  safety  and  the  fundamentals 
of  the  Constitution?  Can  it  be  said,  that  a  treaty 
for  arresting  the  future  operations  of  positive  acts 
of  Legislature,  and  which  has  indeed  no  other  effect 
than  that  of  a  pardon  for  past  offences  committed 


Letters  from  Phocion  239 

against  these  acts,  is  an  attack  upon  the  fundamentals 
of  the  State  Constitutions?  Can  it  be  denied  that 
the  peace  which  was  made,  taken  collectively,  was 
manifestly  for  the  general  good — that  it  was  even 
favorable  to  the  solid  interests  of  this  country,  be 
yond  the  expectation  of  the  most  sanguine?  If  this 
cannot  be  denied — and  none  can  deny  it  who  know 
either  the  value  of  the  objects  gained  by  the  treaty, 
or  the  necessity  these  States  were  under  at  the  time 
of  making  peace — it  follows,  that  Congress  and  their 
ministers  acted  wisely  in  making  the  treaty  which 
has  been  made ;  and  it  follows  from  this,  that  these 
States  are  bound  by  it,  and  ought  religiously  to 
observe  it. 

The  uti  possidetis,  each  party  to  hold  what  it  pos 
sesses,  is  the  point  from  which  nations  set  out  in 
framing  a  treaty  of  peace.  If  one  side  gives  up  a 
part  of  its  acquisitions,  the  other  side  renders  an 
equivalent  in  some  other  way.  What  is  the  equiva 
lent  given  to  Great  Britain  for  all  the  important 
concessions  she  has  made?  She  has  surrendered 
the  capital  of  this  State  and  its  large  dependencies. 
She  is  to  surrender  our  immensely  valuable  posts  on 
the  frontier ;  and  to  yield  to  us  a  vast  tract  of  west 
ern  territory,  with  one  half  of  the  lakes,  by  which 
we  shall  command  almost  the  whole  fur  trade.  She 
renounces  to  us  her  claim  to  the  navigation  of  the 
Mississippi,  and  admits  us  to  share  in  the  fisheries, 
even  on  better  terms  than  we  formerly  enjoyed  it. 
As  she  was  in  possession,  by  right  of  war,  of  all  these 
objects,  whatever  may  have  been  our  original  pre 
tensions  to  them,  they  are,  by  the  laws  of  nations, 


240  Alexander  Hamilton 

to  be  considered  as  so  much  given  up  on  her  part. 
And  what  do  we  give  in  return?  We  stipulate — 
that  there  shall  be  no  future  injury  to  her  adherents 
among  us.  How  insignificant  the  equivalent  in 
comparison  with  the  acquisition!  A  man  of  sense 
would  be  ashamed  to  compare  them;  a  man  of 
honesty,  not  intoxicated  with  passion,  would  blush 
to  lisp  a  question  of  the  obligation  to  observe  the 
stipulation  on  our  part. 

If  it  be  said  that  Great  Britain  has  only  restored 
to  us  what  she  had  unjustly  taken  from  us,  and  that 
therefore  we  are  not  bound  to  make  compensation ; 
this  admits  of  several  answers:  Firstly — That  the 
fact  is  not  true ;  for  she  has  ceded  to  us  a  large  tract 
of  country  to  which  we  had  even  no  plausible  claim. 
Secondly — That  however  the  principle  of  the  ob 
jection  might  have  been  proper,  to  prevent  our  pro 
mising  an  equivalent,  it  comes  too  late  after  the 
promise  has  been  made.  Thirdly — That  as  to  the 
external  effects  of  war,  the  voluntary  law  of  nations 
knows  no  distinction  between  the  justice  or  injustice 
of  the  quarrel,  but  in  the  treaty  of  peace  puts  the 
contracting  parties  upon  an  equal  footing;  which  is 
a  necessary  consequence  of  the  independence  of  the 
nations ;  for,  as  they  acknowledge  no  common  judge, 
if,  in  concluding  peace,  both  parties  were  not  to 
stand  upon  the  same  ground  of  right,  there  never 
could  be  an  adjustment  of  differences,  or  an  end  of 
war.  This  is  a  settled  principle. 

Let  us  examine  the  pretext  upon  which  it  is  dis 
puted.  Congress,  say  our  political  jugglers,  have 
no  right  to  meddle  with  our  internal  police.  They 


Letters  from  Phocion  241 

would  be  puzzled  to  tell  what  they  mean  by  the 
expression.  The  truth  is,  it  has  no  definite  mean 
ing;  for  it  is  impossible  for  Congress  to  do  a  single 
act  which  will  not,  directly  or  indirectly,  affect  the 
internal  police  of  every  State.  When,  in  order  to 
procure  privileges  of  commerce  to  the  citizens  of 
these  States,  in  foreign  countries,  they  stipulate  a 
reciprocity  of  privileges  here,  does  not  such  an  ad 
mission  of  the  subjects  of  foreign  countries  to  certain 
rights  within  these  States,  operate  immediately  upon 
their  internal  police?  And  were  this  not  done, 
would  not  the  power  of  making  commercial  treaties, 
vested  in  Congress,  become  a  mere  nullity?  In 
short,  if  nothing  was  to  be  done  by  Congress  that 
would  affect  our  internal  police,  in  the  large  sense  in 
which  it  has  been  taken,  would  not  all  the  powers  of 
the  Confederation  be  annihilated,  and  the  Union 
dissolved  ? 

But,  say  they  again,  such  a  thing  was  never  heard 
of,  as  an  indemnity  for  traitorous  subjects  stipulated 
in  a  treaty  of  peace.  History  will  inform  them  that 
it  is  a  stipulation  often  made.  Two  examples  shall 
be  cited:  The  Treaty  of  Munster,  which  put  an  end 
to  the  differences  between  Spain  and  the  United 
Provinces,  after  the  revolution  of  those  Provinces; 
the  treaty  concluded,  in  seventeen  hundred  and 
thirty-eight,  between  the  Empire,  France,  Spain, 
Poland,  and  several  other  Powers,  called  the  Christ 
ian  Peace.  The  war  which  preceded  this  treaty 
was  one  of  the  most  complicated  in  which  Europe 
had  been  engaged:  the  succession  to  the  Spanish 
monarchy,  and  the  right  to  the  throne  of  Poland, 

VOL.    IV.— 16 


242  Alexander  Hamilton 

had  been  included  in  it;  Stanislaus  having  been 
obliged  to  abdicate  the  crown.  Different  parts  of 
the  nations  concerned  had  taken  opposite  sides. 
Many  of  the  German  princes  had  been  in  arms 
against  the  Empire,  to  which  they  owed  obedience. 
This  treaty  not  only  mutually  stipulates  indemnity 
to  the  subjects  of  the  respective  Powers,  but  even 
restitution  of  property  and  offices.  The  Emperor, 
who  contracted  in  behalf  of  the  Empire,  has  much 
less  extensive  powers,  as  head  of  the  Empire,  than 
Congress,  as  representative  of  the  United  States. 

But  let  it  be  admitted  that  Congress  had  no  right 
to  enter  into  this  article;  do  not  equity  and  pru 
dence  strongly  urge  the  several  States  to  comply 
with  it?  We  have,  in  part,  enjoyed  the  benefit  of 
the  treaty;  in  consequence  of  which,  we,  of  this 
State,  are  now  in  possession  of  our  capital ;  and  this 
implies  an  obligation  in  conscience,  to  perform 
what  is  to  be  performed  on  our  part.  But  there 
is  a  consideration  which  will,  perhaps,  have  more 
force  with  men  who  seem  to  be  superior  to  con 
scientious  obligations:  it  is  that  the  British  are  still 
in  possession  of  our  frontier  posts,  which  they  may 
keep  in  spite  of  us;  and  that  they  may  essentially 
exclude  us  from  the  fisheries,  if  they  are  so  disposed. 
Breach  of  treaty  on  our  part  will  be  a  just  ground 
for  breaking  it  on  theirs.  The  treaty  must  stand 
or  fall  together.  The  wilful  breach  of  a  single 
article  annuls  the  whole.1  Congress  are  appointed 
by  the  Constitution,  to  manage  our  foreign  concerns. 
The  nations  with  whom  they  contract  are  to  suppose 

1  Vatel,  book  4,  chapter  4,  §  47.     Grotius,  book  3,  chapter  19,  |  14. 


Letters  from  Phocion  243 

they  understand  their  own  powers,  and  will  not  ex 
ceed  them.  If  they  do  it  in  any  instance,  and  we 
think  it  proper  to  disavow  the  act,  it  will  be  no 
apology  with  those  with  whom  they  contract,  that 
they  had  exceeded  their  authority.  One  side  cannot 
be  bound,  unless  the  obligation  is  reciprocal. 

Suppose,  then,  Great  Britain  should  be  induced 
to  refuse  a  further  compliance  with  the  treaty,  in 
consequence  of  a  breach  of  it  on  our  part;  what 
situation  should  we  be  in?  Can  we  renew  the  war 
to  compel  a  compliance?  We  know,  and  all  the 
world  knows,  it  is  out  of  our  power.  Will  those  who 
have  heretofore  assisted  us  take  our  part?  Their 
affairs  require  peace  as  well  as  ours;  and  they  will 
not  think  themselves  bound  to  undertake  an  unjust 
war,  to  regain  to  us  rights  which  we  have  forfeited 
by  a  childish  levity,  and  a  wanton  contempt  of 
public  faith. 

We  should  then  have  sacrificed  important  interests 
to  the  little,  vindictive,  selfish,  mean  passions  of  a 
few.  To  say  nothing  of  the  loss  of  territory,  of  the 
disadvantage  to  the  whole  commerce  of  the  Union, 
by  obstructions  in  the  fisheries,  this  State  would  lose 
an  annual  profit  of  more  than  fifty  thousand  pounds 
sterling  from  the  fur  trade. 

But  not  to  insist  on  possible  inconveniences,  there 
is  a  certain  evil  which  attends  our  intemperance:  a 
loss  of  character  in  Europe.  Our  ministers  write, 
that  our  conduct,  hitherto,  in  this  respect,  has  done 
us  infinite  injury,  and  has  exhibited  us  in  the  light 
of  a  people  destitute  of  government,  on  whose  en 
gagements  of  course  no  dependence  can  be  placed- 


244  Alexander  Hamilton 

The  men  who  are  at  the  head  of  the  party  which 
contends  for  disqualification  and  expulsion,  en 
deavor  to  enlist  a  number  of  people  on  their  side  by 
holding  out  motives  of  private  advantage  to  them. 
To  the  trader  they  say:  "  You  will  be  overborne  by 
the  large  capitals  of  the  Tory  merchants";  to  the 
mechanic:  "Your  business  will  be  less  profitable, 
your  wages  less  considerable,  by  the  interference  of 
Tory  workmen."  A  man,  the  least  acquainted  with 
trade,  will  indeed  laugh  at  such  suggestions.  He 
will  know  that  every  merchant,  or  trader,  has  an 
interest  in  the  aggregate  mass  of  capital,  or  stock  in 
trade;  that  what  he  himself  wants  in  capital,  he 
must  make  up  in  credit ;  that  unless  there  are  others 
who  possess  large  capitals,  this  credit  cannot  be  had; 
and  that,  in  the  diminution  of  the  general  capital 
of  the  State,  commerce  will  decline,  and  his  own 
prospects  of  profit  will  diminish. 

These  arguments,  if  they  were  understood,  would 
be  conclusive  with  the  mechanic:  " There  is  already 
employment  enough  for  all  the  workmen  in  the  city, 
and  wages  are  sufficiently  high.  If  you  could  raise 
them  by  expelling  those  who  remained  in  the  city, 
and  whom  you  consider  as  rivals,  the  extravagant 
price  of  wages  would  have  two  effects;  it  would 
draw  persons  to  settle  here,  not  only  from  other 
parts  of  this  State,  but  from  the  neighboring  States. 
Those  classes  of  the  community  who  are  to  employ 
you,  will  make  a  great  many  shifts  rather  than  pay 
the  exorbitant  prices  you  demand;  a  man  will  wear 
his  old  clothes  so  much  longer,  before  he  gets  a  new 
suit;  he  will  buy  imported  shoes  cheap  rather  than 


Letters  from  Phocion  245 

those  made  here  at  so  dear  a  rate;  the  owner  of  a 
house  will  defer  the  repairs  as  long  as  possible;  he 
will  only  have  those  which  are  absolutely  necessary 
made;  he  will  not  attend  to  elegant  improvement: 
and  the  like  will  happen  in  other  branches.  These 
circumstances  will  give  less  employment,  and  in  a 
very  little  time  bring  back  your  wages  to  what  they 
now  are,  and  even  sink  them  lower.  But  this  is 
not  all.  You  are  not  required  merely  to  expel  your 
rival  mechanics,  but  you  must  drive  away  the  rich 
merchants  and  others  who  are  called  Tories,  to 
please  your  leaders,  who  will  persuade  you  they  are 
dangerous  to  your  liberty  (though,  indeed,  they 
only  mean  their  own  consequence).  By  this  con 
duct  you  will  drive  away  the  principal  part  of  those 
who  have  the  means  of  becoming  large  undertakers. 
The  carpenters  and  masons,  in  particular,  must  be 
content  with  patching  up  the  houses  already  built, 
and  building  little  huts  upon  the  vacant  lots,  in 
stead  of  having  profitable  and  durable  employment 
in  erecting  large  and  elegant  edifices." 

There  is  a  certain  proportion,  or  level,  in  all  the 
departments  of  industry.  It  is  folly  to  think  to 
raise  any  of  them,  and  keep  them  long  above  their 
natural  height.  By  attempting  to  do  it,  the  econ 
omy  of  the  political  machine  is  disturbed,  and  till 
things  return  to  their  proper  state,  the  society  at 
large  suffers.  The  only  object  of  concern  with  an 
industrious  artisan,  as  such,  ought  to  be,  that  there 
may  be  plenty  of  money  in  the  community,  and  a 
brisk  commerce  to  give  it  circulation  and  activity. 
All  attempts  at  profit,  through  the  medium  of 


246  Alexander  Hamilton 

monopoly,  or  violence,  will  be  as  fallacious  as  they 
are  culpable. 

But,  say  some,  to  suffer  these  wealthy  disaffected 
men  to  remain  among  us  will  be  dangerous  to  our 
liberties.  Enemies  to  our  government,  they  will  be 
always  endeavoring  to  undermine  it,  and  bring  us 
back  to  the  subjection  of  Great  Britain.  The  safest 
reliance  of  every  government  is  on  men's  interests. 
This  is  a  principle  of  human  nature,  on  which  all 
political  speculation,  to  be  just,  must  be  founded. 
Make  it  the  interest  of  those  citizens  who,  during  the 
Revolution,  were  opposed  to  us,  to  be  friends  to  the 
new  government,  by  affording  them  not  only  pro 
tection,  but  a  participation  in  its  privileges,  and  they 
will  undoubtedly  become  its  friends.  The  appre 
hension  of  returning  under  the  dominion  of  Great 
Britain  is  chimerical:  if  there  is  any  way  to  bring  it 
about,  the  measures  of  those  men  against  whose 
conduct  these  remarks  are  aimed,  lead  directly  to  it. 
A  disorderly,  or  a  violent  government  may  disgust 
the  best  citizens,  and  make  the  body  of  the  people 
tired  of  their  independence. 

The  embarrassed  and  exhausted  state  of  Great 
Britain,  and  the  political  system  of  Europe,  render  it 
impossible  for  her  ever  to  reacquire  the  dominion  of 
this  country.  Her  former  partisans  must  be  con 
vinced  of  this,  and  abandon  her  cause  as  desperate. 
They  will  never  be  mad  enough  to  risk  their  fortunes 
a  second  time,  in  the  hopeless  attempt  of  restoring 
her  authority ;  nor  will  they  have  any  inclination  to 
do  it,  if  they  are  allowed  to  be  happy  under  the  gov 
ernment  of  the  society  in  which  they  live.  To  make 


Letters  from  Phocion  247 

it  practicable,  if  they  should  be  so  disposed,  they 
must  not  only  get  the  government  of  this  State  but 
of  the  United  States  into  their  hands.  To  suppose 
this  possible  is  to  suppose  that  a  majority  of  the 
numbers,  property,  and  abilities  of  the  United 
States  has  been  and  is  in  opposition  to  the  Revolu 
tion.  Its  success  is  a  clear  proof  that  this  has  not 
been  the  case,  and  every  man  of  information  among 
us  knows  the  contrary.  The  supposition  itself 
would  show  the  absurdity  of  expelling  a  small  num 
ber  from  the  city,  which  would  constitute  so  in 
significant  a  proportion  of  the  whole,  as,  without 
diminishing  their  influence,  would  only  increase 
their  disposition  to  do  mischief.  The  policy  in  this 
case  would  be  evident  of  appealing  to  their  interests 
rather  than  to  their  fears. 

Nothing  can  be  more  ridiculous  than  the  idea  of  ex 
pelling  a  few  from  this  city  and  neighborhood,  while 
there  are  numbers  in  different  parts  of  this  and  other 
States  who  must  necessarily  partake  in  our  govern 
ments,  and  who  can  never  expect  to  be  the  objects  of 
animadversion  or  exclusion.  It  is  confirming  many 
in  their  enmity  and  prejudices  against  the  State  to 
indulge  our  enmity  and  prejudices  against  a  few. 

The  idea  of  suffering  the  Tories  to  live  among  us 
under  disqualifications  is  equally  mischievous  and 
absurd.  It  is  necessitating  a  large  body  of  citizens 
in  the  State  to  continue  enemies  to  the  government, 
ready  at  all  times,  in  a  moment  of  commotion,  to 
throw  their  weight  into  that  scale  which  meditates 
a  change,  whether  favorable  or  unfavorable  to  public 
liberty. 


248  Alexander  Hamilton 

Viewing  the  subject  in  every  possible  light,  there  is 
not  a  single  interest  of  the  community  but  dictates 
moderation  rather  than  violence.  That  honesty 
is  still  the  best  policy;  that  justice  and  modera 
tion  are  the  surest  supports  of  every  government, 
are  maxims  which,  however  they  may  be  called  trite, 
are  at  all  times  true;  though  too  seldom  regarded, 
but  rarely  neglected  with  impunity.  Were  the 
people  of  America  with  one  voice  to  ask:  "What 
shall  we  do  to  perpetuate  our  liberties  and  secure 
our  happiness?"  the  answer  would  be:  " Govern 
well,"  and  you  have  nothing  to  fear  either  from 
internal  disaffection  or  external  hostility.  Abuse 
not  the  power  you  possess,  and  you  need  never  ap 
prehend  its  diminution  or  loss.  But  if  you  make  a 
wanton  use  of  it;  if  you  furnish  another  example 
that  despotism  may  debase  the  government  of  the 
many  as  well  as  the  few,  you,  like  all  others  that 
have  acted  the  same  part,  will  experience  that 
licentiousness  is  the  forerunner  to  slavery. 

How  wise  was  that  policy  of  Augustus,  who, 
after  conquering  his  enemies,  when  the  papers  of 
Brutus  were  brought  to  him,  which  would  have 
disclosed  all  his  secret  associates,  immediately  or 
dered  them  to  be  burnt.  He  would  not  even  know 
his  enemies,  that  they  might  cease  to  hate  where 
they  had  nothing  to  fear. 

How  laudable  was  the  example  of  Elizabeth,  who, 
when  she  was  transferred  from  the  prison  to  the 
throne,  fell  upon  her  knees,  and  thanking  Heaven 
for  the  deliverance  it  had  granted  her  from  her 
bloody  persecutors,  dismissed  her  resentment.  "  This 


Letters  from  Phocion  249 

act  of  pious  gratitude,"  says  her  historian,  "seems 
to  have  been  the  last  circumstance  in  which  she 
remembered  any  past  injuries  and  hardships.  With 
a  prudence  and  magnanimity  truly  laudable,  she 
buried  all  offences  in  oblivion,  and  received  with 
affability  even  those  who  acted  with  the  greatest 
virulence  against  her/'  She  did  more,  she  retained 
many  of  the  opposite  party  in  her  councils. 

The  reigns  of  these  two  sovereigns  are  among  the 
most  illustrious  in  history.  Their  moderation  gave 
a  stability  to  their  government  which  nothing  else 
could  have  effected.  This  was  the  secret  of  uniting 
all  parties. 

These  sentiments  are  delivered  to  you  in  the 
frankness  of  conscious  integrity  by  one  who  feels 
that  solicitude  for  the  good  of  the  community  which 
the  zealots,  whose  opinions  he  encounters,  profess; 
by  one  who  pursues  not  as  they  do  the  honors  or 
emoluments  of  his  country;  by  one  who,  though  he 
has  had  in  the  course  of  the  Revolution  a  very 
confidential  share  in  the  public  councils,  civil  and 
military,  and  has  as  often,  at  least,  met  danger  in 
the  common  cause  as  any  of  those  who  now  assume 
to  be  the  guardians  of  the  public  liberty,  asks  no 
other  reward  from  his  countrymen,  than  to  be  heard 
without  prejudice  for  their  own  interest. 

PHOCION. 

P.  S.  —  While  the  writer  hopes  the  sentiments 
of  this  letter  will  meet  the  approbation  of  discreet 
and  honest  men,  he  thinks  it  necessary  to  apologize 
for  the  hasty  and  incorrect  manner.  Perhaps, 
too,  expressions  of  too  much  asperity  have  been 


250  Alexander  Hamilton 

employed  against  those  who  take  the  lead  in  the 
principles  which  are  here  opposed;  and  feelings  of 
indignation  against  the  pernicious  tendency  of  their 
measures  have  not  admitted  sufficient  allowances 
for  what  is,  in  some  instances,  an  honest  though 
mistaken  zeal.  Though  the  writer  entertains  the 
worst  opinion  of  the  motives  of  many  of  them,  he 
believes  there  are  some  who  act  from  principle. 


LETTER   II1 

The  little  hasty  production,  under  the  signature 
of  Phocion,  has  met  with  a  more  favorable  reception 
from  the  public  than  was  expected.  The  force  of 
plain  truth  has  carried  it  along  against  the  stream 
of  prejudice;  and  the  principles  it  holds  out  have 
gained  ground,  in  spite  of  the  opposition  of  those 
who  were  either  too  angry,  or  too  much  interested, 
to  be  convinced.  Men  of  this  description,  have,  till 
lately,  contented  themselves  with  virulent  invec 
tives  against  the  writer,  without  attempting  to 
answer  his  arguments;  but,  alarmed  at  the  progress 
of  the  sentiments  advocated  by  him,  one  of  them 
has  at  last  come  forward  with  an  answer;  with 
what  degree  of  success,  let  those  who  are  most  par 
tial  to  his  opinion  determine. 

To  say  that  the  answer  of  Mentor  is  a  feeble  at 
tempt,  would  be  no  derogation  from  his  abilities; 

1  The  first  letter  from  Phocion  attracted  much  attention  and  drew 
out  many  answers,  of  which  the  most  important  was  one  signed 
"Mentor."  The  author  was  Isaac  Ledyard,  a  leading  politician  and 
a  friend  of  Governor  Clinton,  so  that  Hamilton  felt  it  necessary  to 
reply  by  publishing  this  second  "Phocion"  letter. 


Letters  from  Phocion  251 

for,  in  fact,  the  cause  he  espouses,  admits  of  nothing 
solid;  and,  as  one  of  its  partisans,  he  is  only  to  be 
blamed  for  not  knowing  its  weak  sides  better  than 
to  have  been  tempted  to  expose  it  to  the  experiment 
of  a  defence. 

But,  before  I  enter  further  into  the  subject,  I 
shall  take  occasion  to  acknowledge,  with  regret,  the 
injudicious  appearance  of  warmth  in  my  former 
letter;  calculated,  with  many  minds,  to  raise  preju 
dices  against  the  truths  it  contains,  and  liable  to  be 
misrepresented  into  a  general  censure  on  that  part 
of  the  community  whose  zeal,  sacrifices,  and  suffer 
ings  must  ever  render  them  respectable  to  the  true 
friends  of  the  Revolution.  I  shall  only  observe,  in 
apology  (as  is  truly  the  case),  that  whatever  sever 
ity  of  animadversion  may  have  been  indulged,  was 
wholly  directed  against  a  very  small  number  of  men, 
who  are  manifestly  aiming  at  nothing  but  the  ac 
quisition  of  power  and  profit  to  themselves;  and 
who,  to  gratify  their  avidity  for  these  objects,  would 
trample  upon  every  thing  sacred  in  society,  and 
overturn  the  foundations  of  public  and  private 
security.  It  is  difficult  for  a  man,  conscious  of  a 
pure  attachment  to  the  public  weal,  who  sees  it  in 
vaded  and  endangered  by  such  men,  under  specious 
but  false  pretences,  either  to  think  or  speak  of  their 
conduct  without  indignation.  It  is  equally  difficult 
for  one  who,  in  questions  that  affect  the  community, 
regards  principles  only,  and  not  men,  to  look  with 
indifference  on  attempts  to  make  the  great  prin 
ciples  of  social  right,  justice,  and  honor,  the  victims 
of  personal  animosity  or  party  intrigue. 


252  Alexander  Hamilton 

More  tenderness  is  indeed  due  to  the  mistakes  of 
those  who  have  suffered  too  much  to  reason  with 
impartiality;  whose  honest  prejudices,  grown  into 
habits  by  the  impressions  of  an  eight  years'  war, 
cannot  at  once  accommodate  themselves  to  that 
system  which  the  public  good  requires;  and  whose 
situations  are  less  favorable  to  distinguishing  be 
tween  doctrines  invented  to  serve  the  turn  of  a 
revolution,  and  those  which  must  give  permanent 
prosperity  to  the  State. 

These  observations  I  have  thought  proper  to 
premise,  in  justice  to  my  own  intentions ;  and  I  shall 
now  proceed,  as  concisely  as  possible,  to  examine 
the  suggestions  of  Mentor,  interspersing,  as  I  go 
along,  some  remarks  on  objections  which,  though 
omitted  by  him,  have  been  urged  in  other  shapes 
against  the  principles  of  Phocion. 

Mentor  proposes  to  treat  the  sentiments  of  Pho 
cion  as  a  political  novelty;  but  if  he  is  serious,  it  is  a 
proof  that  he  is  not  even  ''tolerably  well  informed." 
They  are  as  old  as  any  regular  notions  of  free  gov 
ernment  among  mankind;  and  are  to  be  met  with 
not  only  in  every  speculative  writer  on  these  sub 
jects,  but  are  interwoven  in  the  theory  and  practice 
of  that  code  which  constitutes  the  law  of  the  land. 
They  speak  the  common  language  of  this  country 
at  the  beginning  of  the  Revolution,  and  are  essential 
to  its  future  happiness  and  respectability. 

The  principles  of  all  the  arguments  I  have  used, 
or  shall  use,  lie  within  the  compass  of  a  few  simple 
propositions  which,  to  be  assented  to,  need  only  to 
be  stated. 


Letters  from  Phocion  253 

Firstly.  That  no  man  can  forfeit,  or  be  justly 
deprived,  without  his  consent,  of  any  right  to  which, 
as  a  member  of  the  community,  he  is  entitled,  but 
for  some  crime  incurring  the  forfeiture. 

Secondly.  That  no  man  ought  to  be  condemned 
unheard,  or  punished  for  supposed  offences,  without 
having  an  opportunity  of  making  his  defence.1 

Thirdly.  That  a  crime  is  an  act  committed  or 
omitted,  in  violation  of  a  public  law,  either  forbid 
ding  or  commanding  it.2 

Fourthly.  That  a  prosecution  is,  in  its  most  pre 
cise  signification,  an  inquiry  or  mode  of  ascertain 
ing,  whether  a  particular  person  has  committed  or 
omitted  such  act. 

Fifthly.  That  duties  and  rights,  as  applied  to 
subjects,  are  reciprocal;  or,  in  other  words,  that  a 
man  cannot  be  a  citizen  for  the  purpose  of  punish 
ment,  and  not  a  citizen  for  the  purpose  of  privilege. 

These  propositions  will  hardly  be  controverted 
by  any  man  professing  to  be  a  friend  to  civil  liberty. 
The  application  of  them  will  more  fully  appear 
hereafter. 

By  the  Declaration  of  Independence,  on  the 
fourth  of  July,  in  the  year  seventeen  hundred  and 
seventy-six,  acceded  to  by  our  Convention  on  the 
ninth,  the  late  colony  of  New  York  became  an 
independent  State.  All  the  inhabitants,  who  were 
subjects  under  the  former  government,  and  who  did 
not  withdraw  themselves  upon  the  change  which 
took  place,  were  to  be  considered  as  citizens,  owing 

1  Vide  Address  of  Congress  to  the  people  of  Great  Britain,  September 
5,  1774.  2  Blackstone,  vol.  iv.,  page  5. 


254  Alexander  Hamilton 

allegiance  to  the  new  government.  This,  at  least, 
is  the  legal  presumption;  and  this  was  the  prin 
ciple,  in  fact,  upon  which  all  the  measures  of  our 
public  councils  have  been  grounded.  Duties  have 
been  exacted  and  punishments  inflicted  according 
to  this  rule.  If  any  exceptions  to  it  were  to  be  ad 
mitted,  they  could  only  flow  from  the  indulgence  of 
the  State  to  such  individuals  as,  from  peculiar  cir 
cumstances,  might  desire  to  be  permitted  to  stand 
upon  a  different  footing. 

The  inhabitants  of  the  southern  district,  before 
they  fell  under  the  power  of  the  British  army,  were 
as  much  citizens  of  the  State  as  the  inhabitants  of 
other  parts  of  it.  They  must,  therefore,  continue 
to  be  such,  unless  they  have  been  divested  of  that 
character  by  some  posterior  circumstance.  This 
circumstance  must  either  be : 

Their  having,  by  the  fortune  of  war,  fallen  under 
the  power  of  the  British  army; 

Their  having  forfeited  their  claim  by  their  own 
misconduct ; 

Their  having  been  left  out  of  the  compact  by  some 
subsequent  association  of  the  body  of  the  State ;  or, 

Their  having  been  dismembered  by  treaty. 

The  first  of  these  circumstances,  according  to  the 
fundamental  principles  of  government  and  the  con 
stant  practice  of  nations,  could  have  no  effect  in 
working  a  forfeiture  of  their  citizenship.  To  allow 
it  such  an  effect,  would  be  to  convert  misfortune 
into  guilt;  it  would  be,  in  many  instances,  to  make 
the  negligence  of  the  society,  in  not  providing  ade 
quate  means  of  defence  for  the  several  parts,  the 


Letters  from  Phocion  255 

crime  of  those  parts  which  were  the  immediate  suf 
ferers  by  that  negligence.  It  would  tend  to  the 
dissolution  of  society,  by  loosening  the  ties  which 
bind  the  different  parts  together,  and  justifying 
those  who  should,  for  a  moment,  fall  under  the 
power  of  a  conqueror,  not  merely  in  yielding  such  a 
submission  as  was  exacted  from  them,  but  in  taking 
a  willing,  interested,  and  decisive  part  with  him. 

It  was  the  policy  of  the  Revolution,  to  inculcate 
upon  every  citizen  the  obligation  of  renouncing  his 
habitation,  property,  and  every  private  concern  for 
the  service  of  his  country;  and  many  of  us  have 
scarcely  yet  learned  to  consider  it  as  less  than  treason 
to  have  acted  in  a  different  manner.  But  it  is  time 
we  should  correct  the  exuberances  of  opinions 
propagated  through  policy  and  embraced  from  en 
thusiasm;  and  while  we  admit,  that  those  who  did 
act  so  disinterested  and  noble  a  part  deserve  the 
applause  and,  wherever  they  can  be  bestowed  with 
propriety,  the  rewards  of  their  country,  we  should 
cease  to  impute  discriminate  guilt  to  those  who, 
submitting  to  the  accidents  of  war,  remained  with 
their  habitations  and  property.  We  should  learn 
that  this  conduct  is  tolerated  by  the  general  sense 
of  mankind;  and  that,  according  to  that  sense,  when 
ever  the  State  recovers  the  possession  of  such  parts 
as  were,  for  a  time,  subdued,  the  citizens  returned 
at  once  to  all  the  rights  to  which  they  were  for 
merly  entitled. 

As  to  the  second  head,  of  forfeiture  by  miscon 
duct,  there  is  no  doubt  that  all  such  as,  remaining 
within  the  British  lines,  did  not  merely  yield  an 


256  Alexander  Hamilton 

obedience  which  they  could  not  refuse  without  ruin, 
but  took  a  voluntary  and  interested  part  with  the 
enemy,  in  carrying  on  the  war,  became  subject  to 
the  penalties  of  treason.  They  could  not,  however, 
by  that  conduct,  make  themselves  aliens,  because, 
though  they  were  bound  to  pay  a  temporary  and 
qualified  obedience  to  the  conqueror,  they  could 
not  transfer  their  eventual  allegiance  from  the  State 
to  a  foreign  power.  By  becoming  aliens,  too,  they 
would  have  ceased  to  be  traitors;  and  all  the  laws 
of  the  State,  passed  during  the  Revolution,  by 
which  they  are  considered  and  punished  as  subjects, 
would  have  been,  by  that  construction,  unintel 
ligible  and  unjust.  The  idea,  indeed,  of  citizens 
transforming  themselves  into  aliens,  by  taking  part 
against  the  State  to  which  they  belong,  is  altogether 
of  new  invention,  unknown  and  inadmissible  in  law, 
and  contrary  to  the  nature  of  the  social  compact. 

But  were  this  not  the  case,  an  insurmountable 
difficulty  would  still  remain :  for  how  shall  we  ascer 
tain  who  are  aliens,  or  traitors,  let  us  call  them 
which  we  will?  It  has  been  seen  that  the  bound 
aries  of  the  British  lines  cannot  determine  the 
question;  for  this  would  be  to  say  that  the  merely 
falling  under  the  power  of  the  British  army,  con 
stituted  every  man  a  traitor  or  an  alien.  It  would 
be  to  confound  one  third  of  the  citizens  of  the  State 
in  promiscuous  guilt  and  degradation,  without  evi 
dence  or  inquiry.  It  would  be  to  make  crimes, 
which  are,  in  their  nature,  personal  and  individual, 
aggregate  and  territorial.  Shall  we  go  into  an  in 
quiry  to  ascertain  the  crime  of  each  person?  This 


Letters  from  Phocion  257 

would  be  a  prosecution I;  and  the  treaty  forbids  all 
future  prosecutions.  Shall  the  Legislature  take  the 
map,  and  make  a  geographical  delineation  of  the 
rights  and  disqualifications  of  its  citizens?  This 
would  be  to  measure  innocence  and  guilt  by  latitude 
and  longitude.  It  would  be  to  condemn  and  punish, 
not  one  man  but  thousands,  for  supposed  offences, 
without  giving  them  an  opportunity  of  making  their 
defence.  God  forbid  that  such  an  act  of  barefaced 
tyranny  should  ever  disgrace  our  history!  God  for 
bid  that  the  body  of  the  people  should  be  corrupt 
enough  to  wish  it,  or  even  to  submit  to  it! 

But  here  we  are  informed  by  Mentor,  that  the 
treaty,  instead  of  offering  any  obstacle  to  the  views 
of  those  who  wish  to  metamorphose  their  fellow- 
citizens  into  aliens,  is  precisely  the  thing  which  re 
moves  the  difficulty.  Mentor  is  thus  far  right,  that 
if  they  are  aliens  at  all,  it  must  be  by  some  stipula 
tion  in  the  treaty;  but  it  requires  not  a  little  dex 
terity  to  show  that  such  a  stipulation  exists.  If  it 
exist  at  all,  it  must  be  collected  from  the  fifth  and 
sixth  articles.  Let  us,  by  analyzing  these  articles, 
try  if  we  can  find  it  out. 

The  fifth  article  speaks,  in  the  first  clause,  of  real 
British  subjects, whose  estates  had  been  confiscated;  and 
stipulates  that  Congress  shall  recommend  arestitution. 

In  the  second  clause  it  speaks  of  persons  resident 
in  districts  in  the  possession  of  the  British  forces, 
who  had  not  borne  arms  against  the  United  States; 
of  whose  estates,  also  confiscated,  Congress  are,  in 
like  manner,  to  recommend  a  restitution. 

1  Vide  Proposition  4th. 


VOL.  IV.— 17. 


258  Alexander  Hamilton 

In  the  third  clause,  persons  of  every  other  descrip 
tion  are  comprehended,  who  are  to  be  permitted  to 
remain  twelve  months  unmolested,  in  any  of  the 
States,  to  solicit  a  restoration  of  their  property, 
which  had  been  confiscated;  Congress  recommending, 
even  with  respect  to  them,  a  restitution,  on  condi 
tion  of  their  refunding  to  the  present  possessors, 
where  there  had  been  a  sale,  the  bona  fide  price  given 
by  them  for  the  estates  in  their  possession. 

It  is  apparent  from  the  dissection  of  the  article, 
that  the  inhabitants  in  the  southern  district,  pos 
sessed  by  the  British  army,  are  not  confounded  in 
one  general  mass  of  alienism,  as  has  been  asserted. 
We  find  the  express  words  of  description  are  real 
British  subjects,  and  as  contradistinguished  from 
them,  persons  resident  in  districts  within  the  pos 
session  of  the  British  arms.  These  last,  by  the 
letter  as  well  as  the  spirit  of  the  article,  are  deemed 
not  British  subjects. 

There  is  no  intelligible  medium  between  a  real 
British  subject  and  one  that  is  not  a  British  subject 
at  all.  A  man  either  is  or  is  not  the  subject  of  a 
country.  The  word  real,  as  applied  to  the  affirma 
tive,  is  a  redundancy.  Its  natural  contrasts  are 
fictitious  or  pretended.  If  we  should  call  the  per 
sons  of  other  descriptions  in  the  article  fictitious  or 
pretended  British  subjects,  instead  of  justifying,  it 
would  exclude,  the  construction  given  by  Mentor. 
For  if  they  were  only  fictitious  or  pretended  British 
subjects,  they  must  be  real  American  subjects;  or, 
in  other  words,  if  they  were  not  real  British  subjects, 
which,  by  necessary  implication,  they  are  declared 


Letters  from  Phocion  259 

not  to  be,  they  must,  of  necessity,  be  American 
subjects. 

The  phrase  real  British  subjects,  strictly  considered, 
is  inaccurate ;  but  its  practical  import,  with  the  help 
of  a  little  candor,  is  easily  fixed.  It  is  well  known, 
that  in  this  and  other  States,  the  property  of  per 
sons  who  had  never  been  subjects  of  this  country, 
before  or  after  the  Revolution,  but  who  had  truly 
been  subjects  of  Great  Britain,  had,  in  many  instances, 
been  confiscated.  Sir  Henry  Clinton,  the  late  Gov 
ernor  Tryon,  Lord  Dunmore,  are  examples,  among 
us,  of  the  real  British  subjects  in  the  contemplation 
of  the  treaty.  All  the  rest  are,  of  course,  American 
subjects. 

To  understand  the  fifth  and  sixth  articles  rela 
tively,  it  is  necessary  to  remark,  that  all  the  different 
classes  described  in  the  fifth  article  agree  in  one 
common  quality — they  are  all  persons  whose  property 
had  been  already  confiscated.  I  have  placed  this  fact 
in  a  pointed  view;  because  it  shows  incontestably, 
that  the  persons  who  are  the  objects  of  the  fifth 
article,  and  those  who  are  the  objects  of  the  sixth, 
are  totally  different.  The  one  relates  to  persons 
whose  property  had  been  confiscated,  and  aims  at 
restitution ;  the  other  relates  to  those  whose  property 
had  not  yet  been  confiscated,  who  were  actually 
suffering  the  sentence  of  the  law,  and  has  for  object, 
to  prevent  future  prosecutions,  confiscations,  or  in 
juries  to  individuals,  on  account  of  their  conduct 
in  the  war. 

This  distinction  solves  the  seeming  contradiction 
between  the  fifth  and  sixth  articles:  the  former 


2<5o  Alexander  Hamilton 

providing  for  the  future  residence  of  persons  of  a 
particular  description  within  the  State  for  a  twelve 
month;  the  other  prohibiting  all  future  injury  or 
damage  to  persons,  liberty,  or  property.  At  first 
sight,  the  great  extent  of  the  latter  provision  ap 
pears  to  supersede,  and  render  absurd,  the  former; 
but  the  two  articles  are  reconciled,  by  considering 
those  who  had  already  suffered  the  sentence  of  the 
law  as  not  within  the  purview  of  the  sixth  article, 
to  arrest  or  remit  that  sentence;  while  all  others 
against  whom  sentence  had  not  passed,  are  within  the 
protection  of  the  sixth  article.  It  does  not  operate 
with  a  retrospective  and  restorative  influence,  but 
looks  forward  and  stops  the  future  current  of  prose 
cution  and  punishment. 

To  illustrate,  in  a  more  striking  manner,  the  fal 
lacy  of  Mentor's  comment  upon  the  treaty,  I  shall 
give  a  recital  of  it,  with  some  explanatory  additions, 
the  fairness  of  which,  I  think,  will  not  be  disputed. 

"In  the  sixth  article,"  says  he,  "it  is  provided 
that  no  one  shall  suffer  in  his  person,  liberty,  or 
property,  on  account  of  the  part  he  may  have  taken 
in  the  war";  and  yet,  though  no  one,  consistently 
with  the  treaty,  can  hereafter  suffer  in  either  of 
those  respects,  yet,  many,  consistently  with  the 
treaty,  may  be  declared  aliens,  may  be  stripped  of 
the  most  valuable  rights  of  citizenship,  and  may  be 
banished  from  the  State,  without  injury  to  person, 
liberty,  or  property.  "The  fifth  article,"  though  it 
speaks  of  none  but  those  who  have  already  had 
their  estates  confiscated,  "  describes  the  persons 
provided  for  by  the  sixth,"  which  indeed  says,  that 


Letters  from  Phocion  261 

there  shall  be  no  future  prosecutions,  nor  confisca 
tions,  nor  injury  to  person,  liberty,  or  property; 
but  this  only  means,  that  there  shall  be  no  future 
prosecutions  commenced  against  those  who  have 
been  already  attainted  and  banished;  nor  confisca 
tions  made  of  the  estates  of  those  whose  estates  have 
been  already  confiscated;  nor  injuries  done  to  the 
persons,  liberty,  and  property  of  those  who  are 
already  to  be  esteemed  dead  in  law  by  attainder  and 
exile:  but  with  respect  to  all  those  who  have  not 
been  already  attainted,  banished,  and  subjected  to 
confiscation  (the  only  persons  comprehended  in  the 
fifth  article,  and  provided  for  in  the  sixth),  we  may 
prosecute,  banish,  confiscate,  disfranchise,  and  do 
whatever  else  we  think  proper.  The  fifth  article 
stipulates  the  good  offices  of  Congress  for  those  who 
have  been  already  ruined;  and  the  sixth  benignly 
takes  care  that  they  shall  not  be  ruined  a  second 
time;  but  leaves  all  others  to  their  destiny  and  our 
mercy.  "The  fifth  article  distinguishes  the  persons 
who  are  the  objects  of  it  into  three  classes: — First: 
those  who  are  real  British  subjects.  The  second: 
those,"  meaning  British  subjects,  who  are  not  real 
British  subjects,  described  by  the  appellation  of 
persons  resident  in  districts  in  the  possession  of  the 
British  forces,  "who  had  not  taken  arms  against 
the  country.  The  third  class  are  described  by  the 
provision  that  is  made  for  them;  namely:  They 
shall  have  liberty  to  go  into  any  part  of  the  United 
States  for  twelve  months,  to  solicit  a  restoration  of 
their  estates  that  may  have  been  confiscated.  This 
class  must  be  those  who,  belonging  to  America,  have 


262  Alexander  Hamilton 

taken  arms  against  their  country.  As  to  the  first 
and  second  class,  it  is  agreed,  that  Congress  shall 
recommend  to  the  States  a  restoration  of  their  prop 
erty.  The  third,  it  seems,  were  too  infamous  for 
the  English  minister  to  ask  any  consideration  for, 
except  the  wretched  privilege  of  asking  it  for  them 
selves  ' ' ;  though,  in  fact,  with  respect  even  to  them, 
it  is  expressly  stipulated  that  Congress  shall  recom 
mend  a  restoration  of  their  estates,  rights,  and  prop 
erties,  on  paying  to  the  present  possessors,  the  bona 
fide  price  given  for  them,  where  there  has  been  an 
actual  sale.  "But,"  continues  he,  "I  can  find, 
nowhere,  even  a  request,  and  that  only  implied, 
that  any  of  the  three  classes  may  dwell  among  us, 
and  enjoy  the  immunities  and  privileges  of  citizens : 
for  the  first  class  are  considered  as  former  subjects; 
the  second  and  third  as  acquired  subjects  of  Eng 
land," — acquired  but  not  real. 

Thus  we  see,  by  taking  the  outlines  of  Mentor's 
construction,  and  filling  up  the  canvas  in  a  manner 
suited  to  the  design,  the  whole  is  a  group  of  absurd 
ities;  or,  in  other  words,  by  connecting  the  conse 
quences  with  the  principles  of  his  comment  on  the 
treaty,  the  result  is  too  ridiculous  not  to  strike  the 
meanest  understanding. 

It  must  appear  by  this  time  manifest,  that  there 
is  nothing  in  the  terms  of  the  treaty,  which  counte 
nances  the  supposition  that  those  who  have  been 
within  the  British  lines  are  considered  and  stipulated 
for  as  aliens.  One  ground  upon  which  this  idea  has 
been  originally  adopted,  was,  that  it  would  have  been 
improper  to  have  stipulated  for  them  at  all,  if  they 


Letters  from  Phocion  263 

were  not  aliens:  but  I  have  shown,  in  my  former 
letter,  that  a  stipulation  for  subjects,  in  similar  cir 
cumstances,  has  been  far  from  unprecedented. 

A  good  criterion  by  which  to  determine  the  mean 
ing  of  the  treaty,  in  this  respect,  is,  to  recur  to  the 
impressions  that  it  made  on  its  first  appearance,  be 
fore  there  had  been  time  to  contrive  and  substitute 
an  artificial  to  the  natural  and  obvious  sense  of  the 
words.  Every  man,  by  appealing  to  his  own  bosom, 
will  recollect  that  he  was  at  first  struck  with  an 
opinion  that  the  disaffected  were  secured  from  every 
future  deprivation  and  injury  whatever;  and  how 
ever  many  may  have  been  chagrined  at  the  idea 
that  they  should  be  admitted  to  a  parity  of  privi 
leges  with  those  who  had  supported  the  Revolution, 
none  doubted  that  this  was  the  sense  of  the  treaty. 
Indeed,  the  principal  doubt  seemed  to  be,  in  the  first 
instance,  whether  the  sixth  article  was  not  so  broad 
as  to  protect  even  those  who  had  been  attainted, 
from  personal  injury,  in  case  of  their  return  within 
the  State. 

I  shall  not,  in  this  place,  revive  the  question  of  the 
power  of  Congress  to  make  this  stipulation ;  not  only 
because  Mentor  appears  to  have  conceded  this  point, 
and  to  acknowledge  our  obligation  to  a  faithful  ob 
servance  of  the  treaty;  but  because  what  has  been 
offered  in  my  former  letter  on  this  head  must  con 
tinue  to  appear  to  me  to  be  absolutely  conclusive, 
until  some  satisfactory  limits  can  be  assigned  to  the 
powers  of  war,  peace,  and  treaty,  vested  in  Con 
gress,  other  than  those  I  have  mentioned — the  public 
safety,  and  the  fundamental  constitutions  of  society. 


I 

264  Alexander  Hamilton 

When  any  different  and  intelligible  line  shall  be 
drawn,  I  will  give  up  the  question,  if  I  cannot  show 
it  is  inadmissible  in  practice. 

The  common  interests  of  humanity,  and  the  gen 
eral  tranquillity  of  the  world,  require  that  the  power 
of  making  peace,  wherever  lodged,  should  be  con 
strued  and  exercised  liberally;  and  even  in  cases 
where  its  extent  may  be  doubtful,  it  is  the  policy  of 
all  wise  nations  to  give  it  latitude  rather  than  con 
fine  it.  The  exigencies  of  a  community,  in  time  of 
war,  are  so  various,  and  often  so  critical,  that  it 
would  be  extremely  dangerous  to  prescribe  narrow 
bounds  to  that  power  by  which  it  is  to  be  restored. 
The  consequence  might  frequently  be  a  diffidence  of 
our  engagements,  and  a  prolongation  of  the  calami 
ties  of  war. 

It  may  not  be  improper,  in  this  place,  to  answer  an 
objection  which  has  been  made  to  a  position  con 
tained  in  my  former  letter.  It  is  there  laid  down 
as  a  rule,  that  the  breach  of  a  single  article  of  a 
treaty  annuls  the  whole.  The  reason  of  this  rule  is, 
that  every  article  is  to  be  regarded  as  the  considera 
tion  of  some  other  article. 

This  has  given  occasion  to  observe,  that  a  breach 
of  the  treaty  on  the  part  of  the  British,  in  sending 
away  a  great  number  of  negroes,  has,  upon  my  prin 
ciples,  long  since  annihilated  the  treaty,  and  left  us 
at  perfect  liberty  to  desert  the  stipulations  on  our 
part. 

This  admits  of  an  easy  and  solid  answer.  The 
breach  of  one  article  annuls  the  whole,  if  the  side  in 
jured  by  it  chooses  to  take  advantage  of  it  to  dis- 


Letters  from  Phocion  265 

solve  the  treaty ' ;  but  if  its  interest  dictates  a 
different  conduct,  it  may  waive  the  breach,  and  let 
the  obligation  of  the  treaty  continue.  The  power 
of  determining  whether  the  treaty  has  been  broken, 
properly  belongs  to  that  body  who  made  it.  Con 
gress  have  wisely  taken  a  different  course;  and,  in 
stead  of  reviving  the  state  of  hostility  by  declaring 
the  treaty  void,  have  proceeded  upon  the  presump 
tion  of  its  continuing  in  force;  and,  by  subsequent 
acts,  have  given  it  additional  validity  and  strength. 
The  definitive  treaty  has  been  since  concluded,  and 
proclaimed  with  a  remarkable  solemnity  and  energy 
for  the  observance  of  the  citizens  of  the  United 
States. 

The  third  mode  mentioned,  by  which  the  inhabit 
ants  of  the  southern  district  may  have  lost  their 
rights  of  citizenship,  is,  their  having  been  left  out  of 
the  compact  by  some  subsequent  association  of  the 
body  of  the  State.  The  fact,  however,  is  directly 
the  reverse:  for,  not  only  the  Constitution  makes 
provision  for  the  representation  of  the  people  of  the 
southern  district  in  the  Legislature,  but,  during  the 
whole  war,  by  an  ordinance  of  the  Convention  who 
framed  the  Constitution,  an  actual  representation 
has  been  kept  up  in  a  manner,  the  regularity  of 
which  (whatever  might  have  been  the  expedience  of 
it)  was  more  than  questionable,  as  all  elections  were 
suspended  in  that  part  of  the  State.  This  circum 
stance  of  a  constant  representation  of  the  inhabitants 
of  the  southern  district  in  the  Legislature,  during  the 
war,  is,  in  a  rational  as  well  as  a  legal  light,  a  conclusive 

1  Vatel,  page  130,  §  48. 


266  Alexander  Hamilton 

refutation  of  the  pretended  alienism  of  those  in 
habitants  by  any  events  of  the  war,  or  by  any  other 
matter  that  applies  to  them  in  a  collective  view 
antecedent  to  the  treaty  of  peace.  To  this  it  may 
be  added  that  a  variety  of  the  laws  of  this  State,  in 
the  course  of  the  war,  suppose  and  treat  the  inhabit 
ants  of  the  southern  district  as  subjects  owing  alle 
giance  to  the  State,  and,  consequently,  having  the 
rights  which  subjects  in  general  enjoy  under  the 
government.1 

The  argument  is  still  stronger  when  we  attend  to 
what  has  been  done  by  the  government  since  the 
restoration  of  its  jurisdiction  in  the  southern  dis 
trict.  We  did  not  wait  until  a  bill  of  naturalization 
was  passed  to  remove  the  disabilities  of  the  inhabit 
ants  before  we  proceeded  to  elections.  We  did  not 
confine  those  elections  to  such  persons  only  as  had 
resided  without  the  British  lines,  but  left  them  open 
to  all  descriptions  of  persons  who  would  choose  to 
take  the  oath  prescribed  for  that  purpose  by  the 
Council.  Few,  indeed,  in  this  city,  besides  those 
who  had  been  absent,  did  in  fact  vote  at  the  elec 
tions;  but  a  considerable  number  did  in  the  counties. 
And  if  we  should  admit  the  doctrine  of  the  general 
alienism  of  the  inhabitants  of  the  southern  district, 
either  before,  or  in  consequence  of  the  treaty  of 
peace,  a  curious  question,  not  easy  to  be  solved, 
would  arise,  as  to  the  validity  of  the  election  of  many 
individuals  now  holding  seats  in  Senate  and  As 
sembly.  So  far  as  an  act  of  government  can  de 
cide  the  point  in  controversy,  it  is  already  decided. 

1  Vide  Position  5th. 


Letters  from  Phocion  267 

The  Council  for  the  temporary  government  of  the 
southern  district,  in  appointing  the  mode  of  election; 
the  conduct  of  the  Legislature  since,  in  admitting  the 
members  elected  in  that  mode,  are  unconstitutional; 
or  the  inhabitants  at  large  of  the  southern  district, 
either  by  the  treaty,  or  any  antecedent  circumstance, 
are  not  aliens. 

I  have  dwelt  the  more  largely  on  this  head,  not 
only  because  the  idea  of  a  general  alienism  of  the 
inhabitants  of  the  southern  district  is  the  ground 
Mentor  has  taken;  but  because  some  persons,  who 
have  it  in  their  power  to  make  a  mischievous  use  of 
it,  are  endeavoring  to  give  it  circulation,  where,  if  it 
could  prevail,  it  might  lead  to  pernicious  conse 
quences.  Pressed  by  the  difficulty  of  discriminating 
those  who  may  have  forfeited  the  rights  of  citizen 
ship  from  those  who  have  not,  without  a  manifest 
violation,  as  well  of  the  Constitution  as  of  the 
treaty  of  peace,  they  are  willing,  if  possible,  to  de 
vise  some  general  expedient  to  evade  both ;  and  the 
one  they  have  hit  upon,  is,  to  declare  all  those  aliens 
who  have  lived  within  the  British  lines  during  the 
war,  on  the  miserable  pretence  that  they  are  made 
such  by  the  treaty. 

Thus  we  have  another  example  how  easy  it  is  for 
men  to  change  their  principles  with  their  situations ; 
to  be  zealous  advocates  for  the  rights  of  the  citizens 
when  they  are  invaded  by  others;  and,  as  soon  as 
they  have  it  in  their  power,  to  become  the  invaders 
themselves;  to  resist  the  encroachments  of  power, 
when  it  is  in  the  hands  of  others ;  and,  the  moment 
they  get  it  into  their  own  hands,  to  make  bolder 


268  Alexander  Hamilton 

strides  than  those  they  have  resisted.  Are  such 
men  to  be  sanctified  with  the  hallowed  names  of 
patriots?  Are  they  not  rather  to  be  branded  as  men 
who  make  their  passions,  prejudices,  and  interests  the 
sole  measure  of  their  own  and  others'  rights? 

The  history  of  mankind  is  too  full  of  these  melan 
choly  instances  of  human  contradiction. 

Having  mentioned  the  oath  directed  to  be  pre 
scribed  to  electors  in  the  southern  district,  by  the 
Council  for  the  temporary  government,  I  shall  take 
occasion,  in  this  place,  with  freedom  but  with  respect, 
to  examine  the  propriety  of  that  measure. 

This  measure  was  founded  upon  an  act  of  the 
Legislature  of  this  State,  passed  in  the  year,  declar 
ing  that  persons  who  had  been  guilty  of  certain 
matters  particularized  in  that  act,  should  be 
for  ever  after  disqualified  from  voting  at  all  public 
elections.  I  confine  myself,  for  the  sake  of  brevity, 
to  the  general  idea  of  the  act.  The  embarrassment 
with  the  Council,  no  doubt,  was,  how  to  ascertain 
the  persons  who  had  incurred  the  disability.  As 
the  matters  to  which  that  disability  related  were  of 
a  specific  nature,  it  was  necessary  they  should  be 
specifically  ascertained  before  the  law  could  have 
its  effect. 

The  Council,  therefore,  could  not  satisfy  that  law 
by  declaring  all  those  disqualified  who  had  resided 
within  the  British  lines  during  the  war.  They  would 
not  leave  the  operation  of  it  to  a  course  of  judicial 
investigation  and  decision,  because  this  would  be 
to  fly  in  the  face  of  the  treaty;  and  appearances 
were  to  be  preserved.  This  consideration  was 


Letters  from  Phocion  269 

strengthened  by  another.  The  course  of  the  law 
must  have  been  dilatory.  The  elections  were  to  be 
entered  upon.  It  was  deemed  inexpedient  that  the 
voice  of  the  citizens  at  large  (which  must  have  been 
the  case  if  the  act  of  the  Legislature  in  question 
had  been  left  to  its  natural  course)  should  govern 
these  elections.  If  the  returning  citizens  were  not 
at  this  juncture  gratified,  tumults  were  by  some 
apprehended. 

This  was  a  plausible  step,  and  on  that  account  the 
more  dangerous.  If  we  examine  it  with  an  un 
prejudiced  eye,  we  must  acknowledge,  not  only 
that  it  was  an  evasion  of  the  treaty,  but  a  subver 
sion  of  one  great  principle  of  social  security:  to  wit, 
that  every  man  shall  be  presumed  innocent  until  he 
is  proved  guilty.  This  was  to  invert  the  order  of 
things;  and,  instead  of  obliging  the  State  to  prove 
the  guilt  in  order  to  inflict  the  penalty,  it  was  to 
oblige  the  citizen  to  establish  his  own  innocence  to 
avoid  the  penalty.  It  was  to  excite  scruples  in  the 
honest  and  conscientious,  and  to  hold  out  a  bribe  to 
perjury. 

That  this  was  an  evasion  of  the  treaty,  the  fourth 
proposition  already  laid  down  will  illustrate.  It 
was  a  mode  of  inquiry,  who  had  committed  any  of 
those  crimes  to  which  the  penalty  of  disqualification 
was  annexed;  with  this  aggravation,  that  it  de 
prived  the  citizen  of  the  benefit  of  that  advantage 
which  he  would  have  enjoyed,  by  leaving,  as  in  all 
other  cases,  the  burthen  of  the  proof  upon  the 
prosecutor. 

To  place  this  matter  in  a  still  clearer  light,  let  it 


270  Alexander  Hamilton 

be  supposed,  that  instead  of  the  mode  of  indictment 
and  trial  by  jury,  the  Legislature  was  to  declare, 
that  every  citizen  who  did  not  swear  he  had  never 
adhered  to  the  King  of  Great  Britain,  should  incur 
all  the  penalties  which  our  treason  laws  prescribe. 
Would  this  not  be  a  palpable  evasion  of  the  treaty, 
and  a  direct  infringement  of  the  Constitution  ?  The 
principle  is  the  same  in  both  cases;  with  only  this 
difference  in  the  consequences,  that,  in  the  instance 
already  acted  upon,  the  citizen  forfeits  a  part  of  his 
rights;  in  the  one  supposed,  he  would  forfeit  the 
whole.  The  degree  of  punishment  is  all  that  dis 
tinguishes  the  cases.  In  either,  justly  considered, 
it  is  substituting  a  new  and  arbitrary  mode  of 
prosecution  to  that  ancient  and  highly  esteemed 
one,  recognized  by  the  laws  and  the  Constitution  of 
the  State, — I  mean  the  trial  by  jury. 

Let  us  not  forget,  that  the  Constitution  declares, 
that  trial  by  jury,  in  all  cases  in  which  it  has  been 
formerly  used,  should  remain  inviolate  for  ever;  and 
that  the  Legislature  should,  at  no  time,  erect  any 
new  jurisdiction  which  should  not  proceed  according 
to  the  courses  of  the  common  law.  Nothing  can  be 
more  repugnant  to  the  true  genius  of  the  common 
law,  than  such  an  inquisition  as  has  been  men 
tioned  into  the  consciences  of  men. 

A  share  in  the  sovereignty  of  the  State,  which  is 
exercised  by  the  citizens  at  large,  in  voting  at  elec 
tions,  is  one  of  the  most  important  rights  of  the 
subject,  and,  in  a  republic,  ought  to  stand  foremost 
in  the  estimation  of  the  law.  It  is  that  right  by 
which  we  exist  a  free  people ;  and  it  certainly,  there- 


Letters  from  Phocion  271 

fore,  will  never  be  admitted,  that  less  ceremony 
ought  to  be  used  in  divesting  any  citizen  of  that 
right  than  in  depriving  him  of  his  property.  Such 
a  doctrine  would  ill  suit  the  principles  of  the  Revo 
lution,  which  taught  the  inhabitants  of  this  country 
to  risk  their  lives  and  fortunes  in  asserting  their 
liberty;  or,  in  other  words,  their  right  to  a  share  in 
the  government.  That  portion  of  the  sovereignty 
to  which  each  individual  is  entitled,  can  never  be 
too  highly  prized.  It  is  that  for  which  we  have 
fought  and  bled;  and  we  should  cautiously  guard 
against  any  precedents,  however  they  may  be  im 
mediately  directed  against  those  we  hate,  which 
may,  in  their  consequences,  render  our  title  to  this 
great  privilege  precarious.  Here  we  may  find  the 
criterion  to  distinguish  the  genuine  from  the  pre 
tended  Whig.  The  man  that  would  attack  that 
right,  in  whatever  shape,  is  an  enemy  to  Whigism. 

If  any  oath,  with  retrospect  to  past  conduct, 
were  to  be  made  the  condition  on  which  individuals 
who  have  resided  within  the  British  lines  should 
hold  their  estates,  we  should  immediately  see  that 
this  proceeding  would  be  tyrannical,  and  a  violation 
of  the  treaty;  and  yet,  when  the  same  mode  is  em 
ployed  to  divest  that  right,  which  ought  to  be 
deemed  still  more  sacred,  many  of  us  are  so  infatu 
ated  as  to  overlook  the  mischief. 

To  say  that  the  persons  who  will  be  affected  by  it 
have  previously  forfeited  that  right,  and  that  there 
fore  nothing  is  taken  away  from  them,  is  a  begging 
of  the  question.  How  do  we  know  who  are  the 
persons  in  this  situation?  If  it  be  answered,  This 


272  Alexander  Hamilton 

is  the  mode  taken  to  ascertain  it;  the  objection  re 
turns,  'T  is  an  improper  mode,  because  it  puts  the 
most  essential  interests  of  the  citizen  upon  a  worse 
footing  than  we  should  be  willing  to  tolerate  where 
inferior  interests  were  concerned;  and  because,  to 
elude  the  treaty,  it  substitutes  to  the  established 
and  legal  mode  of  investigating  crimes  and  inflicting 
forfeitures,  one  that  is  unknown  to  the  Constitution 
and  repugnant  to  the  genius  of  our  law. 

Much  stress  has  been  laid  upon  a  couple  of  un 
meaning  words  in  the  act  to  enforce  the  penalties 
for  which  the  oath  was  invented.  It  is  declared 
that  the  persons  who  have  done  the  several  things 
enumerated  in  the  act  shall  be  ipso  facto  disqualified. 
These  words  of  potent  sound  but  of  little  substance, 
have  been  supposed  to  include  wonderful  effects. 
Let  us  see  if  we  can  give  them  any  definite  meaning. 
If  a  man  commits  murder,  by  the  very  act,  ipso 
facto,  he  incurs  the  penalty  of  death ;  but  before  he 
can  be  hanged  we  must  inquire  whether  he  has  cer 
tainly  committed  the  act.  If  a  man  has  done  any 
of  those  things  which  are  declared  sufficient  to  dis 
qualify  him  from  voting,  though  by  the  very  act, 
ipso  facto,  he  incurs  the  penalty  of  the  law,  yet,  before 
he  can  be  actually  disqualified,  we  must  inquire 
whether  he  has  really  done  the  act.  From  this  we 
perceive  the  words  ipso  facto  are  mere  expletives, 
which  add  nothing  to  the  force  or  efficacy  of  the  law. 

It  has  been  said,  too,  that  an  oath  to  determine 
the  qualifications  of  electors  is  a  usual  precaution  in 
free  governments ;  but  we  may  challenge  those  who 
make  the  assertion,  to  show  that  retrospective  oaths 


Letters  from  Phocion  273 

have  ever  been  administered,  requiring  electors  to 
swear  that  they  have  not  been  guilty  of  past  of 
fences.  In  all  the  violence  of  party  which  has,  at 
different  periods,  agitated  Great  Britain,  nothing  of 
this  kind  has  ever  been  adopted;  but  even  where 
religious  fanaticism  has  given  an  edge  to  political 
opposition,  and  in  an  undecided  contest  for  the 
crown,  they  have  never  gone  further  than  to  pre 
scribe  oaths  for  testing  present  dispositions  towards 
the  government,  on  general  principles,  without  retro 
spection  to  particular  instances  of  past  mal-conduct. 
The  practical  notions  of  legal  liberty  established  in 
that  country  by  a  series  of  trials,  would  make  such 
an  experiment  too  odious  to  be  attempted  by  the 
government.  Wise  men  have  thought  that  even 
there  they  have  carried  the  business  of  oaths  to  an 
exceptionable  length;  but  we,  who  pretend  a  purer 
zeal  for  liberty,  in  a  decided  contest,  after  a  formal 
renunciation  of  claims  by  the  adverse  party,  are 
for  carrying  the  matter  to  a  still  more  blamable 
extreme. 

Men  whose  judgments  and  intentions  I  respect, 
were  the  promoters  of  the  measure  which  has  oc 
casioned  this  digression:  some  from  the  contagion 
of  popular  opinion;  others  from  the  too  strong 
impressions  of  momentary  expedience  ;  and  a 
third  class  from  the  insensible  bias  of  some  favorite 
pursuit. 

As  to  the  fourth  method  in  which  the  inhabitants 
of  the  southern  district  may  have  lost  their  rights 
of  citizenship,  a  dismemberment  by  treaty,  I  have 
naturally  been  drawn,  under  the  third  head,  into  a 


274  Alexander  Hamilton 

discussion  of  this;  and  I  trust  have  shown,  to  the 
full  satisfaction  of  all  candid  men,  that  there  is  not 
a  shadow  of  foundation  to  suppose  that  such  a  dis 
memberment  is  in  the  contemplation  of  the  treaty. 
A  few  short  remarks  shall  conclude  what  I  intend  to 
say  on  this  article. 

It  is  a  case  without  precedent,  that  a  nation,  in 
surrendering  its  acquisitions  in  war  to  the  state 
from  which  those  acquisitions  were  made,  should 
stipulate  for  the  inhabitants  of  the  country  given 
up  as  for  its  own  subjects.  To  do  it  would  be  both 
useless  and  absurd:  useless,  because  the  country 
being  surrendered,  no  reasonable  advantage  could 
be  derived  from  retaining  the  allegiance  of  its  in 
habitants;  absurd,  because  the  district  of  territory 
surrendered  being  given  up  as  a  part  of  the  state  to 
which  the  surrender  is  made,  it  would  be  contra 
dictory,  by  the  same  act,  to  acknowledge  the  right 
of  that  state  to  the  part  given  up,  and  yet  to  hold 
up  a  claim  to  the  allegiance  of  its  inhabitants. 

The  surrender  (for  the  question  does  not  relate  to 
original  cessions)  carries  in  itself  a  decisive  implica 
tion  that  the  inhabitants  of  the  country  surrendered 
are  the  subjects  of  the  power  to  which  the  surrender 
is  made;  and  the  presumption  in  this  case  is  so 
strong  that  nothing  but  the  most  positive  and  un 
equivocal  exceptions  in  the  treaty  would  be  suffi 
cient  to  defeat  it.  Labored  constructions  to  give  the 
treaty  that  complexion  are  inadmissible;  for  if  there 
were  room  to  doubt,  the  doubt,  in  just  reasoning, 
should  be  interpreted  against  the  position  that  the 
inhabitants  of  the  country  surrendered  were  the  sub- 


Letters  from  Phocion  275 

jects  of  the  power  by  which  the  surrender  was 
made. 

The  only  additional  remark  I  shall  make  on  this 
head  is  this :  Though  we  are  under  great  obligations 
to  our  ministers  for  the  substance  of  the  treaty, 
which  comprehends  all  the  essential  interests  of  this 
country,  we  must  acknowledge  that  the  language  of  it 
is  in  many  respects  defective  and  obscure.  The  true 
rule  in  this  case  is  not  to  have  recourse  to  artificial 
and  far-fetched  interpretation,  but  to  admit  such 
meanings  as  the  simple  and  popular  import  of  the 
words  conveys.  When,  therefore,  it  is  said,  in  the 
sixth  article,  "  that  there  shall  be  no  future  prose 
cutions  commenced,  nor  confiscations  made,  nor 
damage  done  to  person,  liberty,  or  property  of  any 
person  or  persons  on  account  of  the  part  taken  by 
them  in  the  war  " ;  as  the  natural  and  obvious  scope 
of  the  words  presents  a  full  amnesty  and  indemnity 
for  the  future,  we  should  not  torture  our  imagina 
tions  to  pervert  them  to  a  different  sense. 

It  has  been  urged,  in  support  of  the  doctrines  under 
consideration,  that  every  government  has  a  right  to 
take  precautions  for  its  own  security,  and  to  prescribe 
the  terms  on  which  its  rights  shall  be  enjoyed. 

All  this  is  true  when  understood  with  proper 
limitations;  but,  when  rightly  understood,  will  not 
be  found  to  justify  the  conclusions  which  have  been 
drawn  from  the  premises. 

In  the  first  formation  of  a  government,  the  society 
may  multiply  its  precautions  as  much,  and  annex 
as  many  conditions  to  the  enjoyment  of  its  rights, 
as  it  shall  judge  expedient;  but  when  it  has  once 


276  Alexander  Hamilton 

adopted  a  Constitution  that  Constitution  must  be 
the  measure  of  its  discretion  in  providing  for  its 
own  safety,  and  in  prescribing  the  conditions  upon 
which  its  privileges  are  to  be  enjoyed.  If  the  Con 
stitution  declares  that  persons  possessing  certain 
qualifications  shall  be  entitled  to  certain  rights 
while  that  Constitution  remains  in  force,  the  gov 
ernment,  which  is  the  mere  creature  of  the  Constitu 
tion,  can  divest  no  citizen,  who  has  the  requisite 
qualifications,  of  his  corresponding  rights.  It  may 
indeed  enact  laws  and  annex  to  the  breach  of  them 
the  penalty  of  forfeiture;  but  before  that  penalty 
can  operate,  the  existence  of  the  fact  upon  which  it 
is  to  take  place  must  be  ascertained  in  that  mode 
which  the  Constitution  and  fundamental  laws  have 
provided.  If  trial  by  jury  is  the  mode  known  and 
established  by  that  Constitution  and  those  laws, 
the  persons  who  administer  the  government  in 
deviating  from  that  course  will  be  guilty  of  usurpa 
tion.  If  the  Constitution  declares  that  the  legisla 
tive  power  of  the  state  shall  be  vested  in  one  set  of 
men  and  the  judiciary  power  in  another;  and  those 
who  are  appointed  to  act  in  a  legislative  capacity 
undertake  the  office  of  judges;  if,  instead  of  con 
fining  themselves  to  passing  laws  with  proper  sanc 
tions  to  enforce  their  observance,  they  go  out  of 
their  province  to  decide  who  are  the  violators  of 
those  laws,  they  subvert  the  Constitution  and  erect 
a  tyranny.  If  the  Constitution  were  even  silent  on 
particular  points,  those  who  are  intrusted  with  its 
power  would  be  bound  in  exercising  their  discretion 
to  consult  and  pursue  its  spirit,  and  to  conform  to 


Letters  from  Phocion  277 

the  dictates  of  reason  and  equity ;  if,  instead  of  this, 
they  should  undertake  to  declare  whole  classes  of 
citizens  disfranchised  and  excluded  from  the  com 
mon  rights  of  the  society  without  hearing,  trial, 
examination,  or  proof;  if,  instead  of  waiting  to  take 
away  the  rights  of  citizenship  from  individuals  till 
the  state  has  convicted  them  of  crimes  by  which 
they  are  to  lose  them  before  the  ordinary  and  regular 
tribunal,  they  institute  an  inquisition  into  men's 
consciences  and  oblige  them  to  give  up  their  privi 
leges  or  undertake  to  interpret  the  law  at  the  hazard 
of  perjury,  they  expose  themselves  to  the  imputa 
tion  of  injustice  and  oppression. 

The  right  of  government  to  prescribe  the  condi 
tions  on  which  its  privileges  shall  be  enjoyed  is 
bounded,  with  respect  to  those  who  are  already  in 
cluded  in  the  compact,  by  its  original  conditions :  in 
admitting  strangers  it  may  add  new  ones;  but  it 
cannot,  without  a  breach  of  the  social  compact,  de 
prive  those  who  have  been  once  admitted,  of  their 
rights,  unless  for  some  declared  cause  of  forfeiture 
authenticated  with  the  solemnities  required  by  the 
subsisting  compact. 

The  rights,  too,  of  a  republican  government  are 
to  be  modified  and  regulated  by  the  principles  of 
such  a  government.  These  principles  dictate  that 
no  man  shall  lose  his  rights  without  a  hearing  and 
conviction  before  the  proper  tribunal ;  that,  previous 
to  his  disfranchisement,  he  shall  have  the  full  benefit 
of  the  laws  to  make  his  defence ;  and  that  his  inno 
cence  shall  be  presumed  until  his  guilt  has  been 
proved.  These,  with  many  other  maxims,  never  to 


278  Alexander  Hamilton 

be  forgotten  in  any  but  tyrannical  governments,  op 
pose  the  aims  of  those  who  quarrel  with  the  prin 
ciples  of  Phocion. 

Cases  indeed  of  extreme  necessity  are  exceptions 
to  all  general  rules,  but  these  only  exist  when  it  is 
manifest  the  safety  of  the  community  is  in  imminent 
danger.  Speculations  of  possible  danger  never  can 
be  justifying  causes  of  departures  from  principles  on 
which,  in  the  ordinary  course  of  things,  all  private 
security  depends;  from  principles  which  constitute 
the  essential  distinction  between  free  and  arbitrary 
governments. 

When  the  advocates  for  legislative  discriminations 
are  driven  from  one  subterfuge  to  another,  their  last 
resting-place  is  that  this  is  a  new  case,  the  case  of  a 
revolution.  Your  principles  are  all  right,  say  they, 
in  the  ordinary  course  of  society;  but  they  do  not 
apply  to  a  situation  like  ours.  This  is  opening  a 
wilderness  through  all  the  labyrinths  of  which  it 
is  impossible  to  pursue  them.  The  answer  to  this 
must  be  that  there  are  principles  eternally  true,  and 
which  apply  to  all  situations  such  as  those  that  have 
been  already  enumerated;  that  we  are  not  now  in 
the  midst  of  a  revolution,  but  have  happily  brought 
it  to  a  successful  issue ;  that  we  have  a  Constitution 
formed  as  a  rule  of  conduct;  that  the  frame  of  our 
government  is  determined,  and  the  general  principles 
of  it  settled;  that  we  have  taken  our  station  among 
nations ;  have  claimed  the  benefit  of  the  laws  which 
regulate  them,  and  must  in  our  turn  be  bound  by  the 
same  laws;  that  those  eternal  principles  of  social 
justice  forbid  the  inflicting  punishment  upon  citizens 


Letters  from  Phocion  279 

by  an  abridgment  of  rights,  or  in  any  other  manner, 
without  conviction  of  some  specific  offence  by  regular 
trial  and  condemnation;  that  the  Constitution  we 
have  formed  makes  the  trial  by  jury  the  only  proper 
mode  of  ascertaining  the  delinquencies  of  individuals ; 
that  legislative  discriminations  to  supersede  the 
necessity  of  inquiry  and  proof  would  be  a  usurpation 
of  the  judiciary  powers  of  the  government,  and  a 
renunciation  of  all  the  maxims  of  civil  liberty;  that 
by  the  laws  of  nations  and  the  rules  of  justice  we  are 
bound  to  observe  the  engagements  entered  into  on 
our  behalf  by  that  power  which  is  invested  with 
the  constitutional  prerogative  of  treaty ;  and  that  the 
treaty  we  have  made  in  its  genuine  sense  ties  up  the 
hands  of  government  from  any  species  of  future 
prosecution  or  punishment,  on  account  of  the  part 
taken  by  individuals  in  the  war. 

Among  the  extravagancies  with  which  these  pro 
lific  times  abound,  we  hear  it  often  said  that  the  Con 
stitution  being  the  creature  of  the  people,  their 
sense  with  respect  to  any  measure,  if  it  even  stand 
in  opposition  to  the  Constitution,  will  sanctify  and 
make  it  right. 

Happily  for  us  in  this  country,  the  position  is  not 
to  be  controverted,  that  the  Constitution  is  the 
creature  of  the  people;  but  it  does  not  follow  that 
they  are  not  bound  by  it  while  they  suffer  it  to  con 
tinue  in  force,  nor  does  it  follow  that  the  Legislature, 
which  is,  on  the  other  hand,  a  creature  of  the  Con 
stitution,  can  depart  from  it  on  any  presumption  of 
the  contrary  sense  of  the  people. 

The  Constitution  is  the  compact  made  between 


280  Alexander  Hamilton 

the  society  at  large  and  each  individual.  The  so 
ciety,  therefore,  cannot  without  breach  of  faith  and 
injustice  refuse  to  any  individual  a  single  advantage 
which  he  derives  under  that  compact,  no  more  than 
one  man  can  refuse  to  perform  his  agreement  with 
another.  If  the  community  have  good  reasons  for 
abrogating  the  old  compact  and  establishing  a  new 
one,  it  undoubtedly  has  a  right  to  do  it;  but  until 
the  compact  is  dissolved  with  the  same  solemnity 
and  certainty  with  which  it  was  made,  the  society  as 
well  as  individuals  are  bound  by  it. 

All  the  authority  of  the  Legislature  is  delegated 
to  them  under  the  Constitution;  their  rights  and 
powers  are  there  defined;  if  they  exceed  them  it  is  a 
treasonable  usurpation  upon  the  power  and  majesty 
of  the  people,  and  by  the  same  rule  that  they  may 
take  away  from  a  single  individual  the  rights  he 
claims  under  the  Constitution,  they  may  erect  them 
selves  into  perpetual  dictators.  The  sense  of  the 
people,  if  urged  in  justification  of  the  measure,  must 
be  considered  as  a  mere  pretext,  for  that  sense  can 
not  appear  to  them  in  a  form  so  explicit  and 
authoritative  as  the  Constitution  under  which  they 
act,  and  if  it  could  appear  with  equal  authenticity, 
it  could  only  bind  when  it  had  been  preceded  by  a 
declared  change  in  the  form  of  government. 

The  contrary  doctrine  serves  to  undermine  all 
those  rules  by  which  individuals  can  know  their 
duties  and  their  rights,  and  to  convert  the  govern 
ment  into  a  government  of  will,  not  of  laws. 

There  is  only  one  light,  on  Mentor's  plan,  in  which 
this  subject  remains  to  be  considered;  the  danger 


Letters  from  Phocion  281 

to  the  government  from  suffering  persons  to  reside 
among  us  who  have  an  aversion  to  our  Constitution; 
either  by  their  becoming  auxiliaries  to  future  at 
tempts  of  the  British  nation  to  recover  their  lost 
authority,  or  by  their  contributing  to  corrupt  the 
principles  and  change  the  form  of  our  government. 

My  observations  on  this  subject  in  my  former 
letter,  I  believe,  remain  unshaken  by  what  Mentor 
has  opposed  to  them.  I  shall,  however,  add  a  few 
others. 

The  restoration  of  British  authority  in  this  country 
is  too  chimerical  to  be  believed  even  by  Mentor  him 
self;  though  he  makes  some  faint  essay  to  induce 
the  supposition. 

Why  did  Great  Britain  make  peace  with  America? 
Because  the  necessity  of  her  affairs  compelled  her  to 
do  it  In  what  did  this  necessity  consist  ?  In  every 
species  of  embarrassment  and  disorder  that  a  nation 
could  experience.  Her  public  debt  had  almost  ar 
rived  at  that  point,  when  the  expenses  of  a  peace 
establishment  were  nearly  equal  to  all  the  revenues 
they  were  able  to  extract  from  exhausting  the 
sources  of  taxation.  Had  they  carried  on  the  war 
till  they  had  exceeded  this  point,  a  bankruptcy 
would  have  been  the  inevitable  consequence.  We 
perceive,  as  it  is,  the  great  difficulties  that  are 
acknowledged  by  every  succession  of  ministers,  in 
devising  means  to  retrieve  the  affairs  of  the  nation. 

The  distractions  of  the  government,  arising  from 
those  embarrassments,  are  scarcely  paralleled  in  any 
period  of  British  history.  Almost  every  sitting  of 
Parliament  is  a  signal  of  a  change  of  ministry.  The 


282  Alexander  Hamilton 

King  at  variance  with  his  Ministers;  the  Ministers 
unsupported  by  Parliament;  the  Lords  disagreeing 
with  the  Commons ;  the  nation  execrating  the  King, 
Ministers,  Lords,  and  Commons ;  all  these  are  symp 
toms  of  a  vital  malady  in  the  present  state  of  the 
nation. 

Externally  the  scene  is  not  brighter.  The  affairs 
of  the  East  India  settlements  are  in  the  most  per 
plexing  confusion;  and  Ireland  seems  to  be  ready 
to  dismember  itself  from  the  British  Empire. 

It  may  be  said  that  these  are  temporary  mischiefs, 
which  may  be  succeeded  by  greater  tranquillity, 
prosperity,  and  power.  The  future  situation  of 
Great  Britain  is  a  problem  which  the  wisest  man 
cannot  solve.  In  all  appearance,  it  will  be  a  con 
siderable  time  before  she  can  recover  from  the  pres 
sure  of  the  evils  under  which  she  now  labors,  to  be 
in  a  condition  to  form  enterprises  against  others. 
When  that  period  may  arrive,  our  strength  and  re 
sources  will  have  greatly  increased;  the  habits  of 
men  attached  to  her  will  have  worn  out:  and  it  is 
visionary  to  suppose  that  she  will  then  entertain  a 
disposition  to  renew  her  attempts  upon  a  country, 
increased  in  strength  and  resources,  exerting  its 
forces  under  an  established  Constitution,  fortified 
by  foreign  alliances,  which  her  acknowledged  inde 
pendence  will  at  all  times  command;  when  she 
reflects  that  that  country,  in  the  tumult  of  a  revo 
lution,  and  in  a  state  of  comparative  impotence, 
baffled  all  her  efforts  in  the  zenith  of  her  power. 

To  an  enlightened  mind  it  will  be  sufficient  to  say, 
upon  this  subject,  that,  independent  of  our  own 


Letters  from  Phocion  283 

means  of  repelling  enterprises  against  us,  Europe 
has  been  taught,  by  this  revolution,  to  estimate  the 
danger  to  itself  of  a  union  of  the  two  countries  under 
the  same  government,  in  too  striking  a  manner  ever 
to  permit  the  reunion,  or  tolerate  the  attempts  of 
Great  Britain  toward  it. 

The  danger  from  the  corruption  of  the  principles 
of  our  government  is  more  plausible,  but  not  more 
solid.  It  is  an  axiom,  that  governments  form  man 
ners,  as  well  as  manners  form  governments.  The 
body  of  the  people  of  this  State  are  too  firmly  at 
tached  to  the  democracy  to  permit  the  principles  of 
a  small  number  to  give  a  different  tone  to  that  spirit.1 
The  present  law  of  inheritance,  making  an  equal 
division  among  the  children  of  the  parents'  prop 
erty,  will  soon  melt  down  those  great  estates,  which, 
if  they  continued,  might  favor  the  power  of  the  few. 
The  number  of  the  disaffected,  who  are  so  from 
speculative  notions  of  government,  is  small.  The 
great  majority  of  those  who  took  part  against  us 
did  it  from  accident,  from  the  dread  of  the  British 
power,  and  from  the  influence  of  others  to  whom 
they  had  been  accustomed  to  look  up.  Most  of  the 
men  who  had  that  kind  of  influence  are  already  gone : 
the  residue  and  their  adherents  must  be  carried 
along  by  the  torrent,  and,  with  a  very  few  excep 
tions,  if  the  government  is  mild  and  just,  will  soon 
come  to  view  it  with  approbation  and  attachment. 

Either  the  number  of  malcontents  in  the  State  is 


1  This  whole  passage  should  be  noted  because  it  disposes  so  com 
pletely  of  Jefferson's  absurd  and  reiterated  charge  that  Hamilton 
wished  to  introduce  a  monarchy. 


284  Alexander  Hamilton 

small  or  it  is  considerable.  If  small,  there  is  no  room 
for  apprehension;  if  great,  then  opposition  to  the 
government  is  only  to  be  overcome  by  making  it 
their  interest  to  be  its  friends,  or  by  extirpating 
them  from  the  community.  A  middle  line,  which 
will  betray  a  spirit  of  persecution  in  the  government, 
but  will  only  extend  its  operation  to  a  small  number, 
will  answer  no  other  purpose  than  to  disable  a  few, 
and  inflame  and  rivet  the  prejudices  of  the  rest,  by 
exhibiting  the  temper  of  government  in  a  harsh  and 
unconciliating  light.  We  shall,  then,  in  truth,  have 
a  considerable  faction  in  the  State  ready  for  all 
innovations. 

The  impracticability  of  such  a  general  extirpa 
tion,  suggests  the  opposite  conduct  as  the  only 
proper  one. 

There  is  a  bigotry  in  politics  as  well  as  in  religions, 
equally  pernicious  in  both.  The  zealots,  of  either 
description,  are  ignorant  of  the  advantage  of  a  spirit 
of  toleration.  It  was  a  long  time  before  the  king 
doms  of  Europe  were  convinced  of  the  folly  of  per 
secution  with  respect  to  those  who  were  schismatics 
from  the  established  church.  The  cry  was,  these 
men  will  be  equally  the  disturbers  of  the  Hierarchy 
and  of  the  State.  While  some  kingdoms  were  im 
poverishing  and  depopulating  themselves  by  their 
severities  to  the  non-conformists,  their  wiser  neigh 
bors  were  reaping  the  fruits  of  their  folly,  and  aug 
menting  their  own  numbers,  industry,  and  wealth, 
by  receiving,  with  open  arms,  the  persecuted  fugi 
tives.  Time  and  experience  have  taught  a  different 
lesson :  and  there  is  not  an  enlightened  nation  which 


Letters  from  Phocion  285 

does  not  now  acknowledge  the  force  of  this  truth, 
that  whatever  speculative  notions  of  religion  may 
be  entertained,  men  will  not,  on  that  account,  be 
enemies  to  a  government  that  affords  them  protec 
tion  and  security.  The  same  spirit  of  toleration  in 
politics,  and  for  the  same  reasons,  has  made  great 
progress  among  mankind,  of  which  the  history  of 
most  modern  revolutions  is  a  proof.  Unhappily  for 
this  State,  there  are  some  among  us  who  possess  too 
much  influence;  that  have  motives  of  personal  am 
bition  and  interest  to  shut  their  minds  against  the 
entrance  of  that  moderation  which  the  real  welfare 
of  the  community  teaches. 

Our  neighbors  seem  to  be  in  a  disposition  to  benefit 
by  our  mistakes;  and  the  time  will  not  be  very  re 
mote,  if  the  schemes  of  some  men  can  prevail,  when 
we  shall  be  ashamed  of  our  own  blindness,  and  heap 
infamy  upon  its  promoters. 

It  is  remarkable,  though  not  extraordinary,  that 
those  characters,  throughout  the  States,  who  have 
been  principally  instrumental  in  the  revolution,  are 
the  most  opposed  to  persecuting  measures.  Were 
it  proper,  I  might  trace  the  truth  of  this  remark 
from  that  character  which  has  been  the  first,  in 
conspicuousness,  through  the  several  gradations  of 
those,  with  very  few  exceptions,  who,  either  in  the 
civil  or  military  line,  have  borne  a  distinguished 
part.  On  the  other  hand,  I  might  point  out  men 
who  were  reluctantly  dragged  into  taking  a  part  in 
the  revolution;  others  who  were  furious  zealots  in 
the  commencement  of  the  dispute,  that  were  not 
heard  of  to  any  public  purpose,  during  the  progress 


286  Alexander  Hamilton 

of  it;  and  others  who  were  fluctuating,  according 
to  the  tide  of  good-  or  ill-fortune ;  all  of  whom  now 
join  in  the  cry  with  a  fourth  class,  more  imprudent, 
but  much  more  respectable,  and  endeavor,  by  the 
loudness  of  their  clamors,  to  atone  for  their  past 
delinquencies. 

As  to  Mentor's  commercial  reveries,  I  shall  de 
cline  bestowing  many  remarks  upon  them ;  not  only 
because  they  are  not  immediately  connected  with 
the  general  subject,  but  because  there  is  little  danger 
of  their  making  any  proselytes,  while  men  are  con 
vinced  that  the  prosperity  of  the  national  com 
merce  depends  as  much  upon  the  extent  of  its  capital 
as  that  of  an  individual;  that  to  confine  trade  to 
any  particular  description  of  men,  in  exclusion  of 
others  who  have  better  means  of  carrying  it  on, 
would  be,  if  practicable,  to  make  the  people  at  large 
tributary  to  the  avarice  of  a  small  number  who  were 
to  have  the  benefit  of  the  monopoly;  that,  in  the 
present  situation  of  things,  a  very  small  proportion 
of  those  intended  to  be  benefited,  who  have  the 
means  to  avail  themselves  of  the  advantage,  would 
reap  all  its  fruits,  even  at  the  expense,  and  to  the 
prejudice,  of  the  greater  part  of  those  who  were 
meant  to  be  favored;  that  the  fewer  hands  trade  is 
confined  to,  the  less  will  be  its  activity,  and  the  less 
the  degree  of  employment  afforded  to  other  classes 
of  the  community;  and,  in  short,  that  all  mono 
polies,  exclusions,  and  discriminations,  in  matters  of 
traffic,  are  pernicious  and  absurd. 

Since  writing  the  foregoing,  I  have  learned  that  a 
bill  is  depending  before  the  House  of  Assembly,  for 


Letters  from  Phocion  287 

putting  various  descriptions  of  persons  out  of  the 
protection  of  government.  I  have  too  much  respect 
for  the  wisdom  and  virtue  of  that  body,  to  suppose 
a  measure  of  this  nature  can  obtain  the  sanction  of 
the  majority.  What  is  the  plain  language  of  the 
proposal?  There  are  certain  persons  who  are  ob 
noxious  to  public  resentment.  The  treaty  forbids 
us  to  proceed  against  them  in  a  legal  way.  Let  us, 
therefore,  by  an  unconstitutional  exertion  of  power 
evade  the  treaty,  however  dangerous  the  precedent 
to  the  liberty  of  the  subject,  and  however  derogatory 
to  the  honor  of  the  nation.  By  the  treaty  we  stipu 
late,  that  no  person  or  persons  shall  suffer,  on  account 
of  the  part  they  may  have  taken  in  the  war,  any 
damage  to  person,  liberty,  or  property;  and  yet,  by 
taking  away  the  protection  of  government,  which 
they  would  enjoy  under  the  subsisting  laws,  we  leave 
them  to  suffer  whatever  injury  to  either,  the  rash 
ness  of  individuals  who  are  the  subjects  of  the  State, 
may  think  proper  to  inflict.  What  would  this  be, 
but  to  imitate  the  conduct  of  a  certain  general,  who, 
having  promised  that  he  would  not  spill  the  blood 
of  some  prisoners  who  were  about  to  surrender  by 
capitulation,  after  he  had  them  in  his  power  had 
them  all  strangled  to  death?  Words,  in  every  con 
tract,  are  to  be  construed  so  as  to  give  them  a 
reasonable  effect.  When  it  is  stipulated  that  a  man 
shall  not  suffer  in  person,  liberty,  or  property,  it 
does  not  merely  mean,  that  the  State  will  not  inflict 
any  positive  punishment  upon  him,  but  also  that  it 
will  afford  him  protection  and  security  from  injury. 
The  very  letter,  as  well  as  the  spirit  of  the  stipulation, 


288  Alexander  Hamilton 

imports  this.  He  shall  not  suffer  any  damage,  are 
the  words  of  the  treaty. 

The  scheme  of  putting  men  out  of  the  protection 
of  the  law,  is  calculated  to  transfer  the  sceptre  from 
the  hands  of  government  to  those  of  individuals; 
it  is  to  arm  one  part  of  the  community  against  an 
other;  it  is  to  enact  a  civil  war.  If,  unhappily  for 
the  State,  this  plan  could  succeed,  no  man  can  fore 
see  the  end  of  it.  But  the  guardians  of  the  rights  of 
the  community  will  certainly,  on  mature  delibera 
tion,  reject  it. 

Feeling  for  the  honor  of  the  State,  if  expulsions 
must  take  place,  if  the  Constitution  and  the  faith 
of  the  United  States  must  be  sacrificed  to  a  sup 
posed  political  expedience,  I  had  much  rather  see 
an  open  avowal  of  the  principles  upon  which  we 
acted,  than  that  we  should  clothe  the  design  with  a 
veil  of  artifice  and  disguise,  too  thin  not  to  be  pene 
trated  by  the  most  ordinary  eye. 

I  shall  now,  with  a  few  general  reflections,  con 
clude. 

Those  who  are  at  present  entrusted  with  power, 
in  all  these  infant  republics,  hold  the  most  sacred 
deposit  that  ever  was  confided  to  human  hands. 
'T  is  with  governments  as  with  individuals ;  first 
impressions  and  early  habits  give  a  lasting  bias  to 
the  temper  and  character.  Our  governments,  hith 
erto,  have  no  habits.  How  important  to  the  happi 
ness,  not  of  America  alone,  but  of  mankind,  that 
they  should  acquire  good  ones! 

If  we  set  out  with  justice,  moderation,  liberality, 
and  a  scrupulous  regard  to  the  Constitution,  the 


•  Letters  from  Phocion  289 

government  will  acquire  a  spirit  and  tone  productive 
of  permanent  blessings  to  the  community.  If,  on 
the  contrary,  the  public  councils  are  guided  by 
humor,  passion,  and  prejudice;  if  from  resentment 
to  individuals,  or  a  dread  of  partial  inconveniences, 
the  Constitution  is  slighted,  or  explained  away,  upon 
every  frivolous  pretext,  the  future  spirit  of  govern 
ment  will  be  feeble,  distracted,  and  arbitrary.  The 
rights  of  the  subject  will  be  the  sport  of  every  party 
vicissitude.  There  will  be  no  settled  rule  of  con 
duct,  but  every  thing  will  fluctuate  with  the  alter 
nate  prevalency  of  contending  factions. 

The  world  has  its  eye  upon  America.  The  noble 
struggle  we  have  made  in  the  cause  of  liberty  has 
occasioned  a  kind  of  revolution  in  human  sentiment. 
The  influence  of  our  example  has  penetrated  the 
gloomy  regions  of  despotism,  and  has  pointed  the 
way  to  enquiries  which  may  shake  it  to  its  deepest 
foundations.  Men  begin  to  ask,  everywhere:  Who 
is  this  tyrant  that  dares  to  build  his  greatness  on 
our  misery  and  degradation?  What  commission 
has  he  to  sacrifice  millions  to  the  wanton  appetites 
of  himself  and  a  few  minions  that  surround  his 
throne  ? 

To  ripen  enquiry  into  action,  it  remains  for  us  to 
justify  the  revolution  by  its  fruits. 

If  the  consequences  prove  that  we  really  have  as 
serted  the  cause  of  human  happiness,  what  may  not 
be  expected  from  so  illustrious  an  example?  In  a 
greater  or  less  degree  the  world  will  bless  and 
imitate. 

But  if  experience,  in  this  instance,   verifies  the 

VOL.  IV.— IQ. 


290  Alexander  Hamilton 

lesson  long  taught  by  the  enemies  of  liberty,  that 
the  bulk  of  mankind  are  not  fit  to  govern  them 
selves;  that  they  must  have  a  master,  and  were  only 
made  for  the  rein  and  the  spur;  we  shall  then  see 
the  final  triumph  of  despotism  over  liberty;  the  ad 
vocates  of  the  latter  must  acknowledge  it  to  be  an 
ignis  fatuus,  and  abandon  the  pursuit.  With  the 
greatest  advantages  for  promoting  it  that  ever  a 
people  had,  we  shall  have  betrayed  the  cause  of 
human  nature. 

Let  those  in  whose  hands  it  is  placed  pause  for  a 
moment,  and  contemplate  with  an  eye  of  reverence 
the  vast  trust  committed  to  them.  Let  them  retire 
into  their  own  bosoms  and  examine  the  motives 
which  there  prevail.  Let  them  ask  themselves  this 
solemn  question:  Is  the  sacrifice  of  a  few  mistaken 
or  criminal  individuals  an  object  worthy  of  the 
shifts  to  which  we  are  reduced,  to  evade  the  Con 
stitution  and  the  national  engagements?  Then  let 
them  review  the  arguments  that  have  been  offered 
with  dispassionate  candor;  and  if  they  even  doubt 
the  propriety  of  the  measures  they  may  be  about  to 
adopt,  let  them  remember,  that,  in  a  doubtful  case, 
the  Constitution  ought  never  to  be  hazarded  without 
extreme  necessity. 

PHOCION. 


Treaty  of  Paris  291 

REPEAL  OF  ALL  ACTS  INCONSISTENT  WITH  THE 
TREATY 

[An  act  entitled  "An  act  relative  to  debts  due  to  persons 
within  the  enemy's  lines,"  and  another  act  entitled 
"An  act  to  explain  and  amend  the  act  entitled  an 
act  relative  to  debts  due  to  persons  within  the 
enemy's  lines." — April  20,  1787.] 

Speech  on  the  Passage  of  this  Act ' 

Mr.  Hamilton  expressed  great  uneasiness  that  any 
opposition  should  be  made  to  this  bill;  particularly 
as  this  State  was  individually  interested  therein. 
He  felt  greater  regret,  from  a  conviction  in  his  own 
mind,  on  this  occasion,  that  the  bill  should  be  ob 
jected  to,  as  there  was  not  a  single  law  in  existence 
in  this  State,  in  direct  contravention  of  the  treaty  of 
peace.  He  urged  the  committee  to  consent  to  the 
passing  of  the  bill,  from  the  consideration  that  the 
State  of  New  York  was  the  only  State  to  gain  any 
thing  by  a  strict  adherence  to  the  treaty.  There 
was  no  other  State  in  the  Union  that  had  so  much 
to  expect  from  it.  The  restoration  of  the  western 
posts  was  an  object  of  more  than  £100,000  per  an 
num.  Great  Britain,  he  said,  held  those  posts,  on 
the  plea  that  the  United  States  have  not  fulfilled  the 
treaty,  and  which  we  have  strong  assurances  she 
will  relinquish,  on  the  fulfilment  of  our  engagements 
with  her.  But  how  far  Great  Britain  might  be  sin 
cere  in  her  declaration  was  unknown;  indeed  he 
doubted  it  himself.  But  while  he  doubted  the  sin 
cerity  of  Great  Britain,  he  could  not  but  be  of  opin 
ion  that  it  was  the  duty  of  this  State  to  enact  a  law 

1  Delivered  in  the  New  York  Legislature,  1787. 


292  Alexander  Hamilton 

for  the  repeal  of  all  laws  which  may  be  against  the  said 
treaty,  as  by  doing  away  all  exceptions,  she  would 
be  reduced  to  a  crisis.  She  would  be  obliged  to 
show  to  the  world  whether  she  was  in  earnest  or  not, 
and  whether  she  will  sacrifice  her  honor  and  reputa 
tion  to  her  interest.  With  respect  to  the  bill,  as  it 
was  drafted  in  conformity  to  the  recommendation 
of  Congress,  he  viewed  it  as  a  wise  and  salutary 
measure,  one  calculated  to  meet  the  approbation  of 
the  different  States,  and  most  likely  to  answer  the 
end  proposed.  Were  it  possible  to  examine  an  in 
tricate  maze  of  laws,  and  to  determine  which  of 
them,  or  what  parts  of  laws,  were  opposed  to  the 
treaty,  it  still  might  not  have  the  intended  effect, 
as  different  parties  would  have  the  judging  of  this 
matter.  What  one  should  say  was  a  law  not  in 
consistent  with  the  peace,  another  might  say  was 
so;  and  there  would  be  no  end,  no  decision  of  the 
business.  Even  some  of  the  States  might  view  laws 
in  a  different  manner.  The  only  way  to  comply 
with  the  treaty  was  to  make  a  general  and  unex 
ceptional  repeal.  Congress,  with  an  eye  to  this,  had 
proposed  a  general  law,  from  which  the  one  before 
them  was  a  copy.  He  thought  it  must  be  obvious  to 
every  member  of  the  committee,  that  as  there  was 
no  law  in  direct  opposition  to  the  treaty,  no  diffi 
culty  could  arise  from  passing  the  bill. 

Some  gentlemen,  he  observed,  were  apprehensive 
that  this  bill  would  restore  the  confiscated  estates, 
etc.  This  he  did  not  admit.  However,  if  they  were 
so  disposed  they  might  add  a  proviso  to  prevent  it. 
He  had  written  one,  which  any  of  the  gentlemen 


Treaty  of  Paris  293 

might  move,  if  they  thought  it  necessary;  in  his 
opinion  it  was  not. 

The  treaty  only  provided  that  no  future  confisca 
tions  should  take  place;  and  that  Congress  should 
earnestly  recommend  a  restoration  of  property.  But 
there  was  nothing  obligatory  in  this. 

If  this  State  should  not  come  into  the  measure, 
would  it  not  be  a  very  good  plea  for  the  other  States 
to  favor  their  own  citizens,  and  say,  "Why  should 
we  do  this,  when  New  York,  the  most  interested  of 
any  of  the  States,  refuses  to  adopt  it  ? "  and  shall  we 
suffer  this  imputation  when,  in  fact  we  have  no  laws 
in  existence  that  militate  against  the  treaty?  He 
stated  the  great  disadvantages  that  our  merchants 
have  experienced  from  the  western  posts  being  in 
the  hands  of  the  British,  and  asked  if  it  was  good 
policy  to  let  them  remain  so. 

It  had  been  said,  that  the  judges  would  have 
too  much  power; — this  was  a  misapprehension.  He 
stated  the  powers  of  the  judges  with  great  clearness 
and  precision.  He  insisted  that  their  powers  would 
be  the  same,  whether  this  law  was  passed  or  not. 
For,  as  all  treaties  were  known  by  the  Constitution 
as  the  laws  of  the  land,  so  must  the  judges  act  on  the 
same,  any  law  to  the  contrary  notwithstanding. 

Cicero,  the  great  Roman  orator  and  lawyer,  lays 
it  down  as  a  rule,  that  when  two  laws  clash,  that 
which  relates  to  the  most  important  matters  ought 
to  be  preferred?  If  this  rule  prevails,  who  can 
doubt  what  would  be  the  conduct  of  the  judges, 
should  any  laws  exist  inconsistent  with  the  treaty  of 
peace?  But  it  would  be  impolitic  to  leave  them  to 


294  Alexander  Hamilton 

the  dilemma,  either  of  infringing  the  treaty  to  en 
force  the  particular  laws  of  the  State,  or  to  explain 
away  the  laws  of  the  State  to  give  effect  to  the 
treaty. 

He  declared  that  the  full  operation  of  the  bill 
would  be  no  more  than  merely  to  declare  the  treaty 
the  law  of  the  land;  and  that  the  judges,  viewing  it 
as  such,  shall  do  away  all  laws  that  may  appear  in 
direct  contravention  of  it.  Treaties  were  known 
constitutionally  to  be  the  law  of  the  land,  and  why 
be  afraid  to  leave  the  interpretation  of  those  laws 
to  the  judges?  The  Constitution  knows  them  as 
the  interpreters  of  the  law.  He  asked  if  there  was 
any  member  of  the  committee  who  would  be  willing 
to  see  the  first  treaty  of  peace  ever  made  by  this 
country  violated.  This  he  did  not  believe.  He 
could  not  think  that  any  member  on  that  floor  har 
bored  such  sentiments. 

He  was  in  hopes  the  committee  would  agree  with 
him  in  sentiment,  and  give  a  proof  of  their  attach 
ment  to  our  national  engagements  by  passing  the 
bill,  which  would  do  away  every  exception  of  the 
British  court.  

HAMILTON   TO    WILLIAM   SHORT  z 
(Cabinet  Paper.) 

NEW  YORK,  October  7,  1789. 

SIR: — I  think  it  probable  that  you  will  have  learnt, 
through  other  channels,  before  this  reaches  you,  my 

1  The  payment  of  the  debt  to  France,  which  is  the  subject  of  this 
letter  and  others,  is  so  closely  interwoven  with  our  relations  with 
that  country  in  the  troubled  times  which  followed  the  establishment 
of  the  government,  that  all  documents  in  regard  to  it  seem  to  come 
most  appropriately  under  the  head  of  foreign  relations. 


Hamilton  to  William  Short  295 

appointment  as  Secretary  of  the  Treasury  of  the 
United  States.  In  this  capacity  the  debt  due  from 
us  to  France,  will,  of  course,  constitute  one  of  the 
objects  of  my  attention. 

Except  with  regard  to  a  few  laws  of  immediate 
urgency,  respecting  commercial  imposts  and  naviga 
tion,  the  late  session  of  Congress  was  wholly  occupied 
in  organizing  the  government.  A  resolution,  how 
ever,  passed  the  House  of  Representatives,  declara 
tive  of  their  opinion  that  an  adequate  provision  for 
the  support  of  the  public  credit  was  a  matter  of  high 
importance  to  the  honor  and  prosperity  of  the  United 
States;  and  instructing  me  to  prepare  and  report  a 
plan  for  that  purpose  at  their  next  session. 

In  this  state  of  things  you  will  readily  perceive  that 
I  can  say  nothing  very  precise  with  regard  to  the  pro 
vision  to  be  made  for  discharging  the  arrearages  due 
to  France.  I  am,  however,  desirous  that  it  should 
be  understood  that  proper  attention  will  be  paid  to 
the  subject  on  my  part ;  and  I  take  it  for  granted  that 
the  National  Legislature  will  not  fail  to  sanction  the 
measures  which  the  faith  and  credit  of  the  United 
States  require  in  reference  to  it.  In  addition  to  this  I 
shall  only  remark  that  it  would  be  a  valuable  accom 
modation  to  the  government  of  this  country  if  the 
court  of  France  should  think  fit  to  suspend  the  pay 
ment  of  the  instalments  of  the  principal  due  and  to 
become  due,  for  five  or  six  years  from  this  period, 
on  the  condition  of  effectual  arrangements  for  the 
punctual  discharge  of  the  interest  which  has  accrued 
and  shall  accrue.  But  in  giving  this  intimation  it  is 
not  my  intention  that  any  request  should  be  made  to 


296  Alexander  Hamilton 

that  effect.  I  should  be  glad  that  the  thing  might 
come  about  in  the  form  of  a  voluntary  and  unsolicited 
offer ;  and  that  some  indirect  method  may  be  taken 
to  communicate  the  idea  where  it  would  be  of  use  it 
should  prevail.  It  may  not  be  amiss  that  you  should 
know  that  I  have  hinted  the  matter  in  the  inclosed 
private  letter  to  the  Marquis  de  Lafayette,  in  for 
warding  which  I  request  your  particular  care. 
I  have  the  honor  to  be,  Sir, 

Your  obedient  and  humble  servant, 
ALEXANDER  HAMILTON, 

Secretary  of  the  Treasury. 
WILLIAM  SHORT,  Charge  d*  Affaires,  Paris. 

P.  S. — Since  writing  the  above,  I  have,  in  a  private 
and  unofficial  manner,  broken  the  matter  to  the 
Count  de  Moustier;  and  I  have  reason  to  conclude 
he  will  promote  what  is  desired. 


HAMILTON   TO    WASHINGTON  * 

(Cabinet  Paper.) 

Memorandum  of  the  Substance  of  a  Communication  made 
on  Thursday,  the  Eighth  of  July,  1790,  to  the  Sub 
scriber,  by  Major  Beckwith,  as  by  Direction  of  Lord 
Dorchester 

Major  Beckwith  began  by  stating  that  Lord  Dor 
chester  2  had  directed  him  to  make  his  acknowledg 
ments  for  the  politeness  which  had  been  shown  in 

1  If  we  except  the  informal  mission  of  Morris  to  England,  this  inter 
view  appears  to  have  been  the  first  attempt  of  the  administration  to 
reopen  friendly  relations  with  England. 

*  Sir  Guy  Carleton,  who  had  been  the  last  English  general  in  Amer 
ica.  He  was  raised  to  the  peerage  as  Lord  Dorchester,  and  was  at 
this  time  Governor  of  Canada. 


Hamilton  to  Washington  297 

respect  to  the  desire  he  had  intimated  to  pass  by  New 
York  in  his  way  to  England;  adding  that  the  pro 
spect  of  a  war  between  Great  Britain  and  Spain  would 
prevent  or  defer  the  execution  of  his  intention  in  that 
particular.  He  next  proceeded  to  observe,  that 
Lord  Dorchester  had  been  informed  of  a  negotiation 
commenced  on  the  other  side  of  the  water,  through 
the  agency  of  Mr.  Morris,  mentioning,  as  the  sub 
scriber  understood,  principally  by  way  of  proof  of 
Lord  Dorchester's  knowledge  of  the  transaction,  that 
Mr.  Morris  had  not  produced  any  regular  credentials, 
but  merely  a  letter  from  the  President  directed  to 
himself;  that  some  delays  had  intervened,  partly  on 
account  of  Mr.  Morris'  absence  on  a  trip  to  Holland, 
as  was  understood;  and  that  it  was  not  improbable 
these  delays  and  some  other  circumstances  may  have 
impressed  Mr.  Morris  with  an  idea  of  backwardness 
on  the  part  of  the  British  ministry.  That  his  lord 
ship,  however,  had  directed  him  to  say  that  an  infer 
ence  of  this  sort  would  not,  in  his  opinion,  be  well 
founded,  as  he  had  reason  to  believe  that  the  cabinet 
of  Great  Britain  entertained  a  disposition  not  only 
toward  a  friendly  intercourse,  but  toward  an  alli 
ance,  with  the  United  States.  Major  Beckwith 
then  proceeded  to  speak  of  the  particular  cause  of 
the  expected  rupture  between  Spain  and  Britain, 
observing  it  was  one  in  which  all  commercial  nations 
must  be  supposed  to  favor  the  views  of  Great  Britain. 
That  it  was  therefore  presumed,  should  a  war  take 
place,  that  the  United  States  would  find  it  to  be 
their  interest  to  take  part  with  Great  Britain  rather 
than  with  Spain. 


298  Alexander  Hamilton 

Major  Beckwith  concluded  with  producing  a  let 
ter,  signed  "Dorchester,"  which  letter  contained 
ideas  similar  to  those  he  had  expressed,  though  in 
more  guarded  terms,  and  without  any  allusion  to 
instructions  from  the  British  cabinet.  This  letter, 
it  is  now  recollected,  hints  at  the  non-execution  of 
the  treaty  of  peace  on  our  part. 

On  the  subscriber  remarking  the  circumstance  that 
this  letter  seemed  to  speak  only  the  sentiments  of 
his  lordship,  Major  Beckwith  replied,  that  whatever 
reasons  there  might  be  for  that  course  of  proceeding 
in  the  present  stage  of  the  business,  it  was  to  be 
presumed  that  his  lordship  knew  too  well  the  conse 
quence  of  such  a  step,  to  have  taken  it  without  a 
previous  knowledge  of  the  intentions  of  the  cabinet. 

Major  Beckwith  afterwards  mentioned  that  Lord 
Dorchester  had  heard  with  great  concern  of  some 
depredations  committed  by  some  Indians  on  our 
western  frontier;  that  he  wished  it  to  be  believed 
that  nothing  of  this  kind  had  received  the  least 
countenance  from  him;  that,  on  the  contrary,  he 
had  taken  every  proper  opportunity  of  inculcating 
upon  the  Indians  a  pacific  disposition  towards  us; 
and  that,  as  soon  as  he  had  heard  of  the  outrages 
lately  committed,  he  had  sent  a  message  to  endeavor 
to  prevent  them;  that  his  lordship  had  understood 
that  the  Indians  alluded  to  were  banditti,  composed 
chiefly  or  in  a  great  part  of  Creeks  or  Cherokees, 
over  whom  he  had  no  influence,  intimating  at  the 
same  time  that  these  tribes  were  supposed  to  be  in 
connection  with  the  Spaniards. 

He  stated,  in  the  next  place,  that  his  lordship  had 


Hamilton  to  Washington  299 

been  informed  that  a  Captain  Hait,  in  our  service, 
and  a  Mr.  Nimble,  and  indeed  some  persons  in  the 
treaty  at  Fort  Harman,  had  thrown  out  menaces 
with  regard  to  the  posts  on  the  frontier,  and  had 
otherwise  held  very  intemperate  language;  which, 
however,  his  lordship  considered  rather  as  effusions 
of  individual  feelings  than  as  the  effects  of  any  in 
struction  from  authority. 

A.  HAMILTON. 


HAMILTON   TO    WASHINGTON 

(Cabinet  Paper.) 

July  22,  1790. 

On  Thursday,  the  226.  instant,  I  had  a  second  in 
terview  with  Major  Beckwith,  in  which  I  spoke  to 
him  nearly  as  follows. 

I  have  made  the  proper  use  of  what  you  said  to 
me  at  our  last  interview. 

As  to  what  regards  the  objects  of  a  general  nature 
mentioned  by  you,  though  your  authority  for  the 
purpose  from  Lord  Dorchester  is  out  of  the  question, 
and  though  I  presume  from  his  lordship's  station 
and  character,  and  the  knowledge  he  appears  to 
have  of  what  is  passing  on  the  other  side  of  the 
water,  with  regard  to  Mr.  Morris,  that  the  step  he 
has  taken  through  you  is  conformable  to  the  views 
of  your  cabinet,  and  not  without  its  sanction,  yet 
you  are  no  doubt  sensible  that  the  business  presents 
itself  in  a  shape  which  does  not  give  the  proper  au 
thenticity  to  that  fact,  and  is  wholly  without  form 
ality.  You  must  also  be  sensible  that  there  is  a 


30O  Alexander  Hamilton 

material  difference  between  your  situation  and  that 
of  Mr.  Morris.  His  credentials,  though  not  formal, 
proceed  from  the  proper  source.  Yours  are  neither 
formal  nor  authoritative. 

This  state  of  things  will,  of  course,  operate  on 
what  I  am  going  to  say  on  the  subject.  As  to  what 
relates  to  friendship  between  Great  Britain  and  the 
United  States,  I  conceive  myself  warranted  in  de 
claring  that  there  is  in  the  government  of  this 
country  a  sincere  disposition  to  concur  in  obviating 
with  candor  and  fairness  all  ground  of  misunder 
standing  which  may  now  exist  in  reference  to  the 
execution  of  the  late  treaty  of  peace,  and  in  laying 
the  foundation  of  future  good  understanding,  by 
establishing  liberal  terms  of  commercial  intercourse. 

As  to  alliance,  this  opens  a  wide  field.  The  thing 
is  susceptible  of  a  vast  variety  of  forms.  'T  is  not 
possible  to  judge  what  would  be  proper  or  what 
could  be  done,  unless  points  were  brought  into  view. 
If  you  are  in  condition  to  mention  particulars,  it  may 
afford  better  ground  of  conversation. 

I  stopped  here  for  an  answer. 

Major  Beckwith  replied,  that  he  could  say  nothing 
more  precise  than  he  had  already  done. 

That  being  the  case  (continued  I),  I  can  only  say, 
that  the  thing  is  in  too  general  a  form  to  admit  of  a 
judgment  of  what  may  be  eventually  admissible  or 
practicable.  If  the  subject  shall  hereafter  present 
itself  to  discussion  in  an  authentic  and  proper  shape, 
I  have  no  doubt  we  shall  be  ready  to  converse  freely 
upon  it.  And  you  will  naturally  conclude  that  we 
shall  be  disposed  to  pursue  whatever  shall  appear 


Hamilton  to  Washington  301 

under  all  circumstances  to  be  our  interest,  as  far  as 
may  consist  with  our  honor.  At  present  I  would 
not  mean  either  to  raise  or  repress  expectation. 

Major  Beckwith  seemed  to  admit  that  as  things 
were  circumstanced  nothing  explicit  could  be  ex 
pected,  and  went  on  to  make  some  observations, 
which  I  understood  as  having  for  object  to  sound 
whether  there  existed  any  connection  between  Spain 
and  us;  and  whether  the  questions  with  regard  to 
the  Mississippi  were  settled. 

Perceiving  this,  I  thought  it  best  to  avoid  an 
appearance  of  mystery,  and  to  declare  without  hesi 
tation, 

"  That  there  was  no  particular  connection  between 
Spain  and  the  United  States,  within  my  knowledge, 
and  that  it  was  matter  of  public  notoriety,  that  the 
questions  alluded  to  were  still  unadjusted." 

The  rest  of  our  conversation  chiefly  consisted  of 
assurances  on  my  part,  that  the  menaces  which  had 
been  mentioned  by  him  as  having  been  thrown  out 
by  some  individuals  with  regard  to  the  western  posts 
were  unauthorized,  proceeding  probably  from  a  de 
gree  of  irritation  which  the  detention  of  the  posts 
had  produced  in  the  minds  of  many,  and  of  a  repe 
tition,  on  his  part,  of  the  assurances  which  he  had 
before  given  of  Lord  Dorchester's  disposition  to  dis 
courage  Indian  outrages. 

Something  was  said  respecting  the  probable  course 
of  military  operations,  in  case  of  a  war  between 
Britain  and  Spain,  which  Mr.  Beckwith  supposed 
would  be  directed  towards  South  America ;  alleging, 
however,  that  this  was  mere  conjecture  on  his  part. 


302  Alexander  Hamilton 

I  hinted  cautiously  our  dislike  of  any  enterprise  on 

New  Orleans. 

A.  HAMILTON. 

NOTE  BY  A.  H. — Mr.  Jefferson  was  privy  to  this  transaction.  The 
views  of  the  government  were  to  discard  suspicion  that  any  engage 
ments  with  Spain,  or  intentions  hostile  to  Great  Britain,  existed;  to 
leave  the  ground  in  other  respects  vague  and  open,  so  as  that  in  case 
of  rupture  between  Great  Britain  and  Spain,  the  United  States  ought 
to  be  in  the  best  situation  to  turn  it  to  account,  in  reference  to  the 
disputes  between  them  and  Great  Britain  on  the  one  hand,  and  Spain 
on  the  other. 


HAMILTON   TO    WILLIAM   SHORT  * 
(Cabinet  Paper.) 

TREASURY  DEPARTMENT,  September  i,  1790. 

SIR: — Two  acts  of  the  Legislature,  of  the  fourth 
and  twelfth  of  August,  of  which  I  inclose  you  copies, 
authenticated  according  to  law,  empower  the  Presi 
dent  to  cause  to  be  borrowed  on  their  behalf  four 
teen  millions  of  dollars,  subject  to  certain  restrictions 
and  qualifications,  to  be  applied  in  payment  of  such 
part  of  our  foreign  debt  as  shall  have  become  due, 
and  to  a  new  modification  of  the  remainder,  if  it 
can  be  effected  upon  terms  beneficial  to  the  United 
States.  The  execution  of  this  authority  he  has  com 
mitted  immediately  to  me,  and  ultimately  through 
me  to  you;  except  as  to  three  millions  of  florins, 
part  of  the  above  sum,  of  which,  as  you  are  in 
formed,  a  loan  has  been  anticipated  by  Messrs. 
Willinks,  Van  Staphorsts,  and  Hubbard,  and  of 
which  a  confirmation,  with  correspondent  powers, 

1  This  letter  contains  the  general  instructions  of  the  government  as 
to  our  financial  policy  abroad,  including  both  payment  of  French  debt 
and  the  management  of  Dutch  and  other  loans. 


Hamilton  to  William  Short  303 

has  been  sent  directly  to  them.  Among  the  docu 
ments  which  accompany  this  letter  you  will  find  a 
copy  of  the  commission  from  the  President  to  me, 
and  a  power  founded  on  it  from  me  to  you. 

It  remains  for  me  to  give  you  some  indications  for 
your  government,  conformable  to  the  general  tenor 
of  the  instructions  which  I  have  received  from  the 
President,  and  of  which  I  transmit  a  copy;  pre 
mising  that  it  is  understood,  between  the  Secretary 
of  State  and  myself,  that  you  are  to  proceed  to 
Amsterdam  without  delay,  and  to  continue  there, 
in  the  first  instance,  for  a  term  not  less  than  three 
months. 

A  primary  and  principal  object  of  your  attention 
will  be,  to  acquire  as  exact  knowledge  as  may  be  of 
the  footing  upon  which  the  different  foreign  powers 
who  borrow  in  Holland  have  usually  obtained  their 
loans,  since  the  commencement  of  our  independence, 
and  upon  which  they  at  present  obtain  them;  the 
prices  of  foreign  stock  in  the  Dutch  market,  includ 
ing  our  own;  the  state  of  our  credit  compared  with 
that  of  other  nations ;  the  extent  and  the  conditions 
to  and  upon  which  we  shall  be  likely  to  borrow  in 
case  of  war  between  England  and  Spain,  and  in  the 
alternative  of  our  being  ourselves  at  peace  or  war; 
the  principal  houses  and  brokers  concerned  in  the 
negotiations  of  foreign  loans;  their  characters; 
comparative  solidity  and  influence  with  the  money 
lenders;  the  terms  upon  which  their  agency  is 
afforded  to  their  employers;  the  manner  in  which 
those  whom  we  have  heretofore  employed  are  un 
derstood  to  have  conducted  themselves  in  relation 


304  Alexander  Hamilton 

to  our  interest  and  credit;  and  particularly  their 
solidity  and  influence  with  the  money-lenders. 

Most  if  not  all  these  inquiries  will  be  immediately 
serviceable  to  you.  They  will  all  be  productive  of 
information  useful  to  my  department;  and  I  will 
therefore  thank  you  for  successive  communications 
of  the  result. 

One  consequence  of  them  to  you  will  be,  that  they 
will  enable  you  to  judge  whether  our  confidence 
in  our  former  commissioners  or  agents  ought  to  be 
continued,  or  withdrawn  in  order  to  the  substitution 
of  others;  or,  if  continued,  whether  the  terms  of 
their  agency  may  not  be  meliorated;  or  whether, 
with  their  consent,  some  other  house  or  houses  may 
not  be  combined  with  them,  with  an  increase  of 
credit  and  resource  to  us. 

These,  as  you  will  be  sensible,  are  delicate  points. 
They  are,  however,  left  to  your  prudence  and  dis 
cretion,  according  as  facts  shall  be  ascertained  to 
you. 

I  shall  only  remark,  that  changes  of  public  serv 
ants  ought  never  to  be  made  but  for  cogent  reasons. 
If  lightly  made,  they  are  not  only  chargeable  with 
injustice  and  are  a  symptom  of  fickleness  in  the  pub 
lic  counsels,  but  they  destroy  the  motives  to  good 
conduct,  and,  in  money  concerns  especially,  are  apt 
to  beget  a  disposition  to  make  the  most  of  possession 
while  it  lasts.  Circumspection  in  the  present  case 
is  also  recommended  by  the  consideration  that  those 
whom  we  have  heretofore  trusted  risked  themselves 
and  their  fortunes  upon  our  affairs,  when  the  doing 
it  was  not  without  serious  hazard.  This  is  a  reason 


Hamilton  to  William  Short  305 

for  permitting  them  to  reap  the  benefits  of  our  more 
prosperous  days,  if  they  have  been  faithful  and  are 
adequate  to  the  trust.  A  further  reason  is,  that 
they  are  now  deeply  interested  in  our  funds,  and 
consequently,  it  is  presumable,  in  our  credit.  Com 
petition  and  variance  once  existed  between  the 
house  of  Willinks  and  that  of  the  Van  Staphorsts; 
but  these  appear  some  time  since  to  have  been  com 
promised.  The  latter  have  most  merit  for  early 
exertions,  the  former  are  said  to  be  most  solid.  This 
union  is  desirable  for  the  greater  security  it  affords. 

Suggestions  of  this  nature  are  not  dictated  by  any 
distrust  of  the  fidelity  or  good  conduct  of  our  former 
commissioners.  As  far  as  I  know,  they  deserve  well 
of  us.  My  object  is,  in  entering  upon  a  new  stage  of 
our  affairs,  to  have  the  ground  over  which  we  have 
passed  well  examined,  that  we  may  the  better  judge 
whether  to  continue  or  alter  our  course. 

In  the  consideration  of  our  foreign  debt,  it  na 
turally  divides  itself  into  two  parts ;  that  which  is  now 
payable,  and  that  which  will  be  payable  hereafter. 
The  first  we  are  bound  to  discharge  as  soon  as  may 
be,  and  upon  the  best  terms  we  can.  The  last  we 
are  not  bound  to  discharge  but  as  the  times  of  pay 
ment  elapse,  and  therefore  are  not  called  upon  to  do 
it  unless  some  positive  advantage  accrues  from  it 
to  ourselves.  This  view  of  the  matter  governs  the 
instructions  of  the  President  to  me,  which,  of  course, 
regulate  mine  to  you. 

You  are  accordingly  to  borrow,  on  the  best  terms 
which  shall  be  found  practicable,  within  the  limita 
tions  prescribed  by  law,  such  sum  or  sums  as  shall 


VOL.  IV.— 20. 


306  Alexander  Hamilton 

be  sufficient  to  discharge  as  well  all  instalments  or 
parts  of  the  principal  of  the  foreign  debt,  which  now 
are  due  or  shall  become  payable  to  the  end  of  the 
year  one  thousand  seven  hundred  and  ninety-one, 
as  all  interest  and  arrears  of  interest  which  now  are 
or  shall  become  due  in  respect  to  the  said  debt  to  the 
same  end  of  the  year  one  thousand  seven  hundred 
and  ninety-one.  But  you  shall  not  extend  the 
amount  of  the  loans  which  you  shall  make  or  cause 
to  be  made  beyond  the  sum  which  shall  be  requisite 
for  that  purpose,  unless  it  can  be  done  upon  terms 
more  advantageous  to  the  United  States  than  those 
upon  which  the  residue  of  the  said  debt  shall  stand 
or  be. 

And  in  order  that  you  may  judge  what  will  be  due 
to  the  end  of  the  year  one  thousand  seven  hundred 
and  ninety-one,  I  refer  you  to  the  papers  marked  A 
and  B,  which  contain  statements  of  principal  and 
arrears  of  interest  of  our  foreign  loans  to  that  period ; 
and  shall,  by  the  next  opportunity,  send  you  a  copy 
of  the  contracts  respecting  them,  from  which  you 
will  derive  a  more  accurate  knowledge  of  their 
terms. 

You  will  perceive,  by  the  act  which  authorizes  the 
loan  for  paying  off  the  foreign  debt,  that  there  is  no 
other  restriction  as  to  the  terms  except  that,  in  the 
contracts  to  be  made,  the  United  States  shall  be  left 
at  liberty  to  reimburse  the  sum  borrowed,  within  a 
period  not  exceeding  fifteen  years.  As  this  seems 
to  be  the  usual  period  for  the  reimbursement  of 
moneys  borrowed  in  Holland,  that  restriction  can 
constitute  no  embarrassment. 


Hamilton  to  William  Short  307 

In  the  second  act  there  is  no  restriction  as  to  time 
of  repayment,  but  there  is  one  as  to  the  rate  of  in 
terest,  which  must  not  exceed  five  per  cent.  This, 
however,  I  consider  as  compatible  with  the  allow 
ance  of  those  premiums,  commissions,  and  other 
charges  which  are  customary  in  ordinary  times; 
and  which,  I  am  informed,  are,  in  the  aggregate, 
about  four  and  a  half  per  cent.  But  the  allowance 
of  unusual  or  extraordinary  premiums  to  obtain 
loans  upon  a  nominal  interest  of  five  per  cent.,  as 
well  because  it  is  a  pernicious  mode  of  borrowing 
as  because  it  would  be  an  invasion  of  the  law,  is 
inadmissible. 

If  war  should  continue  or  become  more  general 
in  Europe,  it  is  to  be  apprehended  that  the  demand 
for  money  will  raise  its  price  upon  us,  and  that  loans 
will  not  be  practicable  upon  so  good  terms  as  in  time 
of  peace.  The  situation  of  this  country,  too,  au 
thorizes  us  to  expect  that  as  our  resources  become 
more  unfolded  and  better  understood,  we  shall  be 
able  to  borrow  upon  easier  terms  than  we  have  at 
any  time  heretofore  done.  On  both  these  accounts 
it  would  be  very  desirable,  while  we  did  not  oblige 
ourselves  to  reimburse  the  principal  borrowed  in 
less  than  fifteen  years,  commencing  at  the  end  of 
ten,  that  we  could  stipulate  for  a  right  of  reimburs 
ing  it  sooner, — that  is  to  say,  either  upon  giving 
notice  of  our  intention  to  do  it  for  a  limited  time 
beforehand,  or  at  the  end  of  a  short  period,  say  five 
years.  I  should  consider  a  stipulation  of  this  kind 
as  a  valuable  ingredient  in  your  contracts. 

I  have  intimated  above  the  inexpediency  of  extra- 


308  Alexander  Hamilton 

ordinary  premiums  to  purchase  a  nominal  low  rate 
of  interest.  Against  this  error  I  would  particularly 
guard  you.  It  is  sacrificing  a  real  future  interest 
to  an  appearance,  at  best,  to  temporary  accommoda 
tion.  A  higher  rate  of  interest  upon  a  sum  actually 
received,  is  preferable  to  a  lower  rate  upon  a  nominal 
sum,  with  large  deductions  in  the  first  instance,  or 
considerable  premiums  afterwards;  this  will  be  more 
especially  the  case  if  we  can  reserve  a  right  to  repay 
when  we  please  or  after  a  short  period;  as  we  may 
reasonably  contemplate,  with  the  return  of  peace, 
a  fall  of  interest. 

But  every  thing  of  this  kind  is,  after  all,  matter 
of  calculation,  and  to  be  tested  by  the  evidence  of 
figures.  I  can  only,  therefore,  mean  to  give  you  a 
caution,  referring  you  to  that  test,  and  intimating 
to  you  this  general  principle,  that  the  name  of  a  low 
interest  ought  not  to  betray  us  into  giving  more  for 
it  in  the  shape  of  premium  or  discount  than  it  is 
worth,  and  that,  as  we  shall  borrow  at  a  time  when 
circumstances  will  render  interest  high,  we  had  bet 
ter  pay  that  interest  on  actual  value  received,  than 
a  lower  one  on  a  fictitious  value,  or  for  future  and 
exaggerated  compensations;  reserving,  as  far  as  it 
can  be  done,  the  right  of  paying  off  at  pleasure, 
or  at  an  early  period.  The  future  fall  of  interest 
will,  in  the  first  case,  turn  to  our  advantage,  in  the 
last,  to  our  disadvantage. 

You  will  not  pass  unnoticed  the  circumstance 
that  the  laws  contain  actual  appropriations  of  very 
adequate  funds  for  the  payment  of  interest  upon  the 
sums  you  shall  borrow.  The  first  act,  indeed,  after 


Hamilton  to  William  Short  309 

reserving  six  hundred  thousand  dollars  for  the  sup 
port  of  government,  gives  a  priority  in  payment  to 
the  foreign  debt  out  of  revenues  which  are  calculated 
upon  the  estimate  of  a  much  larger  product.  You 
may  confidently  assert  that  the  duties  hitherto  have 
produced  at  the  rate  of  one  million  eight  hundred 
thousand  dollars;  which  alone  would  leave  twelve 
hundred  thousand  dollars,  as  the  fund  out  of  which 
the  interest  on  your  loans  would  be  payable.  But 
the  augmentations  which  have  been  made  in  the 
rates  are  computed  to  be  capable  of  affording  an 
addition  of  eight  hundred  thousand  dollars;  and  I 
believe  the  computation  to  be  well  founded. 

You  will  also,  no  doubt,  make  a  proper  use  in  your 
communications  of  the  actual  situation  and  future 
prospects  of  this  country.  The  economical  scale  of 
our  establishments,  civil  and  military;  the  com 
parative  smallness  of  our  debt;  the  reliance  which 
may  be  had  on  the  stability  of  our  pecuniary  arrange 
ments  once  made,  from  the  nature  of  our  government 
in  respect  to  the  mutual  checks  inherent  in  its  or 
ganization;  the  rapid  progression  of  population  and 
resources  to  which  we  may  look  forward ;  the  actual 
and  probable  emigrations  occasioned  by  the  troubled 
state  of  Europe;  the  hope  that  we  shall  continue  in 
peace,  while  other  Powers  are  accumulating  their 
debts  by  new  wars;  the  very  favorable  situation  in 
which  we  shall  find  ourselves  at  the  end  of  a  general 
war  in  Europe,  if  we  avoid  participating  in  it,  etc., 
etc.  These  are  topics  which  ought  to  have  weight 
in  our  favor,  and,  within  due  limits,  may  be  urged 
with  force  and  assurance. 


Alexander  Hamilton 

With  regard  to  that  part  of  the  debt  which  does 
not  become  payable  till  after  the  year  one  thousand 
seven  hundred  and  ninety-one,  you  will  have  ob 
served  that  nothing  is  to  be  done  by  you  in  respect 
to  it,  unless  it  can  be  done  upon  terms  of  advantage 
to  the  United  States.  However  cordial  our  dis 
position  to  come  to  the  pecuniary  aid  of  France  in 
her  present  affecting  and  embarrassed  condition,  in 
this  early  stage  of  our  finances  we  could  not  in  pru 
dence  volunteer  payments  not  due  by  the  terms  of 
the  contract,  especially,  too,  by  the  expedient  of 
new  foreign  loans,  unless  it  should  be  attended  with 
some  circumstance  of  advantage  in  the  operation 
to  ourselves.  By  this  I  understand  a  lower  rate  of 
interest. 

For,  according  to  my  speculations  on  the  probable 
rate  of  exchange  between  this  country,  France,  and 
Holland,  and  between  Holland  and  France  for  some 
years  to  come,  I  deem  it  better  (whether  our  pay 
ments  proceed  directly  from  hence,  or  circuitously 
through  Holland)  to  have  to  pay  a  given  sum  to 
France,  than  an  equal  sum  to  Holland. 

The  charges  too  upon  the  new  loans  will  have  to  be 
taken  into  the  account,  and  an  indemnity  for  them 
included  in  the  terms  of  the  operation.  Calculating 
only  upon  the  ordinary  ones,  it  does  not  appear  to 
me  that  it  would  be  the  interest  of  the  United  States 
to  change  the  form  of  this  debt,  unless  the  rate  of 
interest  on  the  new  loans  did  not  exceed  four  per 
cent.  And  I  own  that,  in  the  present  aspect  of 
affairs,  I  see  no  ground  to  expect  that  loans  will  be 
obtained  at  so  low  a  rate. 


Hamilton  to  William  Short  311 

If  the  thing  should  be  possible,  it  must  be  on  the 
score  of  some  collateral  advantages  to  the  lenders; 
such,  for  instance,  as  their  being  permitted  to  pay 
a  part  in  the  effects  or  stock  of  France,  as  was  con 
templated  in  the  last  negotiations.  Whether  any 
arrangement  of  this  nature  will  be  a  desirable  ac 
commodation  to  France;  whether  persons  of  real 
capital,  who  would  not  in  the  execution  be  obliged 
to  use  means  prejudicial  to  the  credit  of  the  United 
States,  would  be  willing  to  embark  in  such  a  plan; 
whether  it  would  prove  an  obstacle  to  other  loans 
which  we  may  have  occasion  to  make  for  other  pur 
poses,  are  circumstances  essential  in  determining  its 
eligibility,  which  cannot  be  known  to  me,  and  can 
only  be  accurately  judged  of  by  one  on  the  spot. 

I  suggest  them  as  hints  to  you.  In  exploring  or 
feeling  the  ground,  you  will  recollect  that  proposi 
tions  of  such  a  nature  ought  not  to  come  from  us. 
If  the  thing  should  be  capable  of  being  placed  upon  a 
footing  conducive  to  our  interests,  we  ought  only  to 
appear  to  sanction  what  other  parties  desire  of  us. 
And  we  should  in  no  event  make  any  movement 
that  may  injure  our  reputation,  or  place  us  in  the 
light  of  a  people  desirous  of  making  hard  bargains 
at  the  expense  of  friends. 

Neither  can  I  authorize  you  to  conclude  any  gen 
eral  arrangement  of  this  nature,  without  a  previous 
communication  of  it  to  me,  to  be  submitted  to  the 
consideration  of  the  President;  there  being  a  sepa 
rate  instruction  from  him  to  me,  that  no  loan  shall 
be  opened  for  more  than  a  million  of  dollars,  and 
that  no  new  loan  shall  be  undertaken  until  the 


312  Alexander  Hamilton 

preceding  one  shall  have  been  announced  to  him, 
and  shall  have  received  his  sanction. 

This  limitation,  therefore,  in  all  your  proceedings, 
you  will  of  course  attend  to,  and  you  will  perceive 
the  utility  of  making  the  earliest  communication  of 
every  loan  you  shall  set  on  foot,  in  order  that  you 
may  know  the  determination  of  the  President  before 
its  completion,  and  be  prepared  in  time  to  commence 
another. 

It  has  been  suggested  that  loans  may  be  made 
with  advantage  in  certain  parts  of  Italy.  I  do  not 
count  on  this  resource,  but  I  shall  be  glad  to  know 
how  far,  from  inquiry,  it  shall  appear  to  be  an 
eligible  field  for  an  experiment. 

With  regard  to  the  application  of  the  moneys  to 
be  borrowed,  you  will,  from  time  to  time,  receive 
special  directions. 

The  foregoing  are  the  only  observations  which  the 
time  I  have  will  permit  me  to  make.  They  contain 
general  indications  of  the  course  you  are  to  pursue; 
the  rest  must  be  left  to  your  judgment,  circum 
spection,  and  delicacy.  I  doubt  not  you  will  be 
duly  impressed  with  the  importance  of  the  trust; 
how  much  the  interest  and  reputation  of  our  gov 
ernment  are  concerned  in  its  proper  execution.  And 
I  feel  a  confidence  that  they  will  not  suffer  in  your 
hands. 

P.  S. — I  send  for  your  information  a  copy  of  my 
letter  to  Messrs.  Willinks  &  Co.,  by  which  you  will 
perceive  the  footing  on  which  the  provisional  loan  of 
three  millions  of  florins  is  placed. 


Hamilton  to  Washington  313 

HAMILTON    TO    WASHINGTON  x 
(Cabinet  Paper.) 

NEW  YORK,  September  15,  1790. 

Answer  to  Questions  Proposed  by  the  President  of  the 
United  States  to  the  Secretary  of  the  Treasury 

QUESTION  THE  FIRST. — "  What  should  be  the  an 
swer  of  the  Executive  of  the  United  States  to  Lord 
Dorchester,  in  case  he  should  apply  for  permission 

1  Following  close  upon  the  Beckwith  interview  came  indications 
that  a  very  practical  test  might  be  put  to  our  relations  with  England 
by  the  suggestion  of  Lord  Dorchester  that  he  might  ask  for  permission 
to  march  troops  across  our  territory  as  a  preparation  for  the  hostilities 
then  impending  between  Spain  and  Great  Britain.  Washington  took 
advice  on  the  point  thus  raised  from  Jefferson,  who  advised  that  no 
answer  should  be  made,  the  question,  if  put  squarely,  evaded,  and 
should  the  British  troops  take  silence  for  consent  their  march  through 
our  country  could  be  then  pressed  as  a  grievance.  The  President  then 
consulted  John  Adams  and  Hamilton.  Both  were  agreed  that  the 
question,  if  put,  should  be  answered  at  once,  squarely  and  directly, 
and  not  evaded.  Adams  argued  for  a  refusal  of  the  permission  (Adams' 
Works,  vol.  viii.,  p.  497),  and  his  letters  show  the  difficulties  which 
encompassed  the  course  he  suggested.  Hamilton  advised  consent, 
although  with  reluctance,  because  he  felt  that  war,  for  which  we  were 
unprepared,  was  the  only  alternative.  The  paper  discusses  the  inter 
national  law  of  the  question,  and  its  political  bearing  as  well,  with 
great  acuteness  and  ability,  but  it  is  chiefly  interesting  as  the  first 
exposition  of  Hamilton's  views  as  to  the  foreign  policy  proper  for  the 
United  States.  The  actual  request  was  never  made,  but  the  discus 
sion  which  its  probability  drew  forth  is  valuable  and  instructive  to 
the  student  of  our  history  and  of  the  development  of  our  national 
policy. 

The  same  question  arose  in  1862  when  Lord  Lyons  asked  permission 
to  land  troops  at  Portland,  and  march  them  through  the  State  of 
Maine  to  Quebec,  as  the  St.  Lawrence  was  then  blockaded  with  ice. 
These  troops  had,  no  doubt,  been  intended  to  act  against  the  United 
States  if  the  Trent  affair  had  not  been  settled,  but  Mr.  Seward,  despite 
the  difficulties  of  the  situation,  adopted  Hamilton's  view  of  the  general 
question,  and  at  once  granted  the  permission,  an  act  of  courtesy  which 
did  much  to  allay  the  excited  feeling  then  existing  (Seward's  Works, 
vol.  v.,  p.  u). 


3H  Alexander  Hamilton 

to  march  troops  through  the  territory  of  said  States, 
from  Detroit  to  the  Mississippi  ? " 

ANSWER. — In  order  to  a  right  judgment  of  what 
ought  to  be  done  in  such  case,  it  may  be  of  use  pre 
viously  to  consider  the  following  points: 

First. — Whether  there  be  a  right  to  refuse  or  con 
sent,  as  shall  be  thought  most  for  the  interest  of  the 
United  States. 

Secondly. — The  consequences  to  be  expected  from 
refusal  or  consent. 

Thirdly. — The  motives  to  the  one  or  to  the  other. 

As  to  the  first  point,  if  it  were  to  be  determined 
upon  principle  only,  without  regard  to  precedents 
or  opinions,  there  would  seem  to  be  no  room  for 
hesitation  about  the  right  to  refuse.  The  exclusive 
jurisdiction  which  every  independent  nation  has 
over  its  own  territory,  appears  to  involve  in  it  the 
right  of  prohibiting  to  all  others  the  use  of  that 
territory  in  any  way  disagreeable  to  itself,  and  more 
especially  for  any  purpose  of  war,  which  always 
implies  a  degree  of  danger  and  inconvenience,  with 
the  exception  only  of  cases  of  necessity. 

And  if  the  United  States  were  in  a  condition  to  do 
it  without  material  hazard,  there  would  be  strong  in 
ducements  to  their  adopting  it  as  a  general  rule  never 
to  grant  a  passage  for  a  voluntary  expedition  of  one 
power  against  another,  unless  obliged  to  it  by  treaty. 

But  the  present  situation  of  the  United  States  is 
too  little  favorable  to  encountering  hazards,  to  au 
thorize  attempts  to  establish  rules,  however  eligible 
in  themselves,  which  are  repugnant  to  the  received 
maxims  or  usages  of  nations. 


Hamilton  to  Washington  315 

It  is  therefore  necessary  to  inquire  what  those 
maxims  or  usages  enjoin  in  the  case  suggested. 

With  regard  to  usage,  it  has  been  far  from  uni 
form.  There  are  various  instances  in  ancient  and 
modern  times  of  similar  permissions  being  demanded ; 
many,  in  which  they  have  been  granted;  others  in 
which  they  have  been  refused,  and  the  refusal 
acquiesced  in;  but  perhaps  more  in  which,  when 
refused,  a  passage  has  been  forced,  and  the  doing  of 
it  has  often  been  deemed  justifiable. 

Opinions  are  not  more  harmonious.  Among  those 
who  may  be  considered  as  authorities  on  such  sub 
jects,  PufTendorf  and  Barbeyrac  confine  within 
narrow  limits  the  right  of  passage  through  neutral 
territories;  while  Grotius  and  Vatel,  particularly 
the  former,  allow  to  it  greater  latitude.  PufTendorf 
treats  it  not  as  a  natural  right,  but  as  derived  from 
compact  or  concession;  especially  when  the  enemy 
of  a  neighboring  state  desires  leave  to  march  troops 
through  a  neutral  country  against  its  neighbor. 
For  it  seems  (says  he)  to  be  a  part  of  the  duty  which 
we  owe  to  our  neighbors,  especially  such  as  have  been 
kind  and  friendly,  not  to  suffer  any  hostile  power  to 
march  through  our  country  to  their  prejudice,  pro 
vided  we  can  hinder  the  design  with  no  great  in 
convenience  to  ourselves.  And  as  it  may  have  a 
tendency  to  make  our  own  country  the  theatre  of 
the  war  (since  the  power  intended  to  be  attacked 
may  justifiably  march  within  our  limits  to  meet  the 
approaching  enemy),  he  concludes  that  it  is  the  safest 
way  of  acting  in  such  case,  if  we  can  do  it  without 
any  considerable  prejudice  to  our  own  affairs,  to  deny 


316  Alexander  Hamilton 

the  enemy  passage,  and  actually  to  oppose  him  if  he 
endeavors  to  force  it  without  our  consent.  But  if 
we  are  either  too  weak  to  hinder  his  progress,  or 
must  on  this  score  engage  in  a  dangerous  war,  he 
admits  that  the  plea  of  necessity  will  fairly  justify 
us  to  our  neighbor. 

Examples,  he  adds,  have  little  force  on  the  de 
cision  of  the  question.  For,  generally,  as  people 
have  been  stronger  or  weaker,  they  have  required 
passage  with  modesty  or  with  confidence,  and  have 
in  like  manner  granted  or  refused  it  to  others.1 

Barbeyrac,  in  his  Commentary  on  Grotius,  is  still 
stronger  against  the  right  of  passage.2  He  affirms 
that,  even  though  we  have  nothing  to  apprehend 
from  those  who  desire  a  passage,  we  are  not  there 
fore  obliged  in  rigor  to  grant  it.  It  necessarily  fol 
lows,  says  he,  from  the  right  of  property,  that  the 
proprietor  may  refuse  another  the  use  of  his  goods. 
Humanity,  indeed,  requires  that  he  should  grant 
that  use  to  those  who  stand  in  need  of  it,  when  it 
can  be  done  without  any  considerable  inconvenience 
to  himself;  but  if  he  even  then  refuses  it,  though  he 
transgresses  his  duty,  he  does  no  wrong,  properly  so 
called,  except  they  are  in  extreme  necessity,  which 
is  superior  to  all  ordinary  rules.  Thus  far,  and  no 
farther,  extends  the  reserve  with  which  it  is  sup 
posed  the  establishment  of  property  is  accompanied. 

Grotius,  on  the  other  hand,  expresses  himself  thus  3 : 
A  free  passage  ought  to  be  granted  to  persons  where 
just  occasion  shall  require,  over  any  lands,  or  rivers, 

1  Puffendorf  s  Laws  of  Nature  and  Nations,  pp.  239,  240. 

3  Note  i  on  Book  II.,  chap,  ii.,  §  13. 

3  Rights  of  War  and  Peace,  Book  II.,  chap,  ii.,  §  13,  Nos.  i,  2,  3,  4. 


Hamilton  to  Washington  317 

or  such  parts  of  the  sea  as  belong  to  any  nation ;  and, 


after  enumerating  several  examples  in  support  of  his 
position,  he  concludes  that  the  middle  opinion  is 
best;  to  wit,  that  the  liberty  of  passing  ought  first 
to  be  demanded,  and  if  denied,  may  be  claimed  by 
force.  Neither,  says  he,  can  it  be  reasonably  ob 
jected  that  there  may  be  suspicion  of  danger  from 
the  passing  of  a  multitude;  for  one  man's  right  is 
not  diminished  by  another  man's  fear.  Nor  is  the 
fear  of  provoking  that  prince  against  whom  he  that 
desires  to  pass  is  engaged  in  a  just  war,  a  sufficient 
reason  for  refusing  him  passage.  Nor  is  it  any  more 
an  excuse  that  he  may  pass  another  way,  for  this 
is  what  everybody  may  equally  allege,  and  so  this 
right  by  passing  would  be  entirely  destroyed.  But 
it  is  enough  that  the  passage  be  requested,  without 
any  fraud  or  ill  design,  by  the  nearest  and  most 
convenient  way.  //,  indeed,  he  who  desires  to  pass 
undertakes  an  unjust  war,  or  if  he  brings  people  who 
are  my  enemies  along  with  him,  I  may  deny  him  a 
passage;  for  in  this  case  I  have  a  right  to  meet  and 
oppose  him,  even  in  his  own  land,  and  to  intercept 
his  march.  Thus  it  would  seem  to  be  the  opinion 
of  Grotius,  that  a  party  engaged  in  a  just  war  has 
a  right,  of  course,  to  a  passage  through  a  neutral 
territory,  which  can  scarcely,  if  at  all,  be  denied 
him,  even  on  the  score  of  danger  or  inconvenience  to 
the  party  required  to  grant  it. 

But  Vatel,  perhaps  the  most  accurate  and  ap 
proved  of  the  writers  on  the  laws  of  nations,  pre 
serves  a  mean  between  these  *  different  opinions. 

1  Book  III.,  chap,  vii.,  §§  119,  120,  121,  122,  123. 


318  Alexander  Hamilton 

This  is  the  sum  of  what  he  advances:  That  an  inno 
cent  passage  is  due  to  all  nations  with  whom  a  state  is 
at  peace,  for  troops  equally  with  individuals,  and  to 
annoy  as  well  as  to  avoid  an  enemy.  That  the  party 
asking  and  the  party  asked  are  both,  in  different 
degrees,  judges  of  the  question  when  innocent?  That 
where  the  party  asked  has  good  reasons  for  refusing, 
he  is  not  under  any  obligation  to  grant,  and  in  doubt 
ful  cases  his  judgment  ought  to  be  definitive;  but  in 
evident  ones,  or  those  in  which  the  harmlessness  of 
the  passage  is  manifest,  the  party  asking  may,  in  the 
last  resort,  judge  for  himself,  and  after  demand  and 
refusal  may  force  his  way.  That  nevertheless,  as  it 
is  very  difficult  for  the  passage  of  a  powerful  army 
to  be  absolutely  innocent,  and  still  more  difficult  for 
its  innocence  to  be  apparent,  a  refusal  ought  to  be 
submitted  to,  except  in  those  very  rare  cases  when 
it  can  be  shown  in  the  most  palpable  manner  that 
the  passage  required  is  absolutely  without  danger  or 
inconvenience.  And  lastly,  that  this  right  of  pass 
age  is  only  due  in  a  war  not  materially  unjust. 

Perhaps  the  only  inference  to  be  drawn  from  all 
this  is,  that  there  exists  in  the  practice  of  nations 
and  the  dogmas  of  political  writers  a  certain  vague 
pretension  to  a  right  of  passage  in  particular  cases 
and  according  to  circumstances,  which  is  sufficient 
to  afford  to  the  strong  a  pretext  for  claiming  and 
exercising  it  when  it  suits  their  interests,  and  to 
render  it  always  dangerous  to  the  weak  to  refuse, 
and  sometimes  not  less  so  to  grant  it. 

It  is,  nevertheless,  a  proper  inquiry,  whether  a 
refusal  could  be  placed  on  such  ground  as  would  give 


Hamilton  to  Washington  319 

a  reasonable  cause  of  umbrage  to  the  party  refused, 
and  as  in  the  eye  of  the  world  would  justify  it. 

Against  the  propriety  of  a  refusal  are  the  following 
circumstances:  that  there  is  no  connection  between 
us  and  Spain,  which  obliges  us  to  it ;  that  the  passage 
asked  will  be  down  rivers,  and  for  the  most  part 
through  an  uninhabited  wilderness,  whence  no  in 
jury  to  our  citizens  or  settlements  will  be  appre 
hended;  and  that  the  number  of  troops  to  be 
marched,  especially  considering  the  route,  will  proba 
bly  not  be  such  as,  on  their  own  account,  to  be  a 
serious  cause  of  alarm.  These  circumstances  may 
give  our  refusal  the  complexion  of  partiality  to 
Spain,  and  of  indisposition  towards  Britain,  which 
may  be  represented  as  a  deviation  from  the  spirit 
of  exact  neutrality. 

In  support  of  the  propriety  of  a  refusal,  the  follow 
ing  is  the  only  assignable  reason :  that  it  is  safer  for 
us  to  have  two  powerful  but  rival  nations  bordering 
upon  our  two  extremities,  than  to  have  one  powerful 
nation  pressing  us  on  both  sides,  and  in  capacity, 
hereafter,  by  posts  and  settlements,  to  envelop  our 
whole  interior  frontier. 

The  good  offices  of  Spain  in  the  late  war;  the 
danger  of  the  seduction  of  our  western  inhabitants; 
the  probable  consequences  to  the  trade  of  the  At 
lantic  States,  are  considerations  rather  to  be  con 
templated  as  motives,  than  alleged  as  reasons. 

The  first  reason,  however,  is  of  a  nature  to  satisfy 
the  mind  of  the  justice  of  a  refusal;  admitting  the 
authority  of  the  more  moderate  opinions,  which 
have  been  cited.  And  the  danger,  too,  upon  the 


320  Alexander  Hamilton 

supposition  of  which  it  is  founded,  appears  to  be  ob 
vious  enough  to  vindicate  it,  in  the  opinion  of  the 
disinterested  part  of  mankind ;  little  likely  as  it  may 
be  to  engage  the  acquiescence  of  the  party  whose 
wishes  would  be  thwarted  by  the  refusal.  It  de 
serves,  notwithstanding,  to  be  noticed  on  this  point, 
that  the  ground  of  dissent  would  not  result  from  the 
thing  itself — that  is,  the  mere  passage, — but  from  the 
nature  of  the  acquisition,  to  which  it  would  give 
facility.  This  circumstance  may  somewhat  obscure 
the  clearness  of  the  conclusion,  that  there  is  a  perfect 
right  to  refuse. 

But,  upon  the  whole,  there  does  not  appear  to  be 
room  enough  for  a  scruple  about  the  right  to  deter 
from  refusal  if,  upon  examination,  it  shall  be  found 
expedient. 

Does  the  right  of  consenting  to  the  passage  stand 
upon  ground  equally  unexceptionable  ? 

This  question  Vatel  answers  in  the  following  man 
ner  : x  "  When  I  have  no  reason  to  refuse  the  passage, 
the  party  against  whom  it  is  granted  has  no  room  for 
complaint,  much  less  for  making  it  a  pretense  for 
war;  since  I  did  no  more  than  what  the  law  of  na 
tions  enjoins.  Neither  has  he  any  right  to  require 
that  I  should  deny  the  passage,  because  he  is  not  to 
hinder  me  from  doing  what  I  think  is  agreeable  to 
my  duty,  and  even  on  occasion  when  I  might  with 
justice  deny  the  passage,  it  is  allowable  in  me  not  to 
make  use  of  my  right;  especially  when  I  should  be 
obliged  to  support  my  refusal  by  my  sword.  Who  will 
take  upon  him  to  complain  of  my  having  permitted 

1  Vatel,  Book  III.,  chap,  vii.,  §  127. 


Hamilton  to  Washington  321 

the  war  to  be  carried  into  his  own  country,  rather 
than  draw  it  on  myself?  It  cannot  be  expected 
that  I  should  take  up  arms  in  his  favor,  unless 
obliged  to  by  a  treaty."  And  Puffendorf  admits, 
as  has  been  before  noted,  that  if  we  are  either  too 
weak  to  hinder  his  progress,  or  must  on  that  score 
engage  in  a  dangerous  war,  the  plea  of  necessity  will 
fairly  justify  us  to  our  neighbor. 

Nothing  need  be  added  to  reasoning  so  perspicuous 
and  convincing.  It  does  not  admit  of  a  moment's 
doubt,  as  a  general  rule,  that  a  neutral  state,  un 
fettered  by  any  stipulation,  is  not  bound  to  expose 
itself  to  a  war,  merely  to  shelter  a  neighbor  from  the 
approaches  of  its  enemy.  It  remains  to  examine,  if 
there  are  any  circumstances,  in  our  particular  case, 
capable  of  forming  an  exception  to  that  rule. 

It  is  not  to  be  forgotten  that  we  received  from 
France,  in  our  late  revolution,  essential  succor,  and 
from  Spain  valuable  countenance  and  some  direct  aid. 
It  is  also  to  be  remembered  that  France  is  the  intimate 
ally  of  Spain,  and  there  subsists  a  connection  by  treaty 
between  the  former  power  and  the  United  States. 

It  might  thence  be  alleged  that  obligations  of 
gratitude  towards  those  powers  require  that  we 
should  run  some  risk,  rather  than  concur  in  a  thing 
prejudicial  to  either  of  them,  and  particularly  in 
favor  of  that  very  nation  against  which  they  as 
sisted  us.  And  the  natural  impulse  of  every  good 
heart  will  second  the  proposition,  till  reason  has 
taught  it  that  refinements  of  this  kind  are  to  be  in 
dulged  with  caution  in  the  affairs  of  nations. 

Gratitude  is  a  word,  the  very  sound  of  which 


VOL.  IV. — 21. 


322  Alexander  Hamilton 

imposes  something  like  respect.  Where  there  is  even 
an  appearance  upon  which  the  claim  to  it  can  be 
founded,  it  can  seldom  be  a  pleasing  task  to  dispute 
that  claim.  But  where  a  word  may  become  the 
basis  of  a  political  system,  affecting  the  essential 
interests  of  the  state,  it  is  incumbent  upon  those  who 
have  any  concern  in  the  public  administration,  to 
appreciate  its  true  import  and  application. 

It  is  necessary,  then,  to  reflect,  however  painful 
the  reflection,  that  gratitude  is  a  duty,  a  sentiment, 
which  between  nations  can  rarely  have  any  solid 
foundation.  Gratitude  is  only  due  to  a  kindness  or 
service,  the  predominant  object  of  which  is  the  in 
terest  or  benefit  of  the  party  to  whom  it  is  per 
formed.  Where  the  interest  or  benefit  of  the  party 
performing  is  the  predominant  cause  of  it,  however 
there  may  result  a  debt,  in  cases  in  which  there  is  not 
an  immediate  adequate  and  reciprocal  advantage, 
there  can  be  no  room  for  the  sentiment  of  gratitude. 
Where  there  is  such  an  advantage,  there  is  then  not 
even  a  debt.  If  the  motive  of  the  act,  instead  of 
being  the  benefit  of  the  party  to  whom  it  was  done, 
should  be  a  compound  of  the  interest  of  the  party 
doing  it  and  of  detriment  to  some  other,  of  whom 
he  is  the  enemy  and  the  rival,  there  is  still  less  room 
for  so  noble  and  refined  a  sentiment.  This  analysis 
will  serve  as  a  test  of  our  true  situation  in  regard 
both  to  France  and  Spain. 

It  is  not  to  be  doubted,  that  the  part  which  the 
courts  of  France  and  Spain  took  in  our  quarrel  with 
Great  Britain,  is  to  be  attributed,  not  to  an  attach 
ment  to  our  independence  or  liberty,  but  to  a  desire 


Hamilton  to  Washington  323 

of  diminishing  the  power  of  Great  Britain  by  sever 
ing  the  British  Empire.  This  they  considered  as  an 
interest  of  very  great  magnitude  to  them.  In  this 
their  calculations  and  their  passions  conspired.  For 
this  they  united  their  arms  with  ours,  and  encount 
ered  the  expenses  and  perils  of  war.  This  has  been 
accomplished ;  the  advantages  of  it  are  mutual ;  and 
so  far  the  account  is  balanced. 

In  the  progress  of  the  war  J  they  lent  us  money, 
as  necessary  to  its  success,  and  during  our  inability 
to  pay  they  have  forborne  to  press  us  for  it.  The 
money  we  ought  to  exert  ourselves  to  pay  with  in 
terest,  and  as  well  for  the  loan  of  it,  as  for  the  for 
bearance  to  urge  the  repayment  of  the  sums  which 
have  become  due,  we  ought  always  to  be  ready  to 
make  proportionate  acknowledgments,  and  when 
opportunities  shall  offer,  returns  answerable  to  the 
nature  of  the  service. 

Let  it  be  added  to  this,  that  the  conduct  of  France 
in  the  manner  of  affording  her  aid,  bore  the  marks 
of  a  liberal  policy.  She  did  not  endeavor  to  extort 
from  us,  as  the  price  of  it,  any  disadvantageous  or 
humiliating  concessions.  In  this  respect,  however, 
she  may  have  been  influenced  by  an  enlightened 
view  of  her  own  interest.  She  entitled  herself  to 
our  esteem  and  good-will.  These  dispositions  to 
wards  her  ought  to  be  cherished  and  cultivated;  but 
they  are  very  distinct  from  a  spirit  of  romantic 
gratitude,  calling  for  sacrifices  of  our  substantial 
interests,  preferences  inconsistent  with  sound  policy, 
or  complaisances  incompatible  with  our  safety. 

1  France  has  made  us  one  loan  since  the  peace. 


324  Alexander  Hamilton 

The  conduct  of  Spain  towards  us  presents  a  pic 
ture  far  less  favorable.  The  direct  aid  we  received 
from  her  during  the  war  was  inconsiderable  in  itself, 
and  still  more  inconsiderable  compared  with  her 
faculty  of  aiding  us.  She  refrained  from  acknow 
ledging  our  independence ;  has  never  acceded  to  the 
treaty  of  commerce  made  with  France, — though  a 
right  of  doing  it  was  reserved  to  her, — nor  made  any 
other  treaty  with  us ;  she  has  maintained  possessions 
within  our  acknowledged  limits  without  our  consent ; 
she  perseveringly  obstructs  our  sharing  in  the  naviga 
tion  of  the  Mississippi,  though  it  is  a  privilege  es 
sential  to  us,  and  to  which  wre  consider  ourselves  as 
having  an  indisputable  title.  And  perhaps  it  might 
be  added  upon  good  ground,  that  she  has  not  scrupled 
to  intrigue  with  leading  individuals  in  the  western 
country,  to  seduce  them  from  our  interests,  and  to 
attach  them  to  her  own. 

Spain  therefore  must  be  regarded,  upon  the  whole, 
as  having  slender  claims  to  peculiar  good-will  from 
us.  There  is  certainly  nothing  that  authorizes  her 
to  expect  we  should  expose  ourselves  to  any  extra 
ordinary  jeopardy  for  her  sake.  And  to  conceive 
that  any  considerations  relative  to  France  ought  to 
be  extended  to  her,  would  be  to  set  up  a  doctrine 
altogether  new  in  politics.  The  ally  of  our  ally  has 
no  claim,  as  such,  to  our  friendship.  We  may  have 
substantial  grounds  of  dissatisfaction  against  him, 
and  act  in  consequence  of  them,  even  to  open  hos 
tility,  without  derogating  in  any  degree  from  what 
we  owe  to  our  ally. 

This  is  so  true,  that  if  a  war  should  really  ensue 


Hamilton  to  Washington  325 

between  Great  Britain  and  Spain,  and  if  the  latter 
should  persist  in  excluding  us  from  the  Mississippi 
(taking  it  for  granted  our  claim  to  share  in  its  navi 
gation  is  well  founded),  there  can  be  no  reasonable 
ground  of  doubt  that  we  should  be  at  liberty,  if  we 
thought  it  our  interest,  consistently  with  our  present 
engagements  with  France,  to  join  Britain  against 
Spain. 

How  far  it  might  be  expedient  to  place  ourselves 
in  a  situation  which,  in  case  France  should  eventually 
become  a  party  in  the  war,  might  entangle  us  in 
opposite  duties  on  the  score  of  the  stipulated  guar 
anty  of  her  West  India  possessions,  or  might  have  a 
tendency  to  embroil  us  with  her,  would  be  a  mere 
question  of  prudential  and  liberal  calculation,  which 
would  have  nothing  to  do  with  the  right  of  taking 
side  against  Spain. 

These  are  truths  necessary  to  be  contemplated 
with  freedom,  because  it  is  impossible  to  foresee  what 
events  may  spring  up,  or  whither  our  interests  may 
point;  and  it  is  very  important  to  distinguish  with 
accuracy  how  far  we  are  bound,  and  where  we  are 
free. 

However  vague  the  obligations  of  gratitude  may  be 
between  nations,  those  of  good  faith  are  precise  and 
determinate.  Within  their  true  limits,  they  can 
hardly  be  held  too  sacred.  But  by  exaggerating 
them,  or  giving  them  a  fanciful  extension,  they 
would  be  in  danger  of  losing  their  just  force.  This 
would  be  converting  them  into  fetters,  which  a 
nation  would  erelong  become  impatient  to  break, 
as  consistent  neither  with  its  prosperity  nor  its 


326  Alexander  Hamilton 

safety.  Hence,  while  it  is  desirable  to  maintain 
with  fidelity  our  engagements  to  France,  it  is  ad 
visable,  on  all  occasions,  to  beware  that  they  oblige 
us  to  nothing  towards  Spain. 

From  this  view  of  the  subject,  there  does  not  ap 
pear  any  circumstance  in  our  case  capable  of  forming 
an  exception  to  the  general  rule ;  and,  as  it  is  certain 
that  there  can  hardly  be  a  situation  less  adapted  to 
war  than  that  in  which  we  now  find  ourselves,  we 
can,  with  the  greatest  sincerity,  offer  the  most 
satisfactory  excuse  to  Spain  for  not  withholding  our 
consent,  if  our  own  interests  do  not  decide  us  to  a 
contrary  course. 

The  conclusion  from  what  has  been  said  is,  that 
there  is  a  right  either  to  refuse  or  consent,  as  shall 
be  judged  for  the  interest  of  the  United  States; 
though  the  right  to  consent  is  less  questionable  than 
the  right  to  refuse. 

The  consequences  to  be  expected  from  refusal  or 
consent  present  themselves  next  to  consideration. 
Those  of  consent  shall  be  first  examined. 

An  increase  of  the  means  of  annoying  us  in  the 
same  hands  is  a  certain  ill  consequence  of  the  ac 
quisition  of  the  Floridas  and  Louisiana  by  the  Brit 
ish.  This  will  result  not  only  from  contiguity  to  a 
greater  part  of  our  territory,  but  from  the  increased 
facility  of  acquiring  an  undivided  influence  over  all 
the  Indian  tribes  inhabiting  within  the  borders  of 
the  United  States. 

Additional  danger  of  the  dismemberment  of  the 
western  country  is  another  ill  consequence  to  be 
apprehended  from  that  acquisition.  This  will  arise 


Hamilton  to  Washington  327 

as  well  from  the  greater  power  of  annoying  us,  as 
from  the  different  policy  which  it  is  likely  would  be 
pursued  by  that  nation,  if  in  possession  of  the  key 
to  the  only  outlet  for  the  productions  of  that  country. 
Instead  of  shutting,  they  would  probably  open,  the 
door  to  its  inhabitants,  and  by  conciliating  their 
good- will  on  the  one  hand,  and  making  them  sensi 
ble,  on  the  other,  of  their  dependence  on  them  for 
the  continuance  of  so  essential  an  advantage,  they 
might  hold  out  to  them  the  most  powerful  tempta 
tion  to  a  desertion  of  their  connection  with  the  rest 
of  the  United  States.  The  avarice  and  ambition  of 
individuals  may  be  made  to  co-operate  in  favor  of 
those  views. 

A  third  ill  consequence  of  that  acquisition  would 
be,  material  injury,  in  time  to  come,  to  the  com 
merce  of  the  Atlantic  States.  By  rendering  New 
Orleans  the  emporium  of  the  products  of  the  western 
country,  Britain  would,  at  a  period  not  very  distant, 
have  little  occasion  for  supplies  of  provisions  for 
their  islands  from  the  Atlantic  States ;  and  for  their 
European  market  they  would  derive  from  the  same 
source  copious  supplies  of  tobacco  and  other  articles 
now  furnished  by  the  Southern  States:  whence  a 
great  diminution  of  the  motives  to  establish  liberal 
terms  of  commercial  intercourse  with  the  United 
States  collectively. 

These  consequences  are  all  expressed  or  implied 
in  the  form  of  the  question  stated  by  the  President. 
And  as  far  as  our  consent  can  be  supposed  likely 
to  have  influence  upon  the  event,  they  constitute 
powerful  objections  to  giving  it. 


328  Alexander  Hamilton 

If  even  it  should  be  taken  for  granted  that  our  con 
sent  or  refusal  would  have  no  influence  either  way, 
it  would  not  even  then  cease  to  be  disagreeable  to 
concur  in  a  thing  apparently  so  inauspicious  to  our 
interests.  And  it  deserves  attention  that  our  con 
currency  might  expose  us  to  the  imputation  either 
of  want  of  foresight  to  discover  a  danger,  or  of  vigor 
to  withstand  it. 

But  there  is  almost  always  in  such  cases  a  com 
parison  of  evils;  and  the  point  of  prudence  is,  to 
make  choice  of  that  course  which  threatens  the 
fewest  or  the  least,  or  sometimes  the  least  certain. 
The  consequences  of  refusal  are  therefore  to  be 
weighed  against  those  of  consent. 

It  seems  to  be  a  matter  taken  for  granted  by  the 
writers  upon  the  subject,  that  a  refusal  ought  to  be 
accompanied  with  a  resolution  to  support  it,  if  neces 
sary,  by  the  sword;  or,  in  other  words,  to  oppose  the 
passage,  if  attempted  to  be  forced,  or  to  resent  the 
injury,  if  circumstances  should  not  permit  an  effect 
ual  opposition.  This,  indeed,  is  implied  in  the  na 
ture  of  the  thing ;  for  to  what  purpose  refuse,  unless 
it  be  intended  to  make  good  the  refusal?  or  how 
avoid  disgrace,  if  our  territories  are  suffered  to  be 
violated  with  impunity,  after  a  formal  and  deliberate 
prohibition  of  passage  ? 

There  are  cases  in  which  a  nation  may,  without 
ignominy,  wink  at  an  infraction  of  its  rights;  but 
this  does  not  appear  to  be  one  of  them.  After  hav 
ing  been  asked  its  permission  and  having  refused  it, 
the  presumption  will  be  that  it  has  estimated  the 
consequences,  calculated  its  means,  and  is  prepared 


Hamilton  to  Washington  329 

to  assert  and  uphold  its  rights.  If  the  contrary  of 
this  should  turn  out  to  be  its  conduct,  it  must  bring 
itself  into  contempt  for  inviting  insult  which  it  was 
unable  to  repel,  and  manifesting  ill-will  towards  a 
power  which  it  durst  not  resist.  As,  on  the  one  hand, 
there  cannot  be  conceived  to  be  a  greater  outrage 
than  to  pass  through  our  country,  in  defiance  of  our 
declared  disapprobation ;  so,  on  the  other,  there  can 
not  be  a  greater  humiliation  than  to  submit  to  it. 

The  consequence  therefore  of  refusal,  if  not  ef 
fectual,  must  be  absolute  disgrace  or  immediate 
war.  This  appears,  at  least,  to  be  the  alternative. 

Whether  a  refusal  would  have  the  desired  effect, 
is,  at  best,  problematical.  The  presumption,  per 
haps,  is,  that  Great  Britain  will  have  adverted  to 
the  possibility  of  it;  and  if,  under  the  uncertainty 
of  what  would  be  our  conduct,  she  should  still  have 
resolved  on  prosecuting  the  enterprise  through  our 
territory,  that  she  will  at  the  same  time  have  re 
solved  either  to  ask  no  questions,  or  to  disregard  our 
dissent.  It  is  not  unlikely  that  the  reasoning  of  the 
British  cabinet  will  have  been  to  this  effect:  If  the 
United  States  have  no  predilection  for  Spain,  or  if 
their  views  of  their  own  interest  are  not  opposed  to 
the  acquisition  we  meditate,  they  will  not  withhold 
their  consent ;  if  either  the  one  or  the  other  be  the 
case,  it  ought  to  be  determined  beforehand,  whether 
their  enmity  be  a  greater  evil,  than  the  projected 
acquisition  a  good;  and  if  we  do  not  choose  to  re 
nounce  the  one,  we  must  be  prepared  to  meet  the 
other. 

A  further  ill  consequence  of  the  refusal,  if  in- 


33°  Alexander  Hamilton 

effectual,  not  wholly  destitute  of  weight,  is  this,  that 
Great  Britain  would  then  think  herself  under  less 
obligation  to  keep  measures  with  us,  and  would  feel 
herself  more  at  liberty  to  employ  every  engine  in 
her  power  to  make  her  acquisition  as  prejudicial  to 
us  as  possible ;  whereas,  if  no  impediment  should  be 
thrown  in  the  way  by  us,  more  good  humor  may 
beget  greater  moderation,  and,  in  the  progress  of 
things,  concessions  securing  us  may  be  made,  as  the 
price  of  our  future  neutrality.  An  explicit  recog 
nition  of  our  right  to  navigate  the  Mississippi  to  and 
from  the  ocean,  with  the  possession  of  New  Orleans, 
would  greatly  mitigate  the  causes  of  apprehension 
from  the  conquest  of  the  Floridas  by  the  British. 

The  consequences  of  refusal  or  consent  constitute 
leading  motives  to  the  one  or  to  the  other;  which 
now  claim  a  more  particular  discussion. 

It  has  been  seen  that  the  ill  effects  to  be  appre 
hended  from  the  conquest  of  the  Spanish  territories 
in  our  neighborhood  are:  an  increase  of  the  means 
whereby  we  may  be  hereafter  annoyed,  and  of  the 
danger  of  the  separation  of  the  western  country  from 
the  rest  of  the  Union ;  and  a  future  interference  with 
the  trade  of  the  Atlantic  States,  in  a  manner,  too, 
not  conducive  to  the  general  weal. 

As  far  as  there  is  a  prospect  that  a  refusal  would 
be  an  impediment  to  the  enterprise,  the  considera 
tions  which  have  been  mentioned  afford  the  strongest 
inducements  to  it.  But  if  that  effect  of  it  be  doubt 
ful,  the  force  of  these  inducements  is  proportionably 
diminished;  if  improbable,  it  nearly  ceases.  The 
prospect  in  this  case  would  be,  that  a  refusal  would 


Hamilton  to  Washington  331 

aggravate  instead  of  preventing  the  evil  it  was  in 
tended  to  obviate.  And  it  must  be  acknowledged 
that  the  success  of  it  is,  at  least,  very  doubtful. 

The  consideration  that  our  assent  may  be  con 
strued  into  want  of  foresight  or  want  of  vigor, 
though  not  to  be  disregarded,  would  not  be  sufficient 
to  justify  our  risking  a  war  in  our  present  situation. 
The  cogent  reasons  we  have  to  avoid  a  war  are  too 
obvious  and  intelligible,  not  to  furnish  an  explana 
tion  of  and  an  apology  for  our  conduct  in  this 
respect. 

Whatever  may  be  the  calculations  with  regard  to 
the  probable  effect  of  a  refusal,  it  ought  to  be  pre 
dicated  upon  the  supposition  that  it  may  not  be  re 
garded,  and  accompanied  with  a  determination  to 
act  as  a  proper  attention  to  national  dignity  would 
in  such  an  event  dictate.  This  would  be  to  make 
war. 

For  it  is  a  sound  maxim,  that  a  state  had  better 
hazard  any  calamities  than  submit  tamely  to  abso 
lute  disgrace. 

Now,  it  is  manifest,  that  a  government  scarcely 
ever  had  stronger  motives  to  avoid  war,  than  that 
of  the  United  States  at  the  present  juncture.  They 
have  much  to  dread  from  war;  much  to  expect  from 
peace;  something  to  hope  from  negotiation,  in  case 
of  a  rupture  between  Britain  and  Spain. 

We  are  but  just  recovering  from  the  effects  of  a 
long,  arduous,  and  exhausting  war.  The  people  but 
just  begin  to  realize  the  sweets  of  repose.  We  are 
vulnerable  both  by  water  and  land;  without  either 
fleet  or  army.  We  have  a  considerable  debt  in 


33  2  Alexander  Hamilton 

proportion  to  the  resources  which  the  state  of  things 
permits  the  government  to  command.  Measures 
have  been  recently  entered  upon  for  the  restoration 
of  credit,  which  a  war  could  hardly  fail  to  disconcert, 
and  which,  if  disturbed,  would  be  fatal  to  the  means 
of  prosecuting  it.  Our  national  government  is  in  its 
infancy.  The  habits  and  dispositions  of  our  people 
are  ill-suited  to  those  liberal  contributions  to  the 
treasury  which  a  war  would  necessarily  exact. 
There  are  causes  which  render  war  in  this  country 
more  expensive,  and  consequently  more  difficult  to 
be  carried  on,  than  in  any  other.  There  is  a  general 
disinclination  to  it  in  all  classes.  The  theories  of  the 
speculative,  and  the  feelings  of  all,  are  opposed  to  it. 
The  support  of  public  opinion  (perhaps  more  essential 
to  our  government  than  to  any  other)  could  only  be 
looked  for  in  a  war  evidently  resulting  from  necessity. 
These  are  general  reasons  against  going  into  war. 
There  are  others,  of  a  more  particular  kind.  To  the 
people  at  large  the  quarrel  would  be  apt  to  have 
the  appearance  of  having  originated  in  a  desire  of 
shielding  Spain  from  the  arms  of  Britain.  There 
are  several  classes  of  men  to  whom  this  idea  would 
not  be  agreeable,  especially  if  the  Dutch  were  under 
stood  to  be  in  conjunction  with  the  British.  All 
those  who  were  not  friendly  to  our  late  revolution 
would  certainly  dislike  it.  Most  of  the  descendants 
of  the  Dutch  would  be  unfriendly  to  it.  And  let  it 
not  be  overlooked,  that  there  is  still  a  considerable 
proportion  of  those  who  were  firm  friends  to  the 
revolution,  who  retain  prepossessions  in  favor  of 
Englishmen,  and  prejudices  against  Spaniards. 


Hamilton  to  Washington  333 

In  a  popular  government  especially,  however 
prejudices  like  these  may  be  regretted,  they  are  not 
to  be  excluded  from  political  calculations. 

It  ought  also  to  be  taken  into  the  account,  that  by 
placing  ourselves  at  this  time  in  a  situation  to  go 
to  war  against  Great  Britain,  we  embark  with  the 
weakest  party — with  a  total  uncertainty  what  ac 
cession  of  strength  may  be  gained — and  without 
making  any  terms  with  regard  either  to  succor,  in 
demnity,  or  compensation. 

France  is  the  only  weight  which  can  be  thrown 
into  the  scale,  capable  of  producing  an  equilibrium. 
But  her  accession,  however  probable,  ought  not  to 
be  deemed  absolutely  certain.  The  predominant 
party  there  may  choose  to  avoid  war  as  dangerous 
to  their  own  power.  And  if  even  obstacles  should 
not  arise  from  that  quarter,  it  cannot  be  foreseen  to 
what  extent  France  will  be  in  condition  to  make 
efforts.  The  great  body  of  malcontents,  compre 
hending  a  large  proportion  of  the  most  wealthy  and 
formerly  the  most  influential  class — the  prodigious 
innovations  which  have  been  made — the  general  and 
excessive  fermentation  which  has  been  excited  in  the 
minds  of  the  people — the  character  of  the  prince,  or 
the  nature  of  the  government  likely  to  be  instituted, 
as  far  as  can  be  judged  prior  to  an  experiment — do 
not  prognosticate  much  order  or  vigor  in  the  affairs 
of  that  country  for  a  considerable  period  to  come. 

It  is  possible,  indeed,  that  the  enthusiasm  which 
the  transition  from  slavery  to  liberty  may  inspire, 
may  be  a  substitute  for  the  energy  of  a  good 
administration,  and  the  spring  of  great  exertions. 


334  Alexander  Hamilton 

But  the  ebullitions  of  enthusiasm  must  ever  be  a 
precarious  reliance.  And  it  is  quite  as  possible 
that  the  greatness,  and  perhaps  immaturity,  of  that 
transition,  may  prolong  licentiousness  and  disorder. 
Calculations  of  what  may  happen  in  France  must  be 
unusually  fallible,  not  merely  from  the  yet  unsettled 
state  of  things  in  that  kingdom,  but  from  the  ex 
treme  violence  of  the  change  which  has  been  wrought 
in  the  situation  of  the  people. 

These  considerations  are  additional  admonitions 
to  avoid,  as  far  as  possible,  any  step  that  may  em 
broil  us  with  Great  Britain.  It  seems  evidently  our 
true  policy  to  cultivate  neutrality.  This,  at  least, 
is  the  ground  on  which  we  ought  to  stand,  until  we 
can  see  more  of  the  scene,  and  can  have  secured  the 
means  of  changing  it  with  advantage. 

We  have  objects  which,  in  such  a  conjuncture,  are 
not  to  be  neglected.  The  western  posts,  on  one  side, 
and  the  navigation  of  the  Mississippi,  on  the  other, 
call  for  a  vigilant  attention  to  what  is  going  on. 
They  are  both  of  importance.  The  securing  of  the 
latter  may  be  regarded  in  its  consequences  as  essen 
tial  to  the  unity  of  the  empire. 

But  it  is  not  impossible,  if  war  takes  place,  that  by 
a  judicious  attention  to  favorable  moments,  we  may 
accomplish  both  by  negotiation.  The  moment, 
however,  we  became  committed  on  either  side,  the 
advantages  of  our  position  for  negotiation  would  be 
gone.  They  would  even  be  gone  in  respect  to  the 
party  with  whom  we  were  in  co-operation ;  for,  being 
once  in  the  war,  we  could  not  make  terms  as  the 
condition  of  entering  into  it. 


Hamilton  to  Washington  335 

Though  it  may  be  uncertain  how  long  we  shall  be 
permitted  to  preserve  our  neutrality,  that  is  not  a 
sufficient  reason  for  departing  from  it  voluntarily. 
It  is  possible  we  may  be  permitted  to  persist  in  it 
throughout.  And  if  we  must  renounce  it,  it  is  better 
it  should  be  from  necessity  than  choice;  at  least 
till  we  see  a  prospect  of  renouncing  with  safety  and 
profit.  If  the  government  is  forced  into  a  war,  the 
cheerful  support  of  the  people  may  be  counted  upon. 
If  it  brings  it  upon  itself,  it  will  have  to  struggle  with 
their  displeasure  and  reluctance.  This  difference 
alone  is  immense. 

The  desire  of  manifesting  amity  to  Spain,  from 
the  supposition  that  our  permanent  interest  is  con 
cerned  in  cementing  an  intimate  connection  with 
France  and  Spain,  ought  to  have  no  influence  in  the 
case.  Admitting  the  existence  of  such  an  interest, 
it  ought  not  to  hurry  us  into  premature  hazards. 
If  it  should  finally  induce  us  to  become  a  party,  it 
will  be  time  enough  when  France  has  become  such, 
and  after  we  shall  have  adjusted  the  condition  upon 
which  we  are  to  engage. 

But  the  reality  of  such  an  interest  is  a  thing  about 
which  the  best  and  the  ablest  men  of  this  country 
are  far  from  being  agreed.  There  are  of  this  num 
ber,  who,  if  the  United  States  were  at  perfect  liberty, 
would  prefer  an  intimate  connection  between  them 
and  Great  Britain  as  most  conducive  to  their  security 
and  advantage;  and  who  are  of  opinion  that  it  will 
be  well  to  cultivate  friendship  between  that  country 
and  this,  to  the  utmost  extent  which  is  reconcilable 
with  the  faith  of  existing  engagements;  while  the 


336  Alexander  Hamilton 

most  general  opinion  is,  that  it  is  our  true  policy  to 
steer  as  clear  as  possible  of  all  foreign  connection, 
other  than  commercial  and  in  this  respect  to  cul 
tivate  intercourse  with  all  the  world  on  the  broad 
est  basis  of  reciprocal  privilege. 

An  attentive  consideration  of  the  vicissitudes 
which  have  attended  the  friendships  of  nations,  ex 
cept  in  a  very  few  instances,  from  very  peculiar  cir 
cumstances,  gives  little  countenance  to  systems 
which  proceed  on  the  supposition  of  a  permanent 
interest  to  prefer  a  particular  connection.  The 
position  of  the  United  States,  detached  as  they  are 
from  Europe,  admonishes  them  to  unusual  circum 
spection  on  that  point.  The  same  position,  as  far 
as  it  has  relation  to  the  possessions  of  European 
Powers  in  their  vicinity,  strengthens  the  admonition. 

Let  it  be  supposed  that  Spain  retains  her  pos 
sessions  on  our  right,  and  persists  in  the  policy  she 
has  hitherto  pursued,  without  the  slightest  symptom 
of  relaxation,  of  barring  the  Mississippi  against  us; 
where  must  this  end,  and  at  a  period  not  very  dis 
tant?  Infallibly  in  a  war  with  Spain,  or  separation 
of  the  western  country.  This  country  must  have 
an  outlet  for  its  commodities.  This  is  essential  to 
its  prosperity,  and  if  not  procured  to  it  by  the 
United  States,  must  be  had  at  the  expense  of  the 
connection  with  them.  A  war  with  Spain,  when 
our  affairs  will  have  acquired  greater  consistency 
and  order,  will  certainly  be  to  be  preferred  to  such 
an  alternative.  In  an  event  of  this  sort,  we  should 
naturally  seek  aid  from  Great  Britain.  This  would 
probably  involve  France  on  the  opposite  side,  and 


Hamilton  to  Washington  337 

effect  a  revolution  in  the  state  of  our  foreign  politics. 

In  regard  to  the  possessions  of  Great  Britain  on 
our  left,  it  is  at  least  problematical  whether  the 
acquisition  of  them  will  ever  be  desirable  to  the 
United  States.  It  is  certain  that  they  are  in  no 
shape  essential  to  our  prosperity.  Except,  there 
fore,  the  detention  of  our  western  posts  (an  object, 
too,  of  far  less  consequence  than  the  navigation  of 
the  Mississippi),  there  appears  no  necessary  source  of 
future  collision  with  that  power. 

This  view  of  the  subject  manifests  that  we  may 
have  a  more  urgent  interest  to  differ  with  Spain  than 
with  Britain;  and  that  conclusion  will  become  the 
stronger  if  it  be  admitted  that  when  we  are  able  to 
make  good  our  pretensions,  we  ought  not  to  leave 
in  the  possession  of  any  foreign  power  the  territories 
at  the  mouth  of  the  Mississippi,  which  are  to  be  re 
garded  as  the  key  to  it. 

While  considerations  of  this  nature  ought  not  to 
weaken  the  sense  which  our  government  ought  to 
have  of  any  obligations  which  good  faith  shall  fairly 
impose,  they  ought  to  inspire  caution  in  adopting  a 
system  which  may  approximate  us  too  nearly  to 
certain  powers,  and  place  us  at  too  great  a  distance 
from  others.  Indeed  every  system  of  this  kind  is 
liable  to  the  objection,  that  it  has  a  tendency  to  give 
a  wrong  bias  to  the  counsels  of  a  nation,  and  some 
times  to  make  its  own  interest  subservient  to  that  of 
another. 

If  the  immediate  cause  of  the  impending  war  be 
tween  Britain  and  Spain  be  considered,  there  can 
not  be  drawn  from  thence  any  inducements  for  our 


VOL.  IV.— 22 


338  Alexander  Hamilton 

favoring  Spain.  It  is  difficult  to  admit  the  reason 
ableness  or  justice  of  the  pretensions  on  her  part, 
which  occasion  the  transactions  complained  of  by 
Great  Britain,  and  certainly  the  monopoly  at  which 
these  pretensions  aim  is  entitled  to  no  partiality 
from  any  maritime  or  trading  people.  Hence,  con 
siderations,  neither  of  justice  nor  policy,  as  they 
respect  the  immediate  cause  of  the  quarrel,  incline 
us  toward  Spain. 

Putting,  therefore,  all  considerations  of  peculiar 
good- will  to  Spain  or  of  predilection  to  any  particular 
connection  out  of  the  question,  the  argument  re 
specting  refusal  or  consent  in  the  case  supposed 
seems  to  stand  thus : 

The  acquisition  of  the  Spanish  territories  bordering 
upon  the  United  States,  by  Britain,  would  be  dan 
gerous  to  us.  And  if  there  were  a  good  prospect 
that  our  refusal  would  prevent  it,  without  exposing 
us  to  a  greater  evil,  we  ought  to  refuse ;  but  if  there 
be  a  considerable  probability  that  our  refusal  would 
be  ineffectual,  and  if  being  so  it  would  involve  us 
in  war  or  disgrace,  and  if  positive  disgrace  is  worse 
than  war,  and  war  in  our  present  situation  worse 
than  the  chances  of  the  evils  which  may  befall  us 
from  that  acquisition,  then  the  conclusion  would  be 
that  we  ought  not  to  refuse.  And  this  appears  to 
be  the  true  conclusion  to  be  drawn  from  a  compre 
hensive  and  accurate  view  of  the  subject,  though 
first  impressions  are  on  the  other  side. 

These  reflections  also  may  be  allowed  to  come  in 
aid  of  it.  Good  or  evil  is  seldom  as  great  in  the 
reality  as  in  the  prospect.  The  mischiefs  we  ap- 


Hamilton  to  Washington  339 

prehend  may  not  take  place.  The  enterprise,  not 
withstanding  our  consent,  may  fail.  The  acquisi 
tion,  if  made,  may,  in  the  progress  of  things,  be 
wrested  from  its  possessors.  These  if  pressed  here 
after  (and  we  are  willing  to  accept  it),  may  deem  it 
expedient  to  purchase  our  neutrality  by  a  cession  to 
us  of  that  part  of  the  territory  in  question  which 
borders  on  the  Mississippi,  accompanied  with  a 
guaranty  of  the  navigation  of  that  river.  If  nothing 
of  this  sort  should  happen,  still  the  war  will  neces 
sarily  have  added  millions  to  the  debt  of  Britain, 
while  we  shall  be  recruiting  and  increasing  our  re 
sources  and  our  strength.  In  such  a  situation  she 
will  have  motives  of  no  inconsiderable  force  for  not 
provoking  our  resentment.  And  a  reasonable  con 
fidence  ought  to  be  reposed  in  the  fidelity  of  the 
inhabitants  of  the  western  country  in  their  attach 
ment  to  the  Union,  in  their  real  interest  to  remain  a 
part  of  it,  and  in  their  sense  of  danger  from  the  at 
tempt  to  separate,  which,  at  every  hazard,  ought  to 
be  resisted  by  the  United  States. 

It  is  also  to  be  kept  in  view  that  the  same  danger, 
if  not  to  the  same  extent,  will  exist,  should  the  terri 
tories  in  question  remain  in  the  hands  of  Spain. 

Besides  all  this,  if  a  war  should  ever  be  deemed  a 
less  evil  than  the  neighborhood  of  the  British  in  the 
quarter  meditated,  good  policy  would  still  seem  to 
require,  as  before  intimated,  that  we  should  avoid 
putting  ourselves  in  a  situation  to  enter  into  it  till 
we  had  stipulated  adequate  indemnities  and  con 
siderations  for  doing  so;  that  we  should  see  a  little 
further  into  the  unravelment  of  the  plot,  and  be 


34°  Alexander  Hamilton 

able  to  estimate  what  prospect  there  would  be  by 
our  interference  of  obviating  the  evil.  It  deserves 
a  reflection,  that  if  those  territories  have  been  once 
wrested  from  Spain  she  will  be  more  tractable  to  our 
wishes,  and  more  disposed  to  make  the  concessions 
which  our  interests  require,  than  if  they  never  passed 
into  other  hands. 

A  question  occurs  here  whether  there  be  not  a 
middle  course  between  refusal  and  consent;  to  wit, 
the  waiving  an  answer,  by  referring  the  matter  to 
further  consideration.  But  to  this  there  appear  to 
be  decisive  objections.  An  evasive  conduct  in  simi 
lar  cases  is  never  dignified — seldom  politic.  It  would 
be  likely  to  give  satisfaction  to  neither  party — to 
effect  no  good — to  prevent  no  ill.  By  Great  Britain 
it  would  probably  be  considered  as  equivalent  to  a 
refusal — as  amounting  to  connivance  by  Spain — as 
an  indication  of  timidity  by  all  the  world. 

It  happens  that  we  have  a  post  on  the  Wabash, 
down  which  river  the  expedition,  it  is  presumable, 
must  go.  If  the  commanding  officer  at  that  post 
has  no  orders  to  the  contrary,  it  will  be  his  duty  to 
interrupt  the  passage  of  the  British  troops;  if  he 
does,  it  would  seem  necessary  for  them,  in  order  to 
the  safe  passage  of  their  boats,  with  their  artillery, 
stores,  provisions,  and  baggage,  to  take  that  post. 
Here  then  would  be  a  passage  through  our  territory, 
not  only  without  our  permission,  but  with  the  cap 
ture  of  a  post  of  ours,  which  would  be  in  effect  making 
war  upon  us.  And  thus  silence,  with  less  dignity, 
would  produce  the  same  ill  consequence  as  refusal. 

If,  to  avoid  this,  private  orders  were  to  be  sent  to 


Hamilton  to  Washington  341 

the  commanding  officer  of  that  post  not  to  interrupt 
the  passage,  his  not  being  punished  for  his  delin 
quency  would  betray  the  fact  and  afford  proof  of 
connivance. 

The  true  alternative  seems  to  be  to  refuse  or  con 
sent  ;  and,  if  the  first  be  preferred,  to  accompany  it 
with  an  intimation,  in  terms  as  free  from  offence  as 
possible,  that  dispositions  will  be  made  to  oppose 
the  passage,  if  attempted  to  be  forced;  and  accord 
ingly,  as  far  as  practicable,  to  make  and  execute 
such  dispositions. 

If,  on  the  contrary,  consent  should  be  given,  it 
may  deserve  consideration  whether  it  would  not  be 
expedient  to  accompany  it  with  a  candid  intimation 
that  the  expedition  is  not  agreeable  to  us,  but  that 
thinking  it  expedient  to  avoid  an  occasion  of  con 
troversy,  it  has  been  concluded  not  to  withhold  as 
sent.  There  are,  however,  objections  to  this  mode. 
In  case  of  consent,  an  early  and  frank  explanation 
should  be  given  to  Spain. 

QUESTION  THE  SECOND. — "What  notice  ought  to 
be  taken  of  the  measure,  if  it  should  be  undertaken 
without  leave,  which  is  the  more  probable  proceed 
ing  of  the  two?" 

If  leave  should  be  asked  and  refused,  and  the  enter 
prise  should  be  prosecuted  without  it,  the  manner 
of  treating  it  has  been  anticipated — that  is,  the  pass 
age,  if  practicable,  should  be  opposed;  and  if  not 
practicable,  the  outrage  should  be  resented  by  re 
course  to  arms. 

But  if  the  enterprise  should  be  undertaken  with- 


342  Alexander  Hamilton 

out  asking  leave,  which  is  presumed  to  be  the  import 
of  the  question,  then  the  proper  conduct  to  be  ob 
served  will  depend  upon  the  circumstances. 

As  the  passage  contemplated  would  be  by  water, 
and  almost  wholly  through  an  uninhabited  part  of 
the  country,  over  which  we  have  no  actual  jurisdic 
tion,  if  it  were  unaccompanied  by  any  violence  to 
our  citizens  or  posts,  it  would  seem  sufficient  to  be 
content  with  remonstrating  against  it,  but  in  a  tone 
that  would  not  commit  us  to  the  necessity  of  going 
to  war;  the  objections  to  which  apply  with  full 
force  here. 

But  if,  as  it  is  to  be  feared  will  necessarily  be  the 
case,  our  post  on  the  Wabash  should  be  forced,  to 
make  good  their  passage,  there  seems  to  be  no  alter 
native  but  to  go  to  war  with  them,  unwelcome  as  it 
may  be.  It  seems  to  be  this,  or  absolute  and  un 
qualified  humiliation;  which,  as  has  been  already 
noticed,  is  in  almost  every  situation  a  greater  evil 
than  war. 

In  every  event,  it  would  appear  advisable  im 
mediately  to  convene  the  Legislature;  to  make  the 
most  vigorous  measures  for  war;  to  make  a  formal 
demand  for  satisfaction;  to  commence  negotiations 
for  alliances;  and  if  satisfaction  should  be  refused, 
to  endeavor  to  punish  the  aggressor  by  the  sword. 

ALEXANDER  HAMILTON, 
Secretary  of  the  Treasury. 


Hamilton  to  Washington  343 

HAMILTON   TO   WASHINGTON  x 
(Cabinet  Paper.) 

NEW  YORK,  September  30,  1790. 

SIR  : — I  had  lately  a  visit  from  a  certain  gentleman, 
the  sole  object  of  which  was  to  make  some  observa 
tions  of  a  delicate  nature  concerning  another  gentle 
man  employed  on  a  particular  errand;  which,  as  they 
were  doubtless  intended  for  your  ear  (and,  such  as 
they  are,  ought  to  be  known  to  you),  it  is  of  course 
my  duty  to  communicate. 

He  began  (in  a  manner  somewhat  embarrassed, 
which  betrayed  rather  more  than  he  seemed  to 
discover)  by  telling  me  that,  in  different  companies 
where  he  had  happened  to  be  in  this  city  (a  circum 
stance,  by  the  way,  very  unlikely),  he  had  heard  it 
mentioned  that  that  other  gentleman  was  upon  terms 
of  very  great  intimacy  with  the  representative  of  a 

1  Gouverneur  Morris  had  been  sent  to  England  by  Washington,  in  an 
informal  and  unofficial  manner,  to  open  relations  once  more  with  that 
country,  and  obtain  the  performance  of  treaty  obligations.  Before 
presenting  his  credentials,  Morris  made  the  mistake  of  disclosing  to 
his  old  friend  Luzerne,  formerly  Minister  to  the  United  States,  and 
at  this  time  Minister  to  London,  the  object  of  his  visit.  Luzerne 
allowed  this  fact  to  become  known,  and  there  was  much  jealousy 
aroused  by  this  apparent  close  connection  with  France,  which  hindered 
greatly  the  advancement  of  Morris'  mission.  Complaint  found  its  way 
to  the  American  Government  through  Lord  Dorchester.  The  "cer 
tain  gentlemen"  of  Hamilton's  letter,  is  Major  Beckwith;  "another 
gentleman  employed  on  a  particular  errand"  is  Morris;  and  Luzerne 
is  the  "  representative  of  a  certain  court."  The  head  of  the  opposition 
party  was  Fox.  Morris  doubted  whether  Luzerne  had  betrayed  him, 
but  this  fact  seems  proved.  Morris  alleged  further  that  he  avoided 
Fox  purposely,  and  only  saw  him  twice.  It  is  more  than  probable 
that  both  these  accusations  were  mere  pretences,  put  forward  by  the 
Tory  government  to  delay  doing  us  justice  under  the  treaty,  and 
quietly  injure  so  far  as  possible  the  successful  and  now  thriving  rebels, 
whom  they  had  failed  to  conquer. — See  Life  of  G.  Morris,  i.,  p.  347. 


344  Alexander  Hamilton 

certain  court  at  the  one  where  he  was  employed,  and 
with  the  head  of  the  party  opposed  to  the  minister; 
and  he  proceeded  to  say  that,  if  there  were  any 
symptoms  of  backwardness  or  coolness  in  the  min 
ister,  it  had  occurred  to  him  that  they  might  possi 
bly  be  occasioned  by  such  an  intimacy;  that  he  had 
no  intimation,  however,  of  this  being  the  case,  and 
that  the  idea  suggested  by  him  was  mere  matter  of 
conjecture ;  that  he  did  not  even  know  it  was  a  fact 
that  the  intimacy  subsisted.  But  if  this  should  be 
the  case  (said  he),  you  will  readily  imagine  that  it 
cannot  be  calculated  to  inspire  confidence  or  facili 
tate  free  communication.  It  would  not  be  surprising 
if  a  very  close  connection  with  the  representative  of 
another  power  should  beget  doubts  and  reserves ;  or 
if  a  very  familiar  intercourse  with  the  head  of  the 
opposition  should  occasion  prejudice  and  distance. 
Man,  after  all,  is  but  man;  and  though  the  min 
ister  has  a  great  mind,  and  is  as  little  likely  as  most 
men  to  entertain  illiberal  distrusts  or  jealousies,  yet 
there  is  no  saying  what  might  be  the  effect  of  such 
conduct  upon  him.  It  is  hardly  possible  not  to 
have  some  diffidence  of  those  who  seem  to  be  very 
closely  united  with  our  political  or  personal  enemies 
or  rivals.  At  any  rate,  such  an  intimacy,  if  it  exists, 
can  do  no  good,  but  may  do  some  harm. 

This,  as  far  as  I  recollect,  was  the  substance  of 
what  he  said.  My  answer  was  nearly  as  follows : — 

I  have  never  heard  a  syllable,  sir,  about  the  matter 
you  mention.  It  appears  to  me,  however,  very 
possible  that  an  intimacy  with  both  the  persons  you 
mention  mav  exist :  with  the  first,  because  the  situa- 


Hamilton  to  Jefferson  345 

tion  of  the  parties  had  naturally  produced  such  an 
intimacy  while  both  were  in  this  country,  and  to 
have  dropped  and  avoided  it  there  would  not  have 
been  without  difficulty,  on  the  score  of  politeness, 
and  would  have  worn  an  extraordinary  and  mys 
terious  aspect ;  with  the  last,  from  the  patronage  of 
American  affairs,  which  is  understood  to  have  been 
uniformly  the  part  of  that  gentleman,  and,  in  some 
degree,  from  a  similarity  of  dispositions  and  char 
acters — both  brilliant  men,  men  of  wit  and  genius, 
both  fond  of  the  pleasures  of  society.  It  is  to  be 
hoped  that  appearances  which  admit  of  so  easy 
a  solution  will  not  prove  an  obstacle  to  any  thing 
which  mutual  interest  dictates.  It  is  impossible 
that  there  can  be  any  thing  wrong. 

He  replied,  that  he  certainly  had  no  idea  that 
there  could  be  any  thing  wrong;  but  that  as  trifles 
often  mar  great  affairs,  he  thought  it  best  to  impart 
to  me  his  conjecture,  that  such  use  might  be  made 
of  it  as  should  be  thought  advisable. 

I  have  the  honor  to  be,  etc. 

P.  S. — The  letters  herewith  were,  through  hurry, 
omitted  in  my  despatch  of  yesterday. 


HAMILTON    TO   JEFFERSON 
(Cabinet  Paper.) 

PHILADELPHIA,  January  n,  1791. 

DEAR  SIR: — I  have  perused  with  attention  your 
intended  report  to  the  President,  and  will,  as  I 
am  sure  is  your  wish,  give  you  my  opinion  with 
frankness. 

As  far  as  a  summary  examination  enables  me  to 


346  Alexander  Hamilton 

judge,  I  agree  in  your  interpretation  of  the  treaty.1 
The  exemption  sought  does  not  appear  to  be  claim 
able  as  a  right.  But  I  am  not  equally  well  satisfied 
of  the  policy  of  granting  it  on  the  ground  you  suggest. 
This,  in  my  mind,  stands  in  a  very  questionable 
shape.  Though  there  be  a  collateral  consideration, 
there  is  a  want  of  reciprocity  in  the  thing  itself ;  and 
this  is  a  circumstance  which  materially  affects  the 
general  policy  of  our  navigation  system.  The  tend 
ency  of  the  measure  would  be  to  place  French  ves 
sels  upon  an  equal  footing  with  our  own  in  our  ports, 
while  our  vessels  in  the  ports  of  France  may  be  sub 
jected  to  all  the  duties  which  are  there  laid  on  the 
mass  of  foreign  vessels.  I  say  the  mass  of  foreign 
vessels,  because  the  title  of  "most  favored  nation" 
is  a  very  extensive  one,  the  terms  being  almost  words 
of  course  in  commercial  treaties.  And  consequently 
our  own  vessels  in  the  carrying  trade  between  the 
United  States  and  France  would  be  in  a  worse  situa 
tion  than  French  vessels.  This  is  the  necessary  re 
sult  of  equal  privileges  on  one  side  and  unequal  on  the 
other,  in  favor  of  the  vessels  of  France. 

Though,  in  the  present  state  of  the  French  navi 
gation,  little  would  be  to  be  apprehended  from  the 
regulation ;  yet,  when  the  probable  increase  of  that 
navigation  under  a  free  government  is  considered, 
it  can  hardly  be  deemed  safe  to  calculate  future  con 
sequences  from  the  actual  situation  in  this  respect. 

1  This  refers  undoubtedly  to  our  treaty  with  France.  What  the 
precise  exemption  was  which  was  sought  is  not  clear,  although  indi 
cated  in  this  and  the  next  letter.  There  is  no  evidence  that  this  "in 
tended"  report  was  ever  made;  at  least  it  is  not  found  in  Jefferson's 
works  nor  in  those  of  Washington. 


Hamilton  to  Jefferson  347 

And  if  the  principle  of  the  regulation  cannot  be 
deemed  safe  in  a  permanent  view,  it  ought  not  to  be 
admitted  temporarily;  for  inconvenient  precedents 
are  always  embarrassing. 

On  the  whole,  I  should  be  of  opinion  that  the 
introduction  of  such  a  principle  without  immediate 
reciprocity  would  be  a  high  price  for  the  advantage 
which  it  is  intended  to  compensate. 

It  will,  no  doubt,  have  occurred  to  you  that  the 
fund  has  been  mortgaged  for  the  public  debt.  I  do 
not,  however,  mention  this  as  an  insuperable  objec 
tion;  but  it  would  be  essential  that  the  same  act 
which  would  destroy  this  source  of  revenue  should 
provide  an  equivalent.  This  I  consider  as  a  rule 
which  ought  to  be  sacred,  as  it  affects  public  credit. 
I  have  the  honor  to  be,  etc. 

P.  S. — If  you  have  any  spare  set  of  the  printed 
papers,  I  should  be  obliged  by  having  them. 


HAMILTON    TO    JEFFERSON 
(Cabinet  Paper.) 

January  13,  1791. 

DEAR  SIR: — I  thank  you  for  the  printed  papers 
you  have  been  so  obliging  as  to  send. 

I  cannot  forbear  a  conjecture  that  the  communica 
tions  of  the  Charge  des  Affaires  of  France  are  rather 
expedients  to  improve  a  moment  in  which  it  is  per 
ceived  questions  concerning  navigation  are  to  be 
discussed,  than  the  effects  of  serious  instructions 
from  his  court. 

Be  this  as  it  may,  I  really  have  not  thought  of  any 


348  Alexander  Hamilton 

substitute  for  your  proposition  to  which  objections 
do  not  lie.  And,  in  general,  I  have  doubts  of  the 
eligibility  of  eoc-parte  concessions,  liable  to  be  re 
sumed  at  pleasure.  I  had  rather  endeavor,  by  a 
new  treaty  of  commerce  with  France,  to  extend 
reciprocal  advantages,  and  fix  them  on  a  permanent 
basis.  This  would  not  only  be  more  solid,  but  it 
would,  perhaps,  be  less  likely,  than  apparently 
gratuitous  and  voluntary  exemptions,  to  beget  dis 
contents  elsewhere,  especially  (as  ought  to  be  the 
case)  if  each  party  should  be  at  liberty,  for  equivalent 
considerations,  to  grant  like  privileges  to  others. 
My  commercial  system  turns  very  much  on  giving  a 
free  course  to  trade,  and  cultivating  good  humor 
with  all  the  world.  And  I  feel  a  particular  reluctance 
to  hazard  any  thing,  in  the  present  state  of  our 
affairs,  which  may  lead  to  a  commercial  warfare 
with  any  Power;  which,  as  far  as  my  knowledge  of 
examples  extends,  is  commonly  productive  of  mu 
tual  inconvenience  and  injury,  and  of  dispositions 
tending  to  a  worse  kind  of  warfare.  Exemptions 
and  preferences  which  are  not  the  effect  of  treaty, 
are  apt  to  be  regarded  by  those  who  do  not  partake 
in  them  as  proofs  of  an  unfriendly  temper  towards 
them.1 

1  Although  the  precise  point  involved  is  lost,  the  general  purport  of 
this  and  the  preceding  letter  is  clear.  Jefferson  was  considering 
whether  to  recommend  some  treaty  construction  favorable  to  France. 
Hamilton  civilly  disagreed  on  being  consulted,  and  the  matter  appears 
to  have  dropped. 


Correspondence  with  France  349 

WASHINGTON    TO    THE    PRESIDENT   OF   THE   NATIONAL 

ASSEMBLY    OF    FRANCE 

Draft  by  Hamilton.1 

(Cabinet  Paper.) 

PHILADELPHIA,  2 7th  January,  1792. 

SIR: — I  received  with  particular  satisfaction,  and 
imparted  to  Congress,  the  communication  made  by 
the  President's  letter  of  the  2oth  of  June  last  in  the 
name  of  the  National  Assembly  of  France.  So  pe 
culiar  and  so  signal  an  expression  of  the  esteem  of 
that  respectable  body  for  a  citizen  of  the  United 
States,  whose  eminent  and  patriotic  services  are  in 
delibly  engraved  on  the  minds  of  his  countrymen, 
cannot  fail  to  be  appreciated  by  them  as  it  ought  to 
be.  On  my  part,  I  assure  you,  sir,  that  I  am  sensible 
of  all  its  value. 

The  circumstances  which,  under  the  patronage  of  a 
monarch  who  has  proved  himself  to  be  the  friend  of 
the  people  over  whom  he  reigns,  have  promised  the 
blessings  of  liberty  to  the  French  nation,  could  not 
have  been  uninteresting  to  the  free  citizens  of  the 
United  States,  especially  when  they  recollected  the 
dispositions  which  were  manifested  by  the  individu 
als  as  well  as  by  the  government  of  that  nation 
toward  their  still  recent  exertions  in  support  of  their 
own  rights. 

It  is  with  real  pleasure,  sir,  that  I  embrace  the 
opportunity  now  afforded  me  of  testifying,  through 
you,  to  the  National  Assembly,  the  sincere,  cordial, 

1  This  draft  of  a  reply  to  the  communication  of  the  French  Assembly 
on  the  death  of  Franklin  was  adopted  verbatim  by  Washington  and 
sent  to  France. — Writings  of  Washington,  x.,  133. 


35°  Alexander  Hamilton 

and  earnest  wish  I  entertain,  that  their  labors  may 
speedily  issue  in  the  firm  establishment  of  a  consti 
tution  which,  by  wisely  conciliating  the  indispensa 
ble  principles  of  public  order  with  the  enjoyment 
and  exercise  of  the  essential  rights  of  man,  shall 
perpetuate  the  freedom  and  happiness  of  the  people 
of  France. 

The  impressions  naturally  produced  by  similarity 
of  political  sentiment  are  justly  to  be  regarded  as 
causes  of  national  sympathy,  calculated  to  confirm 
the  amicable  ties  which  may  otherwise  subsist  be 
tween  nations.  This  reflection,  independent  of  its 
more  particular  reference,  must  dispose  every  bene 
volent  mind  to  unite  in  the  wish  that  a  general  dif 
fusion  of  the  true  principles  of  liberty,  assimilating 
as  well  as  ameliorating  the  condition  of  mankind, 
and  fostering  the  maxims  of  an  ingenuous  and  virtu 
ous  policy,  may  tend  to  strengthen  the  fraternity 
of  the  human  race,  to  assuage  the  jealousies  and 
animosities  of  its  various  subdivisions,  and  to  con 
vince  them  more  and  more  that  their  tme  interest 
and  felicity  will  best  be  promoted  by  mutual  good 
will  and  universal  harmony. 

The  friendship  to  which  the  President  alludes  in 
the  close  of  his  letter,  has  caused  me  to  perceive  with 
particular  pleasure  that  one  who  had  endeared  him 
self  to  this  country  by  an  ardent  zeal  and  by  useful 
efforts  in  the  cause  of  liberty  has,  by  the  same  title, 
acquired  the  confidence  and  affection  of  his  own. 
May  it  ever  be  his  chief  aim  to  continue  to  be  be 
loved,  as  one  of  her  most  virtuous  and  most  faithful 
citizens. 


Hamilton  to  Jefferson  351 

I  beg  you  to  accept  my  acknowledgments  for  the 
sentiments  in  the  same  letter,  which  relate  more 
particularly  to  myself,  and  at  the  same  time  to  be 
assured  of  the  most  perfect  consideration  on  the 
part  of,  etc. 


HAMILTON    TO   JEFFERSON 
(Cabinet  Paper.) 

TREASURY  DEPARTMENT,  April  12,  1791. 

SIR: — I  have  perused  the  papers  r  communicated 
to  you  by  the  Charge  des  Affaires  of  France. 

The  propositions  to  which  they  relate,  as  far  as 
they  are  understood,  appear  to  me  inadmissible. 
The  only  advantage  they  offer  to  the  United  States 
is  a  prolongation  of  the  time  of  reimbursement.  The 
rate  of  interest  is  to  remain  the  same,  and  the  place 
of  payment,  according  to  the  probable  course  of  ex 
change,  is  to  be  altered  for  the  worse  from  Paris  to 
Amsterdam.  A  premium  of  five  per  cent,  is  also 
required,  while  the  charges  on  the  loans  we  make  in 
Holland  do  not  exceed  four.  There  is,  however,  a 
proposition  which  is  not  understood:  it  is  that  the 
exchange  on  the  sum  to  be  paid  at  Paris  and  re 
ceived  at  Amsterdam  shall  be  regulated  according  to 
the  tariff  announced  in  the  law  of  Congress.  Now 
there  is  nothing  in  the  laws  of  the  United  States  to 
which  I  can  apply  the  term  tariff.  It  is  possible, 
however,  that  Mr.  Short's  letters,  when  received, 
may  throw  light  on  this  point  and  some  others,  which 
may  give  a  different  complexion  to  the  business. 

1  Relating  to  the  payment  of  our  debt  to  France. 


35 2  Alexander  Hamilton 

But  there  are  various  collateral  considerations  in 
relation  to  the  transfer  of  the  debt  due  from  the 
United  States  to  France,  affecting  the  credit  and 
financial  operations  of  this  country,  which  will  make 
it  in  almost  any  form  a  delicate  operation. 

It  is  desirable  on  every  account  to  make  expedi 
tious  payment  to  France,  but  this  desire  must  be 
conciliated  with  that  of  invigorating  and  perfecting 
the  system  of  public  credit  of  the  United  States, 
and  in  adhering  to  this  idea  there  is  the  additional 
inducement  of  a  tolerable  prospect  of  satisfying  the 
claims  of  France  in  a  manner  perhaps  as  expeditious 
and  probably  more  efficacious  than  would  be  incident 
to  an  acquiescence  in  the  proposed  plan. 

I  have  the  honor  to  be,  with  great  respect,  etc. 


HAMILTON    TO   JEFFERSON 
(Cabinet  Paper.) 

TREASURY  DEPARTMENT,  April  15,  1791. 

SIR: — The  letter  you  sent  me  from  Mr.  Short,  and 
others  which  I  have  received  since  mine  to  you,  con 
firm  the  views  of  the  subject  therein  taken.  This 
you  will  perceive  from  the  following  passages  ex 
tracted  from  one  of  them:  "Since  then  (speaking 
of  former  overtures)  another  company  has  presented 
itself  for  the  same  object,  with  a  scheme  by  which 
the  United  States  are  to  make  the  sacrifices  on  which 
they  count  for  their  profits."  "The  object  of  this 
company  is,  as  you  will  see,  to  pay  livres  tournois  in 
their  present  depreciated  state,  and  to  receive  from 


Hamilton  to  Jefferson  353 

the  United  States  florins  at  the  usual  exchange ;  by 
this  means  France  would  receive  from  them  as  much 
as  she  is  entitled  to  receive  from  us,  but  we  should  be 
obliged  to  pay  the  company  much  more  than  we  are 
obliged  to  pay  France."  "Had  I  had  powers  com 
petent  to  the  purpose,  I  should  not  have  thought 
myself  justified  to  have  opened  such  a  negotiation, 
where  there  was  all  loss  and  no  prospect  of  advantage 
to  the  United  States."  " *  *  *  I  must  also  add 
that  the  house  which  makes  these  propositions  is 
entirely  unknown  here,  and  that  France  feared  even 
their  names  at  Paris,  which  proves  that  it  must  be 
an  inconsiderable  one."  Consequently,  the  credit 
of  the  United  States  would  be  in  imminent  danger 
of  suffering  in  their  hands. 

I  have  authorized  Mr.  Short  to  apply  a  million 
and  a  half  of  florins  of  the  loan  he  has  opened  to  the 
use  of  France,  and  shall  press  as  large  payments  as 
may  be  practicable  to  her. 

I  take  it  for  granted  that  the  court  of  France  will 
not  attempt  any  operation  with  the  debt  without 
the  consent  of  the  United  States.  Any  thing  of  this 
sort,  considering  the  efforts  which  are  making  on 
our  part  to  discharge  the  debt,  would  certainly  be 
very  exceptionable.  Indeed,  I  do  not  see  how  any 
valid  disposition  of  the  debt  of  a  sovereign  power 
can  be  made  without  its  consent;  but  it  would  be 
disagreeable  to  have  to  use  this  argument.  I  trust 
it  will  never  be  rendered  necessary. 


VOL.  IV.— 23. 


354  Alexander  Hamilton 

HAMILTON    TO    WASHINGTON  J 

(Cabinet  Paper.) 

PHILADELPHIA,  September  22,  1791. 

SIR: — I  have  received  a  letter  from  the  Minister 
of  France,  of  which  the  enclosed  is  a  copy.  Having 
full  authority  from  you  in  relation  to  payments  to 
France,  and  there  being  funds  out  of  which  that 
which  will  constitute  the  succor  requested  may  with 
propriety  be  made,  and  being  fully  persuaded  that 
in  so  urgent  and  calamitous  a  case  you  will  be 
pleased  with  a  ready  acquiescence  in  what  is  de 
sired,  I  have  not  hesitated  to  answer  the  Minister 
that  the  sum  he  asks  is  at  his  command. 

With  the  most  perfect  respect  and  truest  attach 
ment,  etc. 


HAMILTON    TO    JEFFERSON 

(Cabinet  Paper.) 

March,  1792. 

Mr.  Hamilton  presents  his  respectful  compliments 
to  the  Secretary  of  State.  He  has  perused,  with  as 
much  care  and  attention  as  time  has  permitted,  the 
draft  of  a  letter  in  answer  to  that  of  Mr.  Hammond, 
of  March  5th.2 

Much  strong  ground  has  been  taken,  and  strongly 
maintained,  particularly  in  relation  to : 

1  The  letter  enclosed  from  De  Ternant,  the  French  Minister,  set 
forth  the   distress  in   Hispaniola  owing  to   negro  insurrection,   and 
asked  for  an  advance  in  payment  of  the  French  debt,  to  purchase  pro 
visions  and  relieve  the  distress  of  the  French  colony. 

2  Jefferson's  answer  to  Hammond's  letter  of  March  5th,  although 
he  appears  to  have  consulted  Hamilton  in  regard  to  it  during  the 
same  month,  was  not  sent  until  May  29,  1792.     It  was  long,  able,  and 
elaborate. — See  Jefferson's  Works,  Hi.,  365. 


Hamilton  to  Jefferson  355 

The  recommendatory  clauses  of  the  treaty; 

The  previous  infractions  by  Great  Britain,  as  to 
negroes  and  posts; 

The  question  of  interest. 

And  many  of  the  suggestions  of  the  British  Min 
ister,  concerning  particular  acts  and  adjudications, 
as  far  as  can  be  judged  without  consulting  the  docu 
ments,  appear  to  be  satisfactorily  obviated. 

But  doubts  arise  in  the  following  particulars : 

ist.  The  expediency  of  the  retaliation  on  the  ist, 
2d,  and  3d  pages.  Much  of  the  propriety  of  what  is 
said  depends  on  the  question  of  the  original  right  or 
wrong  of  the  war.  Should  it  lead  to  observations  on 
that  point,  it  may  involve  an  awkward  and  irritating 
discussion.  Will  it  not  be  more  dignified,  as  well  as 
more  discreet,  to  observe,  concisely  and  generally, 
on  the  impropriety  of  having  deduced  imputations 
from  transactions  during  the  war,  and  (alluding  in 
the  aggregate,  and  without  specification,  to  the  in 
stances  of  legislative  warfare  on  the  part  of  the 
British  Parliament  which  might  be  recriminated) 
to  say  that  this  is  foreborne,  as  leading  to  an  un 
profitable  and  unconciliating  discussion? 

2d.  The  soundness  of  the  doctrine  (page  4),  that 
all  governmental  acts  of  the  States  prior  to  the  nth 
of  April  are  out  of  the  discussion.  Does  not  the 
term  "subjects,"  to  whom,  according  to  Vatel,  notice 
is  necessary,  apply  merely  to  individuals?  Are  not 
States  members  of  the  federal  league,  the  parties 
contractantes,  "who  are  bound  by  the  treaty  itself, 
from  the  time  of  its  conclusion ;  that  is,  in  the  present 
case,  from  the  time  the  provisional  treaty  took 


356  Alexander  Hamilton 

effect,  by  the  ratification  of  the  preliminary  articles 
between  France  and  Britain?" 

3d.  The  expediency  of  so  full  a  justification  of 
the  proceedings  of  certain  States  with  regard  to 
debts.  In  this  respect  extenuation  rather  than  vin 
dication  would  seem  to  be  the  desirable  course.  It 
is  an  obvious  truth,  and  is  so  stated,  that  Congress 
alone  has  the  right  to  pronounce  a  breach  of  the 
treaty,  and  to  fix  the  measure  of  retaliation.  Not 
having  done  it,  the  States  which  undertook  the  task 
for  them,  contravened  both  their  federal  duty  and 
the  treaty.  Do  not  some  of  the  acts  of  Congress 
import  that  the  thing  was  viewed  by  that  body  in 
this  light  ?  Will  it  be  well  for  the  Executive  now  to 
implicate  itself  in  too  strong  a  defence  of  measures 
which  have  been  regarded  by  a  great  proportion  of 
the  Union,  and  by  a  respectable  part  of  the  citizens 
of  almost  every  State,  as  exceptionable  in  various 
lights?  May  not  too  earnest  an  apology  for  instal 
ment  and  paper-money  laws,  if  made  public  hereafter, 
tend  to  prejudice,  somewhat,  the  cause  of  good  gov 
ernment,  and,  perhaps,  to  affect  disadvantageously 
the  character  of  the  general  government? 

To  steer  between  too  much  concession  and  too 
much  justification  in  this  particular,  is  a  task  both 
difficult  and  delicate ;  but  it  is  worthy  of  the  greatest 
circumspection  to  accomplish  it. 

4th.  The  expediency  of  risking  the  implication  of 
the  tacit  approbation  of  Congress  of  the  "retaliations 
of  four  States"  by  saying  that  they  neither  gave 
nor  refused  their  sanction  to  those  retaliations.  Will 
not  the  national  character  stand  better  if  no  ground 


Hamilton  to  Jefferson  357 

to  suspect  the  connivance  of  the  national  govern 
ment  is  afforded?  Is  it  not  the  fact  that  Congress 
were  inactive  spectators  of  the  infractions  which 
took  place,  because  they  had  no  effectual  power  to 
control  them? 

5th.  The  truth  of  the  position,  which  seems  to 
be  admitted  (page  57),  that  the  quality  of  alien 
enemy  subsisted  till  the  definitive  treaty.  Does  not 
an  indefinite  cessation  of  hostilities,  founded  too  on 
a  preliminary  treaty,  put  an  end  to  the  state  of 
war,  and  consequently  destroy  the  relation  of  alien 
enemy  ? 

The  state  of  war  may  or  may  not  revive  if  points 
which  remain  to  be  adjusted  by  a  definitive  treaty 
are  never  adjusted  by  such  a  treaty;  but  it  is  con 
ceived  that  a  definitive  treaty  may  never  take  place, 
and  yet  the  state  of  war  and  all  its  consequences  be 
completely  terminated. 

6th.  The  expediency  of  grounding  any  argument 
on  the  supposition  of  either  party  being  in  the 
wrong  (as  in  page  65).  The  rule  in  construing 
treaties  is  to  suppose  both  parties  in  the  right,  for 
want  of  a  common  judge,  etc.  And  a  departure 
from  this  rule  in  argument  might  possibly  lead  to 
unpleasant  recrimination. 

The  foregoing  are  the  principal  points  that  have 
occurred  on  one  perusal.  They  are  submitted  with 
out  reserve.  Some  lesser  matters  struck,  which 
would  involve  too  lengthy  a  commentary;  many 
of  them  merely  respecting  particular  expressions. 
A  mark  +  is  in  the  margin  of  the  places,  which 
will  probably  suggest  to  the  Secretary  of  State,  on 


358  Alexander  Hamilton 

revision,  the  nature  of  the  reflections  which  may  have 
arisen.  It  is  imagined  that  there  is  a  small  mistake 
in  stating  that  Waddington  paid  no  rent.1 


JEFFERSON   TO    HAMILTON  a 

(Cabinet  Paper.) 

March  5,  1792. 

Thomas  Jefferson  will  be  glad  if  the  Secretary  of 
the  Treasury  will  state  the  specific  propositions  he 
would  have  made  to  Spain,  on  the  subject  of  our 
fish,  grain,  and  flour,  to  wit,  what  he  would  ask,  and 
what  propose  as  an  equivalent.  The  following  con 
siderations  will  of  course  occur  to  him : 

1 .  If  we  quit  the  ground  of  the  most  favored  nation, 
as  to  certain  articles  for  our  convenience,  Spain  may 
insist  on  doing  the  same  for  other  articles  for  her 
convenience,  and  I  apprehend  that  our  commission 
ers  might  soon  be  out  of  their  depth  in  the  details 
of  commerce. 

2.  If  we  grant  favor  to  the  wines,  etc.,  of  Spain, 
Portugal  and  France  will  demand  the  same,  and 
may  create  the  equivalent,  the  former  by  laying 
duties  on  our  fish  and  grain,  the  latter  by  a  pro 
hibition  of  our  whale  oils,  the  removal  of  which  will 
be  proposed  as  the  equivalent. 

1  Jefferson  accepted  and  adopted  Hamilton's  suggestions  in  all 
except  the  second  and  third  objections.  See  Hamilton's  Works,  J.  C. 
Hamilton  edition,  iv.,  p.  144,  Jefferson  to  Hamilton,  March,  1791,  a 
letter  not  found  in  Jefferson's  Works.  Both  Hamilton's  letter  and 
Jefferson's  reply  are  misdated  by  J.  C.  Hamilton.  Hammond  did  not 
arrive  until  the  autumn  of  1791,  and  this  letter  was  written  in  March, 
1792,  not  1791,  as  J.  C.  Hamilton  has  it. 

a  Not  printed  in  Jefferson's  Works.  This  request  for  information  is 
probably  in  connection  with  the  next  letter  of  criticism  on  the  report. 


Hamilton  to  Jefferson  359 

HAMILTON    TO   JEFFERSON 

»       March,  1792. 

The  general  tenor  of  the  report  *  appears  solid  and 
proper. 

The  following  observations,  however,  on  a  hasty 
perusal  occur. 

Page  2.  Is  it  to  put  our  revolution  upon  the  true 
or  the  best  footing,  to  say  that  the  circumstances 
which  obliged  us  to  discontinue  our  foreign  magis 
trate  brought  upon  us  the  war  ?  Did  not  the  war 
previously  exist  and  bring  on  the  discontinuance? 
Was  it  not  rather  the  cause  than  the  effect?  2 

Is  it  accurate  to  say  that  France  aided  us  in  cap 
turing  the  whole  army  of  the  enemy?  Does  this 
not  imply  that  there  was  no  other  enemy-army  in 
the  country;  though  there  were  in  fact  two  others, 
one  in  New  York,  another  in  South  Carolina?  This 
last  is  a  mere  criticism  as  to  the  accuracy  of  expres 
sion.  The  sense  is  clear  enough.3 

Page  ii.  Are  "naval  victories"  the  essential 
means  of  conquest  of  a  water,  as  seems  to  be  im 
plied  ?  Is  not  the  conquest  of  a  water  an  incident  to 
that  of  territory  ? 4  If  this  idea  is  not  sound,  that 
combined  with  it  is, — namely,  that  in  no  event 

1  Jefferson's  report  on  the  negotiations  with  Spain  as  to  free  navi 
gation  of  the  Mississippi,  sent  in  March   18,   1792. — See  Jefferson's 
Works,  vii.,  570. 

2  These  notes  are  in  the  hand  of  Jefferson.     "The  report  is  amended 
in  conformity  with  this  observation." 

3  "The  capture  of  the  army  struck  out." 

4  "No  conquest  of  the  territory  was  made,  to  wit,  of  the  island  of 
New  Orleans  on  the  one  side,  or  Louisiana  on  the  other,  as  both  had 
belonged  to  Spain  before  the  war.     Therefore  no  change  in  the  right 
to  the  water  as  incident  to  the  territory.     This  circumstance,  however, 
is  inserted  in  the  report  to  make  the  reasoning  the  clearer." 


360  Alexander  Hamilton 

could  Spain  be  considered  as  having  conquered  the 
river  against  the  United  States,  with  whom  she  not 
only  had  no  war,  but  was  an  associate. 

Page  12.  May  it  not  be  inferred  from  what  is 
said  here,  that  though  the  United  States  would  not 
wish  to  insert  an  express  stipulation  against  other 
nations,  yet  they  may  be  prevailed  upon  to  do  it? 
Would  such  a  stipulation  be  consistent  with  the 
right  which  Great  Britain  reserved  to  herself  in  the 
treaty  with  us?  If  the  influence  alluded  to  is  in 
tended  to  be  excluded,  will  it  not  be  advisable  to 
vary  the  turn  of  expression  so  as  to  render  the  inten 
tion  more  unequivocal? l 

Page  23.  Are  there  conclusive  reasons  to  make  it 
a  sine  qua  non  that  no  phrase  shall  be  admitted 
which  shall  express  or  imply  a  grant?  Could  the 
negotiation  with  propriety  be  broken  off  on  such  a 
point? 

Is  it  not  rather  one  to  be  endeavored  to  be  avoided, 
than  the  avoiding  of  it  to  be  made  a  sine  qua  non?  2 

Page  25.  Is  it  true  that  the  United  States  have 
no  right  to  alienate  an  inch  of  the  territory  in  ques 
tion,  except  in  the  case  of  necessity,  estimated  in 
another  place?  Or  will  it  be  useful  to  avow  the  de 
nial  of  such  a  right?  It  is  apprehended  that  the 
doctrine  which  restricts  the  alienation  of  territory  to 
cases  of  extreme  necessity,  is  applicable  rather  to 

JThe  word  choose  substituted  for  wish;  however,  England  could 
hold  that  right  of  command  in  the  water  only  as  incident  to  Florida, 
which  she  then  held.  When  she  conveyed  Florida  to  Spain,  the  inci 
dent  passed  by  the  same  consequence,  and  she  can  never  have  a  claim 
against  us  on  a  stipulation,  the  benefit  of  which  she  has  conveyed  to 
another. 

3  Report  altered  in  conformity  to  this. 


Hamilton  to  Jefferson  361 

peopled  territory  than  to  waste  and  uninhabited 
districts.  Positions  restraining  the  right  of  the 
United  States  to  accommodate  to  exigencies  which 
may  arise,  ought  ever  to  be  advanced  with  great 
caution.1 

Page  28.  Is  it  true  that  the  stipulation  with 
France  respecting  the  reception  of  prizes  is  exclusive 
and  incommunicable  ?  It  is  doubtless  so  as  against 
France,  but  why  is  it  so  as  against  other  nations? 

It  is,  however,  a  stipulation  very  inconvenient  and 
even  dangerous  to  the  United  States,  and  one  which 
ought  by  all  means  to  be  excluded.2 

Though  a  treaty  of  commerce  like  that  contem 
plated  in  the  report  ought  not  to  be  rejected,  if 
desired  by  Spain,  and  coupled  with  a  satisfactory  ad 
justment  of  the  boundary  and  navigation,  yet  ought 
not  something  more  to  be  attempted,  if  it  were  only 
to  give  satisfaction  to  other  parts  of  the  Union? 

1  The  power  to  alienate  the  unpeopled  territory  of  any  State  is  not 
among  the  enumerated  powers  given  by  the  Constitution  to  the  Gen 
eral  Government,  and  if  we  may  go  out  of  that  instrument,  and  accom 
modate   to  exigencies  which  may  arise,  by  alienating  the  unpeopled 
territory  of  a  State,  we  may  accommodate  ourselves  a  little  more  by 
alienating  that  which  is  peopled,  and  still  a  little  more  by  selling  the 
people  themselves.     A  shade  or  two  more  in  the  degree  of  exigency  is 
all  that  will  be  requisite,  and  of  that  degree  we  shall  ourselves  be  the 
judges.     However,  may  it  not  be  hoped  that  these  questions  are  for 
ever  laid  to  rest  by  the  i2th  amendment,  now  made  a  part  of  the  Con 
stitution,  declaring  expressly  that  the  powers  not  delegated  to  the 
United  States  by  the  Constitution  are  reserved  to  the  States  respect 
ively  ?     And  if  the  General  Government  has  no  power  to  alienate  the 
territory  of  a  State,  it  is  too  irresistible  an  argument  to  deny  ourselves 
the  use  of  it  on  the  present  occasion. 

2  It  is  certainly  impossible  for  any  nation  to  have  stipulations  of  this 
kind  and  extent  with  two  others  at  the  same  time.     However,  the 
language  of  the  report  is  made  more  correct  and  conformable  to  the 
words  of  the  French  treaty. 


362  Alexander  Hamilton 

Some  positively  favorable  stipulations  respecting  our 
grain,  flour,  and  fish,  even  in  the  European  domin 
ions  of  Spain,  would  be  of  great  consequence,  and 
would  justify  reciprocal  advantages  to  some  of  her 
commodities  (say  wines  and  brandies).1 

Will  it  not  be  necessary  to  add  an  instruction  that 
the  usual  stipulation  respecting  the  ratification  of 
the  treaty  by  the  United  States  be  varied,  so  as  to  be 
adapted  to  the  participation  of  the  Senate?  2 

Last  page.  The  words  "nor  in  assenting  to  their 
rights ' '  have  a  pencil  line  drawn  through  them.  'T  is 
certainly  best  to  obliterate  them. 

The  less  commitment  the  better.3 


HAMILTON   TO    WASHINGTON 

(Cabinet  Paper.) 
TREASURY  DEPARTMENT,  November  19,  1792. 

SIR: — I  have  carefully  reflected  on  the  application 
of  Mr.  Ternant  for  an  additional  supply  of  money 
for  the  use  of  the  colony  of  St.  Domingo,  on  account 
of  the  debt  due  to  France,  which  I  regard  more  and 
more  as  presenting  a  subject  extremely  delicate  and 
embarrassing. 

Two  questions  arise :  first  as  to  the  ability  of  the 
United  States  to  furnish  the  money,  which  is  stated 

1  If  the  Secretary  of  the  Treasury  will  be  so  good  as  to  particularize 
the  advantages  to  be  asked  and  the  equivalents  to  be  offered,  it  will 
be  proper  to  consider  of  them. 

2  It  seems  sufficient  to  stipulate  that  the  treaty  shall  be  ratified, 
without  saying  by  what  body  or  by  what  individuals  it  is  to  be.     An 
instruction,  however,  is  inserted  to  allow  sixteen  months  for  the  ex 
change  of  ratifications. 

3  This  has  been  decided  before. 


Hamilton  to  Washington  363 

at  about  $326,000,  in  addition  to  the  sum  remaining 
of  the  $400,000,  some  time  since  promised;  second  as 
to  the  propriety  of  doing  it  on  political  considerations. 

With  regard  to  ability,  I  feel  little  doubt  that  it 
will  be  in  the  power  of  the  Treasury  to  furnish  the 
sum;  yet  circumstanced  as  we  are,  with  the  possi 
bility  of  more  extensive  demands  than  at  present 
exist  for  exigencies  of  a  very  serious  nature,  I  think 
it  would  not  be  desirable  to  be  bound  by  a  positive 
stipulation  for  the  entire  amount.  With  regard  to 
the  propriety  of  the  measure  on  political  considera 
tions,  more  serious  difficulties  occur. 

The  late  suspension  of  the  king,  which  is  officially 
communicated,  and  the  subsequent  abolition  of 
royalty  by  the  convention,  which  the  newspapers 
announce  with  every  appearance  of  authenticity, 
essentially  change,  for  the  moment,  the  condition  of 
France. 

If  a  restoration  of  the  king  should  take  place,  I  am 
of  opinion  that  no  payment  which  might  be  made 
in  the  interval  would  be  deemed  regular  or  obliga 
tory.  The  admission  of  it  to  our  credit  would 
consequently  be  considered  as  matter  of  discretion, 
according  to  the  opinion  entertained  of  its  merit  and 
utility.  A  payment  to  the  newly  constituted  power, 
as  a  reimbursement,  in  course,  or  in  any  manner 
which  would  subject  it  to  be  used  in  support  of  the 
change,  would  doubtless  be  rejected. 

An  advance,  however,  to  supply  the  urgent 
necessities  of  a  part  of  the  French  Empire,  strug 
gling  under  the  misfortune  of  an  insurrection,  of  the 
nature  of  that  which  has  for  some  time  distressed 


364  Alexander  Hamilton 

the  colony  of  St.  Domingo,  and  now  exposed  to  the 
danger  of  total  ruin  by  famine,  is  of  a  different 
complexion.  Succors  furnished  in  such  a  situation, 
under  due  limitations,  would  be  so  clearly  an  act  of 
humanity  and  friendship,  of  such  evident  utility  to 
the  French  Empire,  that  no  future  government  could 
refuse  to  allow  a  credit  for  them  without  a  disregard  of 
moderation  and  equity.  But  the  claim  for  such  credit 
would  not  be  of  a  nature  to  be  regularly  and  of  course 
valid;  consequently  would  be  liable  to  be  disputed. 

The  condition  in  which  the  colony  has  lately 
placed  itself,  by  espousing  the  last  change  which  has 
been  made  in  France,  operates  as  a  serious  difficulty 
in  the  case,  and  may  be  made  a  ground  of  objection 
to  any  aid  which  may  be  given  them. 

There  is  even  a  question  whether  there  be  now 
any  organ  of  the  French  nation  which  can  regularly 
ask  the  succor,  whether  the  commission  to  Mr. 
Ternant  be  not  virtually  superseded. 

It  is  also  an  objection  (in  the  view  of  regularity 
and  validity)  to  the  supply  asked,  that  the  decree 
of  the  National  Assembly,  on  which  it  is  founded, 
contemplated  a  negotiation  between  the  executive 
power  in  France  and  our  minister  there.  The 
channel  has  not  been  pursued,  and  no  substitute 
has  been  provided.  The  business  wants  organiza 
tion  in  every  sense. 

From  these  premises,  I  deduce  that  nothing  can 
be  done  without  risk  to  the  United  States;  that, 
therefore,  as  little  as  possible  ought  to  be  done ;  that 
whatever  may  be  done  should  be  constantly  re 
stricted  to  the  single  idea  of  preserving  the  colony 


Hamilton  to  Washington  365 

from  destruction  by  famine;  that,  in  all  communica 
tions  on  the  subject,  care  should  be  taken  to  put  it 
on  this  footing,  and  even  to  avoid  the  explicit  recog 
nition  of  any  regular  authority  in  any  person. 

Under  these  cautions  and  restrictions  (but  not 
otherwise),  I  beg  leave  to  submit  it  as  my  opinion, 
that  succors  ought  to  be  granted,  notwithstanding 
the  degree  of  risk  which  will  attend  it;  that  they 
should  be  effected  by  occasional  advances,  without 
previous  stipulation,  and  with  only  a  general  assur 
ance  that  the  United  States,  disposed  to  contribute 
by  friendly  offices  to  the  preservation  of  an  important 
portion  of  the  French  Empire,  and  to  that  of  French 
Algiers,  from  the  calamity  of  famine,  will  endeavor, 
from  time  to  time,  as  far  as  circumstances  shall 
permit,  to  afford  means  of  sustenance. 

According  to  a  statement  of  Mr.  De  la  Foret,  the 
provisions  desired  to  be  shipped  in  the  course  of 
November  would  amount  to  $83,000,  including  the 
total  supply  of  fish  and  oil.  Towards  this,  he  com 
putes  the  application  of  $50,000  out  of  the  remain 
der  of  the  $400,000  heretofore  promised,  which 
would  leave  a  deficiency  of  $33,800.  This  sum,  or 
in  round  numbers  $40,000,  can  be  engaged  to  be 
furnished;  and  in  December,  if  no  future  circum 
stances  forbid,  a  further  sum  can  be  engaged  to  be 
supplied,  payable  at  a  future  short  period. 

It  will  be  proper,  that  the  most  precise  measures 
should  be  taken  to  ascertain  from  time  to  time  the 
investment  of  the  moneys  supplied,  in  purchasing 
and  forwarding  provisions  from  this  country  to  the 
colony  in  question. 


366  Alexander  Hamilton 

It  has  been  heretofore  understood  that  the  balance 
of  the  sum  some  time  since  stipulated  was  to  be 
furnished,  which  accordingly  has  been  and  is  doing. 

Engagements  for  supplies  have  been  entered  into 
upon  the  basis  of  that  stipulation,  and  payments  to 
as  great  if  not  a  greater  amount  are  becoming  due, 
in  which  the  citizens  of  the  United  States  are  materi 
ally  interested. 

The  caution  which  is  deemed  necessary,  has 
reference  not  only  to  the  safety  of  the  United  States 
in  a  pecuniary  aspect,  but  to  the  consideration  of 
avoiding  a  dangerous  commitment,  which  may  ever 
prove  a  source  of  misunderstanding  between  this 
country  and  the  future  government  of  the  French 
nation. 

From  all  that  is  hitherto  known,  there  is  no  ground 
to  conclude  that  the  governing  power,  by  the  last 
advices,  will  be  of  long  duration. 


WASHINGTON   TO   HAMILTON 

(Cabinet  Paper.) 

PHILADELPHIA,  April  18,  1793. 

SIR: — The  posture  of  affairs  in  Europe,  particu 
larly  between  France  and  Great  Britain/  places  the 
United  States  in  a  delicate  situation,  and  requires 
much  consideration  as  to  the  measures  which  it  will 
be  proper  for  them  to  observe  in  the  war  between 
those  Powers.  With  a  view  to  forming  a  general 
plan  of  conduct  for  the  Executive,  I  have  stated  and 

1  News  had  arrived  of  the  war  between  France  and  England,  and 
also  that  the  minister  of  the  new  French  Republic  was  on  his  way  to 
the  United  States. 


Washington  to  Hamilton  367 

inclosed  sundry  questions,  to  be  considered  prepara 
tory  to  a  meeting  at  my  house  to-morrow,  where  I 
shall  expect  to  see  you  at  nine  o'clock,  and  to  re 
ceive  the  result  of  your  reflections  thereon. 

Question  i. — Shall  a  proclamation  issue  for  the 
purpose  of  preventing  interferences  of  the  citizens 
of  the  United  States  in  the  war  between  France  and 
Great  Britain,  etc.  ?  Shall  it  contain  a  declaration 
of  neutrality  or  not?  What  shall  it  contain? 

Question  2. — Shall  a  minister  from  the  republic  of 
France  be  received? 

Question  3. — If  received,  shall  it  be  absolutely,  or 
with  qualifications;  and  if  with  qualifications,  of 
what  kind? 

Question  4. — Are  the  United  States  obliged,  by 
good  faith,  to  consider  the  treaties  heretofore  made 
with  France,  as  applying  to  the  present  situation 
of  the  parties?  May  they  either  renounce  them,  or 
hold  them  suspended  till  the  government  of  France 
shall  be  established? 

Question  5. — If  they  have  the  right,  is  it  expedient 
to  do  either,  and  which? 

Question  6. — If  they  have  an  option,  would  it  be 
a  breach  of  neutrality  to  consider  the  treaties  still 
in  operation? 

Question  7. — If  the  treaties  are  to  be  considered  as 
now  in  operation,  is  the  guaranty  in  the  treaty  of 
alliance  applicable  to  a  defensive  war  only,  or  to 
war  either  offensive  or  defensive? 

Question  8. — Does  the  war  in  which  France  is  en 
gaged  appear  to  be  offensive  or  defensive  on  her 
part,  or  of  a  mixed  and  equivocal  character? 


Alexander  Hamilton 

Question  9. — If  of  a  mixed  and  equivocal  charac 
ter,  does  the  guaranty,  in  any  event,  apply  to  such 
a  war? 

Question  10. — What  is  the  effect  of  a  guaranty, 
such  as  that  to  be  found  in  the  treaty  of  alliance 
between  the  United  States  and  France? 

Question  n. — Does  any  article  in  either  of  the 
treaties  prevent  ships  of  war,  other  than  privateers, 
of  the  Powers  opposed  to  France,  from  coming  into 
the  ports  of  the  United  States,  to  act  as  convoys  to 
their  own  merchantmen?  or  does  it  lay  other  re 
straints  upon  them,  more  than  would  apply  to  the 
ships  of  war  of  France  ? 

Question  12. — Should  the  future  regent  of  France 
send  a  minister  to  the  United  States,  ought  he  to  be 
received? 

Question  13. — Is  it  necessary  or  advisable  to  call 
together  the  two  Houses  of  Congress,  with  a  view  to 
the  present  posture  of  European  affairs?  If  it  is, 
what  should  be  the  particular  objects  of  such  a  call? 

GEO.  WASHINGTON. 


CABINET   OPINION 

April  19,  1793. 

At  a  meeting  of  the  Heads  of  Departments,  and 
the  Attorney-General,  at  the  President's,  April  19, 
1793,  to  consider  the  foregoing  questions  proposed 
by  the  President,  it  was  determined  by  all,  on  the 
first  question,  that  a  proclamation  shall  issue,  forbid 
ding  our  citizens  to  take  part  in  any  hostilities  on 
the  seas,  with  or  against  any  of  the  belligerent 


Hamilton  to  Washington  369 

Powers;  and  warning  them  against  carrying  to  any 
such  Powers,  any  of  those  articles  deemed  contra 
band,  according  to  the  modern  usage  of  nations; 
and  enjoining  them  from  all  acts  and  proceedings 
inconsistent  with  the  duties  of  a  friendly  nation 
towards  those  at  war. 

On  the  second  question,  "  Shall  a  minister  from 
the  republic  of  France  be  received?"  it  was  unani 
mously  agreed  that  he  shall  be  received. 

The  remaining  questions  were  postponed  for  fur 
ther  consideration.1 


HAMILTON   TO   WASHINGTON  2 

(Cabinet  Paper.) 

April,  1793. 

Question  the  Third  proposed  by  the  President  of  the 
United  States. — "  If  a  minister  from  the  republic  of 
France  shall  be  received,  shall  it  be  absolutely,  or 
with  qualifications;  and  if  with  qualifications,  of 
what  kind?" 

Answer 

It  is  conceived  to  be  advisable  that  the  reception 
of  the  expected  minister  from  the  republic  of  France 

1  Five  days  later,  in  accordance  with  the  views  of  his  Cabinet,  Wash 
ington  issued  his  famous  proclamation  of  neutrality,  which  marked 
out  our  foreign  policy  as  one  of  absolute  abstention  from  the  affairs 
of  Europe,  a  principle  of  which  the  Monroe  doctrine  was  the  necessary 
corollary. 

2  This  important  paper  carries  the  principle  of  our  neutrality  a  step 
further,  and  is  most  important.     Hamilton  wished  to  sever  as  quietly 
as  possible  all  connection  with  France,  so  that  we  might  be  free  from 
alliances  of  any  sort  which  were  liable  to  go  beyond  mere  comity  and 
commercial  reciprocity.     Hamilton's  policy  was  entirely  consistent 
with  that  of  the  proclamation. 

VOL.  IV.— 24. 


37°  Alexander  Hamilton 

should  be  qualified  by  a  previous  declaration,  sub 
stantially  to  this  effect:  "That  the  Government  of 
the  United  States,  uniformly  entertaining  cordial 
wishes  for  the  happiness  of  the  French  nation,  and 
disposed  to  maintain  an  amicable  communication 
and  intercourse,  uninterrupted  by  political  vicissi 
tudes,  does  not  hesitate  to  receive  him  in  the  charac 
ter  which  his  credentials  import;  yet,  considering 
the  origin,  course,  and  circumstances  of  the  relations 
originally  contracted  between  the  two  countries,  and 
the  existing  position  of  the  affairs  of  France,  it  is 
deemed  advisable  and  proper,  on  the  part  of  the 
United  States,  to  reserve  to  future  consideration  and 
discussion  the  question — whether  the  operation  of 
the  treaties  by  which  those  relations  were  formed, 
ought  not  to  be  deemed  temporarily  and  provision 
ally  suspended;  and  under  this  impression,  it  is 
thought  due  to  a  spirit  of  candid  and  friendly  pro 
cedure  to  apprise  him  beforehand  of  the  intention 
to  reserve  that  question,  lest  silence  on  the  point 
should  occasion  misconstruction." 

The  grounds  of  this  opinion  are  as  follow : 
The  treaties  between  the  United  States  and  France 
were  made  with  His  Most  Christian  Majesty,  his 
heirs  and  successors.  The  government  of  France 
which  existed  at  the  time  those  treaties  were  made, 
gave  way,  in  the  first  instance,  to  a  new  constitution, 
formed  by  the  representatives  of  the  nation,  and 
accepted  by  the  king,  which  went  into  regular  opera 
tion.  Of  a  sudden  a  tumultuous  rising  took  place. 
The  king  was  seized,  imprisoned,  and  declared  to 
be  suspended  by  the  authority  of  the  National  As- 


Hamilton  to  Washington  371 

sembly,  a  body  delegated  to  exercise  the  legislative 
functions  of  the  already  established  government— 
in  no  shape  authorized  to  divest  any  other  of  the 
constituted  authorities  of  its  legal  capacities  or 
powers.  So  far,  then,  what  was  done  was  a  mani 
fest  assumption  of  power. 

To  justify  it,  it  is  alleged  to  have  been  necessary 
for  the  safety  of  the  nation,  to  prevent  the  success 
of  a  counter-revolution  meditated  or  patronized  by 
the  king. 

On  the  other  side,  it  is  affirmed  that  the  whole 
transaction  was  merely  the  execution  of  a  plan 
which  had  been  for  some  time  projected,  and  had 
been  gradually  ripening,  to  bring  about  an  abolition 
of  the  royalty  and  the  establishment  of  a  republican 
government. 

No  satisfactory  proof  is  known  to  have  been  pro 
duced  to  fix  upon  the  king  the  charges  which  have 
been  brought  against  him. 

On  the  other  hand,  declarations  have  escaped 
from  characters  who  took  a  lead  in  the  measure  of 
suppressing  the  royalty,  which  seem  to  amount  to 
a  tacit  acknowledgment  that  the  events  of  the  loth 
of  August  were  the  result  of  a  premeditated  plan  of 
the  republican  party  to  get  rid  of  the  monarchical 
power,  rather  than  a  necessary  counteraction  of 
mischievous  designs  on  the  part  of  the  king. 

Mr.  De  Malsherbes,  one  of  the  counsel  of  the  king, 
makes  this  striking  reflection  on  the  point. 

The  events  of  the  loth  of  August  were  followed  on 
the  2d  and  3d  of  September  with  the  massacre  of  a 
great  number  of  persons  in  different  parts  of  France, 


372  Alexander  Hamilton 

including  several  distinguished  individuals  who  were 
known  to  be  attached  either  to  the  ancient  govern 
ment,  or  to  the  constitution  which  had  succeeded 
to  it. 

The  suspension  of  the  king  was  accompanied  by  a 
call  upon  the  primary  assemblies  to  depute  persons 
to  represent  them  in  a  convention,  in  order  to  the 
taking  of  such  measures  as  the  exigency  of  the  con 
juncture  might  require. 

Under  circumstances  not  free  from  precipitation, 
violence,  and  awe,  deputies  to  a  national  convention 
were  chosen.  They  assembled  on  the  i;th  of  Sep 
tember,  1792,  at  Paris,  and  on  the  very  day  of  their 
meeting  decreed  the  abolition  of  royalty. 

They  proceeded  in  the  next  place  to  organize  a 
temporary  provisional  government,  charged  with 
managing  the  affairs  of  the  nation  till  a  constitution 
should  be  established. 

As  a  circumstance  that  gives  a  complexion  to  the 
course  of  things,  it  is  proper  to  mention  that  the 
Jacobin  Club  at  Paris  (a  society  which,  with  its 
branches  in  different  parts  of  France,  appears  to 
have  had  a  prevailing  influence  over  the  affairs  of 
the  country),  previous  to  the  meeting  of  the  conven 
tion,  entered  into  measures  with  the  avowed  object 
of  purging  the  convention  of  those  persons,  favorers 
of  royalty,  who  might  have  escaped  the  attention  of 
the  primary  assemblies. 

In  the  last  place,  the  late  king  of  France  has  been 
tried  and  condemned  by  the  convention,  and  has 
suffered  death. 

Whether    he    has    suffered    justly    or    unjustly, 


Hamilton  to  Washington  373 

whether  he  has  been  a  guilty  tyrant  or  an  unfortun 
ate  victim,  is  at  least  a  problem.  There  certainly 
can  be  no  hazard  in  affirming  that  no  proof  has  yet 
come  to  light  sufficient  to  establish  a  belief  that  the 
death  of  Louis  is  an  act  of  national  justice. 

It  appears  to  be  regarded  in  a  different  light 
throughout  Europe,  and  by  a  numerous  and  respect 
able  part,  if  not  by  a  majority,  of  the  people  of  the 
United  States. 

Almost  all  Europe  is  or  seems  likely  to  be  armed  in 
opposition  to  the  presentrulers  of  France,with  the  de 
clared  or  implied  intention  of  restoring,  if  possible, 
the  royalty  in  the  successor  of  the  deceased  monarch. 

The  present  war,  then,  turns  essentially  on  the 
point — What  shall  be  the  future  government  of 
France?  Shall  the  royal  authority  be  restored  in 
the  person  of  the  successor  of  Louis,  or  shall  a  re 
public  be  constituted  in  exclusion  of  it? 

Thus  stand  the  material  facts  which  regard  the 
origin  of  our  connections  with  France,  and  the  obliga 
tions  or  dispensations  that  now  exist. 

They  have  been  stated,  not  with  a  view  to  indicate 
a  definitive  opinion  concerning  the  propriety  of  the 
conduct  of  the  present  rulers  of  France,  but  to  show 
that  the  course  of  the  revolution  there  has  been  at 
tended  with  circumstances,  which  militate  against 
a  full  conviction  of  its  having  been  brought  to  its 
present  stage  by  such  a  free,  regular,  and  deliberate 
act  of  the  nation,  and  with  such  a  spirit  of  justice 
and  humanity,  as  ought  to  silence  all  scruples  about 
the  validity  of  what  has  been  done,  and  the  morality 
of  aiding  it,  if  consistent  with  policy. 


374  Alexander  Hamilton 

This  great  and  important  question  arises  out  of 
the  facts  which  have  been  stated: 

Are  the  United  States  bound,  by  the  principles  of 
the  laws  of  nations,  to  consider  the  treaties  hereto 
fore  made  with  France  as  in  present  force  and  opera 
tion  between  them  and  the  actual  governing  powers 
of  the  French  nation?  or  may  they  elect  to  consider 
their  operation  as  suspended,  reserving  also  a  right 
to  judge  finally  whether  any  such  changes  have  hap 
pened  in  the  political  affairs  of  France  as  may  justify 
a  renunciation  of  those  treaties? 

It  is  believed  that  they  have  an  option  to  consider 
the  operation  of  those  treaties  as  suspended,  and  will 
have  eventually  a  right  to  renounce  them,  if  such 
changes  shall  take  place  as  can  bona  fide  be  pro 
nounced  to  render  a  continuance  of  the  connec 
tions  which  result  from  them  disadvantageous  or 
dangerous. 

There  are  two  general  propositions  which  may  be 
opposed  to  this  opinion: — ist.  That  a  nation  has  a 
right,  in  its  own  discretion,  to  change  its  form  of 
government — to  abolish  one,  and  substitute  another. 
2d.  That  real  treaties  (of  which  description  those  in 
question  are)  bind  the  NATIONS  whose  governments 
contract,  and  continue  in  force  notwithstanding 
any  changes  which  happen  in  the  forms  of  their 
government. 

The  truth  of  the  first  proposition  ought  to  be  ad 
mitted  in  its  fullest  latitude.  But  it  will  by  no 
means  follow,  that,  because  a  nation  has  a  right  to 
manage  its  own  concerns  as  it  thinks  fit,  and  to  make 
such  changes  in  its  political  institutions  as  itself 


Hamilton  to  Washington  375 

judges  best  calculated  to  promote  its  interests,  it 
has  therefore  a  right  to  involve  other  nations,  with 
whom  it  may  have  had  connections,  absolutely  and 
unconditionally,  in  the  consequences  of  the  changes 
which  it  may  think  proper  to  make.  This  would  be 
to  give  to  a  nation  or  society  not  only  a  power  over 
its  own  happiness,  but  a  power  over  the  happiness 
of  other  nations  or  societies.  It  would  be  to  extend 
the  operation  of  the  maxim  much  beyond  the  reason 
of  it,  which  is  simply,  that  every  nation  ought  to  have 
a  right  to  provide  for  its  own  happiness. 

If,  then,  a  nation  thinks  fit  to  make  changes  in 
its  government,  which  render  treaties  that  before 
subsisted  between  it  and  another  nation  useless,  or 
dangerous,  or  hurtful  to  that  other  nation,  it  is  a 
plain  dictate  of  reason,  that  the  latter  will  have  a 
right  to  renounce  those  treaties;  because  it  also  has 
a  right  to  take  care  of  its  own  happiness,  and  cannot 
be  obliged  to  suffer  this  to  be  impaired  by  the  means 
which  its  neighbor  or  ally  may  have  adopted  for  its 
own  advantage,  contrary  to  the  ancient  state  of 
things. 

But  it  may  be  said,  that  an  obligation  to  submit 
to  the  inconveniences  that  may  ensue  arises  from 
the  other  maxim  which  has  been  stated — namely, 
that  real  treaties  bind  nations,  notwithstanding 
the  changes  which  happen  in  the  forms  of  their 
governments. 

All  general  rules  are  to  be  construed  with  certain 
reasonable  limitations.  That  which  has  been  just 
mentioned  must  be  understood  in  this  sense, — that 
changes  in  forms  of  government  do  not  of  course 


Alexander  Hamilton 

abrogate  real  treaties;  that  they  continue  absolutely 
binding  on  the  party  which  makes  the  change,  and 
will  bind  the  other  party,  unless,  in  due  time  and  for 
just  cause,  he  declares  his  election  to  renounce  them; 
that  in  good  faith  he  ought  not  to  renounce  them, 
unless  the  change  which  happened  does  really  render 
them  useless,  or  materially  less  advantageous,  or 
more  dangerous  than  before.  But  for  good  and 
sufficient  cause  he  may  renounce  them. 

Nothing  can  be  more  evident  than  that  the  exist 
ing  forms  of  government  of  two  nations  may  enter 
far  into  the  motives  of  a  real  treaty.  Two  republics 
may  contract  an  alliance,  the  principal  inducement 
to  which  may  be  a  similarity  of  constitutions,  pro 
ducing  a  common  interest  to  defend  their  mutual 
rights  and  liberties.  A  change  of  the  government 
of  one  of  them  into  a  monarchy  or  despotism  may 
destroy  the  inducement  and  the  main  link  of  com 
mon  interest.  Two  monarchies  may  form  an  alli 
ance  on  a  like  principle,  their  common  defence  against 
a  powerful  neighboring  republic.  The  change  of  the 
government  of  one  of  the  allies  may  destroy  the 
source  of  common  sympathy  and  common  interest, 
and  render  it  prudent  for  the  other  ally  to  renounce 
the  connection  and  seek  to  fortify  itself  in  some 
other  quarter. 

Two  nations  may  form  an  alliance  because  each 
has  confidence  in  the  energy  and  efficacy  of  the 
government  of  the  other.  A  revolution  may  subject 
one  of  them  to  a  different  form  of  government — 
feeble,  fluctuating,  and  turbulent,  liable  to  provoke 
wars,  and  very  little  fitted  to  repel  them.  Even  the 


Hamilton  to  Washington  377 

connections  of  a  nation  with  other  foreign  powers 
may  enter  into  the  motives  of  an  alliance  with  it.  If 
a  dissolution  of  ancient  connections  shall  have  been 
a  consequence  of  a  revolution  of  government,  the 
external  political  relations  of  the  parties  may  have 
become  so  varied  as  to  occasion  an  incompatibility 
of  the  alliance  with  the  Power  which  had  changed 
its  constitution  with  the  other  connections  of  its  ally 
— connections  perhaps  essential  to  its  welfare. 

In  such  cases,  reason,  which  is  the  touchstone  of 
all  similar  maxims,  would  dictate  that  the  party 
whose  government  had  remained  stationary  would 
have  a  right,  under  a  bona-fide  conviction  that  the 
change  in  the  situation  of  the  other  party  would 
render  a  future  connection  detrimental  or  dangerous, 
to  declare  the  connection  dissolved. 

Contracts  between  nations  as  between  individuals 
must  lose  their  force  where  the  considerations  fail. 

A  treaty  pernicious  to  the  state  is  of  itself  void, 
where  no  change  in  the  situation  of  either  of  the 
parties  takes  place.  By  a  much  stronger  reason  it 
must  become  voidable  at  the  option  of  the  other  party, 
when  the  voluntary  act  of  one  of  the  allies  has  made 
so  material  a  change  in  the  condition  of  things  as  is 
always  implied  in  a  radical  revolution  of  government. 

Moreover,  the  maxim  in  question  must,  I  presume, 
be  understood  with  this  further  limitation — that  the 
revolution  be  consummated — that  the  new  govern 
ment  be  established,  and  recognized  among  nations — 
that  there  be  an  undisputed  organ  of  the  national 
will  to  obtain  the  performance  of  the  stipulations 
made  with  the  former  government. 


Alexander  Hamilton 

It  is  not  natural  to  presume  that  an  ally  is  obliged 
to  throw  his  weight  into  either  scale,  where  the  war 
involves  the  very  point — what  shall  be  the  govern 
ment  of  the  country;  and  that,  too,  against  the  very 
party  with  whom  the  formal  obligations  of  the  alli 
ance  have  been  contracted. 

It  is  more  natural  to  conclude,  that  in  such  a  case 
the  ally  ought  either  to  aid  the  party  with  whom  the 
contract  was  immediately  made,  or  to  consider  the 
operation  of  the  alliance  as  suspended.  The  latter  is 
undoubtedly  his  duty,  rather  than  the  former,  where 
the  nation  appears  to  have  pronounced  the  change. 

A  doctrine  contrary  to  that  here  supported  may 
involve  an  opposition  of  moral  duties,  and  dilemmas 
of  a  very  singular  and  embarrassing  kind. 

A  nation  may  owe  its  existence  or  preservation 
entirely,  or  in  a  great  degree,  to  the  voluntary  suc 
cors  which  it  derived  from  a  monarch  of  a  country — 
the  then  lawful  organ  of  the  national  will,  the  director 
of  its  sword  and  its  purse,  the  dispenser  of  its  aid 
and  its  favors.  In  consideration  of  the  good  offices 
promised  or  afforded  by  him,  an  alliance  may  have 
been  formed  between  the  monarch,  his  heirs  and  suc 
cessors,  and  the  country  indebted  to  him  for  those 
good  offices — stipulating  future  co-operation  and 
mutual  aid.  This  monarch,  without  any  particular 
crime  on  his  part,  may  be  afterwards  deposed  and 
expelled  by  his  nation,  or  by  a  triumphant  faction, 
which  may,  perhaps,  momentarily  direct  the  nation's 
voice.  He  may  find  in  the  assistance  of  neighbor 
ing  powers  friendly  to  his  cause  the  means  of  en 
deavoring  to  reinstate  himself. 


Hamilton  to  Washington  379 

In  the  midst  of  his  efforts  to  accomplish  this  pur 
pose,  the  ruling  powers  of  the  nation  over  which  he 
had  reigned  call  upon  the  country  which  had  been 
saved  by  his  friendship  and  patronage,  to  perform 
the  stipulations  expressed  in  the  alliance  made  with 
him,  and  embark  in  a  war  against  their  friend  and 
benefactor — on  the  suggestion,  that  the  treaty  being 
a  real  one,  the  actual  rulers  of  the  nation  have  a 
right  to  claim  the  benefit  of  it. 

If  there  be  no  option  in  such  case,  would  there  not 
be  a  most  perplexing  conflict  of  opposite  obligations? 
—of  the  faith  supposed  to  be  plighted  by  the  treaty, 
and  of  justice  and  gratitude  toward  a  man  from 
whom  essential  benefits  had  been  received,  and  who 
could  oppose  the  formal  and  express  terms  of  the 
contract  to  an  abstract  theoretic  proposition  ?  Would 
genuine  honor,  would  true  morality  permit  the 
taking  a  hostile  part  against  the  friend  and  bene 
factor,  being  at  the  same  time  the  original  party  to 
the  contract? 

Suppose  the  call  of  the  actual  rulers  to  be  com 
plied  with,  and  the  war  to  have  been  entered  into 
by  the  ally.  Suppose  the  expelled  monarch  to  have 
re-entered  his  former  dominions,  and  to  have  been 
joined  by  one  half  of  his  former  subjects — how  would 
the  obligation  then  stand  ?  He  will  now  have  added 
to  the  title  of  being  the  formal  party  to  the  contract, 
that  of  being  the  actual  possessor  of  one  half  the 
country  and  of  the  wishes  of  one  half  the  nation. 

Is  it  supposable  that  in  such  a  case  the  obligations 
of  the  alliance  can  continue  in  favor  of  those  by  whom 
he  had  been  expelled?  or  would  they  then  revert 


380  Alexander  Hamilton 

again  to  the  monarch  ?  or  would  they  fluctuate  with 
the  alternations  of  good  and  ill  fortune  attending 
the  one  or  the  other  party  ?  Can  a  principle  which 
would  involve  such  a  dilemma  be  true?  Is  it  not 
evident  that  there  must  be  an  option  to  consider 
the  operation  of  the  alliance  as  suspended  during 
the  contest  concerning  the  government — that,  on  the 
one  hand,  there  may  not  be  a  necessity  of  taking 
part  with  the  expelled  monarch  against  the  apparent 
will  of  the  nation,  or,  on  the  other,  a  necessity  of 
joining  the  ruling  powers  of  the  moment  against  the 
immediate  party  with  whom  the  contract  was  made, 
and  from  whom  the  consideration  may  have  flowed? 

If  the  opinions  of  writers  be  consulted,  they  will, 
as  far  as  they  go,  confirm  the  sense  of  the  maxim 
which  is  here  contended  for. 

Grotius,  while  he  asserts  the  general  principle  of 
the  obligation  of  real  treaties  upon  nations,  notwith 
standing  the  changes  in  their  governments,  admits 
the  qualification  which  has  been  insisted  upon,  and 
expressly  excepts  the  case  where  it  appears  that  the 
motive  to  the  treaty  was  "peculiar  to  the  form  of 
government,  as  when  free  states  enter  into  an  alli 
ance  for  the  defence  of  their  liberties."-— Book  II., 
Chap.  XVI.,  §  1 6,  No.  i. 

And  Vatel,  who  is  the  most  systematic  of  the  writ 
ers  on  the  laws  of  nations,  lays  down  the  qualifica 
tion  in  the  greatest  latitude.  To  give  a  correct  idea 
of  his  meaning,  it  will  be  of  use  to  transcribe  the  en 
tire  section.  It  is  found  in  Book  II.,  Ch.  XII.,  §  197. 

"  What  is  the  obligation  of  a  real  alliance,  when  the 
king,  who  is  the  ally,  is  driven  from  the  throne  ? 


Hamilton  to  Washington  381 

"The  same  question,"  says  he  (to  wit,  that  stated 
above),  "  presents  itself  in  real  alliances  made,  and 
in  general  in  all  alliances  made  with  the  state,  and 
not  in  particular  with  a  king  for  the  defence  of  his 
person.  An  ally  ought  doubtless  to  be  defended 
against  every  invasion,  against  every  foreign  vio 
lence,  and  even  against  his  rebellious  subjects;  in 
the  same  manner,  a  republic  ought  to  be  defended 
against  the  enterprises  of  one  who  attempts  to  de 
stroy  the  public  liberty.  But  it  ought  to  be  remem 
bered  that  an  ally  of  the  state  or  the  nation  is  not  its 
judge.  If  the  nation  has  deposed  its  king  in  form — 
if  the  people  of  a  republic  have  driven  out  their 
magistrates  and  set  themselves  at  liberty,  or  acknow 
ledged  the  authority  of  a  usurper,  either  expressly  or 
tacitly,  to  oppose  these  domestic  regulations  by  dis 
puting  their  justice  or  validity  would  be  to  interfere 
with  the  government  of  a  nation,  and  do  it  an  injury. 
The  ally  remains  the  ally  of  the  state,  notwithstanding 
the  change  which  has  happened  in  it.  However, 
when  this  change  renders  the  alliance  useless,  dan 
gerous,  or  disagreeable,  it  may  renounce  it ;  for  it  may 
say,  upon  a  good  foundation,  that  it  would  not  have 
entered  into  an  alliance  with  that  nation  had  it  been 
under  the  present  form  of  government." 

It  is  not  perceived  that  there  is  any  ambiguity  of 
expression,  or  any  other  circumstance,  to  throw  the 
least  obscurity  upon  the  sense  of  the  author.  The 
precise  question  he  raises  is:  What  is  the  obligation 
of  a  real  alliance,  when  the  king,  who  is  the  ally,  is 
driven  from  the  throne?  He  concludes,  after  sever 
al  intermediate  observations,  that  the  ally  remains 


382  Alexander  Hamilton 

the  ally  of  the  State,  notwithstanding  the  change 
which  has  happened.  Nevertheless,  says  he,  when 
the  change  renders  the  alliance  useless,  dangerous, 
or  disagreeable,  it  may  be  renounced. 

It  is  observable,  that  the  question  made  by  writers 
always  is,  whether,  in  a  real  alliance,  when  the  king 
who  is  the  ally  is  deposed,  the  ally  of  the  deposed 
king  is  bound  to  succor  and  support  him.  And 
though  it  is  decided  by  the  better  opinions,  as  well 
as  by  the  reason  of  the  thing,  that  there  is  not  an 
obligation  to  support  him  against  the  will  of  the  na 
tion,  when  his  dethronement  is  to  be  ascribed  to 
that  source,  yet  there  is  never  a  single  suggestion, 
on  the  other  hand,  of  the  ally  of  such  dethroned 
king  being  obliged  to  assist  his  nation  against  him. 
The  most  that  appears  to  be  admitted  in  favor  of  the 
decision  of  the  nation  is,  that  there  is  no  support  due 
to  the  dethroned  prince. 

Puffendorf  puts  this  matter  upon  very  proper 
grounds.  Referring  to  the  opinion  of  Grotius,  who 
with  too  much  latitude  lays  it  down,  "  that  a  league 
made  with  a  king  is  valid,  though  that  king  or  his 
successors  be  expelled  the  kingdom  by  his  subjects, 
for  though  he  has  lost  his  possession,  the  right  to  the 
crown  still  remains  in  him,"  he  makes  the  following 
observation:  "To  me,  so  much  in  this  case  seems  to 
be  certain,  that  if  the  terms  of  the  league  expressly 
mention  and  intend  the  defence  of  the  prince's  person 
and  family,  he  ought  to  be  assisted  in  the  recovery 
of  his  kingdom.  But  if  the  league  was  formed  for 
public  good  only,  't  is  a  disputable  point  whether  the 
exiled  prince  can  demand  assistance  in  virtue  of  his 


Hamilton  to  Washington  383 

league.  For  the  aids  mentioned  are  presumed  to  have 
been  promised  against  foreign  enemies,  without  view 
of  this  particular  case.  Not  but  that  still  such  a 
league  leaves  liberty  to  assist  a  lawful  prince  against  a 
usurper." 

The  presumption  here  stated  is  a  natural  and 
proper  one,  and  in  its  reason  applies  to  both  sides — 
to  the  exiled  prince  who  should  demand  succors 
against  his  nation,  and  to  the  nation  who,  having 
dethroned  its  prince,  should  demand  succor  to  sup 
port  the  act  of  dethronement  and  establish  the  revo 
lution.  The  ally  in  such  case  is  not  bound  to  come 
in  aid  of  either  party,  but  may  consider  the  opera 
tion  of  the  alliance  as  suspended  till  the  competition 
about  the  government  is  decided. 

What  a  difference  is  there  between  asserting  it  to 
be  a  disputable  point,  whether  the  ally  of  a  dethroned 
prince,  in  the  case  of  a  real  treaty,  is  not  bound  to 
assist  him  against  the  nation,  and  maintaining  that 
the  ally  is  bound  at  all  events  to  assist  the  nation 
against  him!  For  this  is  the  consequence  of  assert 
ing  that  such  a  treaty  ipso  facto  attaches  itself  to  the 
body  of  the  nation,  even  in  the  course  of  a  pending 
revolution,  and  without  option  either  to  suspend  or 
renounce. 

If  the  practice  of  nations  be  consulted,  neither  will 
that  be  found  to  confirm  the  proposition,  that  the 
obligation  of  real  treaties  extends  unconditionally 
to  the  actual  governors  of  nations,  whatever  changes 
take  place.  In  the  books  which  treat  on  the  subject, 
numerous  examples  of  the  contrary  are  quoted. 
The  most  prevailing  practice  has  been  to  assist  the 


384  Alexander  Hamilton 

ancient  sovereign.  In  the  very  instance  to  which  this 
discussion  relates,  this  is  the  course  which  a  great 
part  of  Europe  directly  or  indirectly  pursues. 

It  may  be  argued  by  way  of  objection  to  what  has 
been  said,  that  admitting  the  general  principle  of  a 
right  for  sufficient  cause  to  renounce,  yet  still,  as  the 
change  in  the  present  case  is  from  a  monarchy  to 
a  republic,  and  no  sufficient  excuse  hitherto  exists 
for  a  renunciation,  the  possibility  of  its  arising  here 
after  in  the  progress  of  events,  does  not  appear  a 
valid  reason  for  resorting  to  the  principle  in  ques 
tion.  To  this  the  answer  is,  that  no  government  has 
yet  been  instituted  in  France  in  lieu  of  that  which 
has  been  pulled  down;  that  the  existing  political 
powers  are,  by  the  French  themselves,  denominated 
provisional,  and  are  to  give  way  to  a  constitution  to 
be  established. 

It  is  therefore  impossible  to  foresee  what  the 
future  government  of  France  will  be;  and  in  this 
state  of  uncertainty,  the  right  to  renounce  resolves 
itself  into,  of  course,  a  right  to  suspend.  The  one  is 
a  consequence  of  the  other ;  applicable  to  the  undeter 
mined  state  of  things.  If  there  be  a  right  to  re 
nounce  when  the  change  of  government  proves  to  be 
of  a  nature  to  render  an  alliance  useless  or  injurious, 
there  must  be  a  right,  amidst  a  pending  revolution, 
to  wait  to  see  what  change  will  take  place. 

Should  it  be  said  that  the  treaty  is  binding  now, 
no  objectionable  change  having  yet  taken  place,  but 
may  be  renounced  hereafter,  if  any  such  change  shall 
take  place: 

The  answer  is,  that  it  is  not  possible  to  pronounce 


Hamilton  to  Washington  385 

at  present  what  is  the  quality  of  the  change.  Every 
thing  is  in  transitu.  This  state  of  suspense,  as  to  the 
object  of  option,  naturally  suspends  the  option  it 
self.  The  business  may,  in  its  progress,  assume  a 
variety  of  forms.  If  the  issue  may  not  be  waited 
for,  the  obligations  of  the  country  may  fluctuate  in 
definitely — be  one  thing  to-day,  another  to-morrow; 
a  consequence  which  is  inadmissible. 

Besides,  the  true  reasoning  would  seem  to  be  that 
to  admit  the  operation  of  the  treaties,  while  the 
event  is  pending,  would  be  to  take  the  chance  of 
what  that  event  shall  be,  and  would  preclude  a 
future  renunciation. 

Moreover,  the  right  to  consider  the  operation  of 
the  treaties  as  suspended,  results  from  this  further 
consideration,  that  during  a  pending  revolution,  an 
ally  in  a  real  treaty  is  not  bound  to  pronounce  be 
tween  the  competitors. 

The  conclusion  from  the  whole  is,  that  there  is  an 
option  in  the  United  States  to  hold  the  operation  of 
the  treaties  suspended ;  and  that  in  the  event,  if  the 
form  of  government  established  in  France  shall  be 
such  as  to  render  a  continuance  of  the  treaties  con 
trary  to  the  interests  of  the  United  States,  they  may 
be  renounced. 

If  there  be  such  an  option,  there  are  strong  reasons 
to  show  that  the  character  and  interests  of  the  United 
States  require,  that  they  should  pursue  the  course 
of  holding  the  operation  of  the  treaties  suspended. 

Their  character: 

Because  it  was  from  Louis  XVI.,  the  then  sover 
eign  of  the  country,  that  they  received  those  succors 


VOL.  IV.— 25. 


Alexander  Hamilton 

which  were  so  important  in  the  establishment  of 
their  independence  and  liberty.  It  was  with  him, 
his  heirs,  and  successors,  that  they  contracted  their 
engagements — by  which  they  obtained  those  precious 
succors. 

It  is  enough,  on  their  part,  to  respect  the  right  of 
the  nation  to  change  its  government,  so  far  as  not  to 
side  with  the  successors  of  the  dethroned  prince;  as 
to  receive  their  ambassador,  and  keep  up  an  amicable 
intercourse;  as  to  be  willing  to  render  every  good 
office,  not  contrary  to  the  duties  of  a  real  neutrality. 

To  throw  their  weight  into  the  scale  of  the  new 
government  would,  it  is  to  be  feared,  be  considered 
by  mankind  as  not  consistent  with  a  decent  regard 
to  the  relations  which  subsisted  between  them  and 
Louis  XVI.;  as  not  consistent  with  a  due  sense  of 
the  services  they  received  from  that  unfortunate 
prince ;  as  not  consistent  with  national  delicacy  and 
decorum. 

The  character  of  the  United  States  may  also  be 
concerned  in  keeping  clear  of  any  connection  with 
the  present  government  of  France  in  other  views. 

A  struggle  for  liberty  is  in  itself  respectable  and 
glorious;  when  conducted  with  magnanimity,  jus 
tice,  and  humanity,  it  ought  to  command  the  ad 
miration  of  every  friend  to  human  nature;  but  if 
sullied  by  crimes  and  extravagances,  it  loses  its 
respectability.  Though  success  may  rescue  it  from 
infamy,  it  cannot,  in  the  opinion  of  the  sober  part 
of  mankind,  attach  to  it  much  positive  merit  or 
praise.  But  in  the  event  of  a  want  of  success,  a 
general  execration  must  attend  it. 


Hamilton  to  Washington  387 

It  appears,  thus  far,  but  too  probable,  that  the 
pending  revolution  of  France  has  sustained  some 
serious  blemishes.  There  is  too  much  ground  to 
anticipate  that  a  sentence  uncommonly  severe  will 
be  passed  upon  it  if  it  fails. 

Will  it  be  well  for  the  United  States  to  expose 
their  reputation  to  the  issue,  by  implicating  them 
selves  as  associates?  Will  their  reputation  be  pro 
moted  by  a  successful  issue  ?  What  will  it  suffer  by 
the  reverse? 

These  questions  suggest  very  serious  considera 
tions  to  a  mind  anxious  for  the  reputation  of  the 
country — anxious  that  it  may  emulate  a  character 
of  sobriety,  moderation,  justice,  and  love  of  order. 

The  interest  of  the  United  States  seems  to  dictate 
the  course  recommended,  in  many  ways: 

I.  In  reference  to  their  character,  from  the  con 
siderations  already  stated. 

II.  In  reference  to  their  peace. 

As  the  present  treaties  contain  stipulations  of 
military  succors  and  military  aids,  in  certain  cases 
which  are  likely  to  occur,  there  can  be  no  doubt, 
that  if  there  be  an  option  to  consider  them  as  not 
binding,  as  not  in  operation,  the  considering  them  as 
binding,  as  in  operation,  would  be  equivalent  to 
making  new  treaties  of  similar  import;  and  it  is 
a  well-settled  point,  that  such  stipulations  entered 
into,  pending  a  war,  or  with  a  view  to  a  war,  is  a 
departure  from  neutrality. 

How  far  the  parties  opposed  to  France  may  think 
fit  to  treat  us  as  enemies,  in  consequence  of  this, 
is  a  problem  which  experience  only  can  solve;  the 


388  Alexander  Hamilton 

solution  of  which  will  probably  be  regulated  by  their 
views  of  their  own  interest — by  the  circumstances 
which  may  occur;  and  it  is  far  from  impossible  that 
these  will  restrain  them,  so  long  as  we,  in  fact,  take 
no  active  part  in  favor  of  France. 

But  if  there  be  an  option  to  avoid  it,  it  can  hardly 
be  wise  to  incur  so  great  an  additional  risk  and  em 
barrassment,  to  implicate  ourselves  in  the  perplex 
ities  which  may  follow. 

With  regard  to  the  good  effect  of  the  conduct 
which  is  advocated  upon  the  Powers  at  war  with 
France,  nothing  need  be  said. 

Even  considering  our  interest  with  reference  to 
France  herself,  some  reasons  may  be  urged  in  favor 
of  considering  the  treaties  as  suspended. 

It  seems  to  be  the  general  if  not  the  universal  sen 
timent,  that  we  ought  not  to  embark  in  the  war. 

Suppose  the  French  islands  attacked,  and  we  called 
upon  to  perform  the  guaranty.  To  avoid  comply 
ing  with  it,  we  must  either  say:  That  the  war  being 
offensive  on  the  part  of  France,  the  casus  fcederis  does 
not  exist;  or,  that  as  our  co-operation  would  be 
useless  to  the  object  of  the  guaranty,  and  attended 
with  more  than  ordinary  danger  to  ourselves,  we 
cannot  afford  it. 

Would  the  one  or  the  other  be  satisfactory  to 
France? 

The  first  would  probably  displease — the  last  would 
not  please.  It  is,  moreover,  the  most  questionable 
and  the  least  reputable  of  all  the  objections  which 
a  nation  is  allowed  to  oppose  to  the  performance  of 
its  engagements.  We  should  not,  therefore,  be  much 


Hamilton  to  Washington  389 

more  certain  of  avoiding  the  displeasure  of  the 
present  ruling  powers  of  France,  by  considering  the 
treaties  as  in  operation,  than  by  considering  their 
operation  as  suspended;  taking  it  for  granted  that 
we  are  in  either  case  to  observe  a  neutral  conduct 
in  fact. 

But  suppose  the  contest  unsuccessful  on  the  part 
of  the  present  governing  powers  of  France,  what 
would  then  be  our  situation  with  the  future  govern 
ment  of  that  country? 

Should  we  not  be  branded  and  detested  by  it  as 
the  worst  of  ingrates? 

When  it  is  added,  that  the  restoration  of  the 
monarchy  would  be  very  naturally  attributed  to 
the  interposition  of  Great  Britain,  the  reflection  just 
suggested  acquires  peculiar  weight  and  importance. 

But  against  this  may  be  placed  the  consideration, 
that  in  the  event  of  the  success  of  the  present 
governing  powers,  we  should  stand  on  much  worse 
ground,  by  having  considered  the  operation  of  the 
treaties  as  suspended,  than  by  having  pursued  a 
contrary  conduct. 

This  is  not  clear,  for  the  reasons  just  given ;  unless 
we  are  also  willing,  if  called  upon,  to  become  parties 
in  the  war.  But  admitting  that  the  course  of  con 
sidering  the  treaties  as  in  present  operation  would 
give  us  a  claim  of  merit  with  France,  in  the  event  of 
the  establishment  of  the  republic,  our  affairs  with 
that  country  would  not  stand  so  much  the  better  on 
this  account,  as  they  would  stand  worse  for  giving 
operation  to  the  treaties,  should  the  monarchy  be 
restored. 


39°  Alexander  Hamilton 

We  should  still  have  to  offer  a  better  claim  to  the 
friendship  of  France  than  any  other  Power — the  not 
taking  side  with  her  enemies,  the  early  acknowledg 
ment  of  the  republic  by  the  reception  of  its  minister, 
and  such  good  offices  as  have  been  and  may  be 
rendered,  consistently  with  a  sincere  neutrality. 

The  reasons,  too,  which  induced  us  not  to  go 
further,  will  have  their  due  weight  in  times  that  shall 
restore  tranquillity  and  moderation  and  sober  reflec 
tion!  They  will  justify  us  even  to  France  herself. 

Is  there  not,  however,  danger  that  a  refusal  to 
admit  the  operation  of  the  treaties  might  occasion 
an  immediate  rupture  with  France? 

A  danger  of  this  sort  cannot  be  supposed,  without 
supposing  such  a  degree  of  intemperance  on  the  part 
of  France  as  will  finally  force  us  to  quarrel  with  her 
or  to  embark  with  her.  And  if  such  be  her  temper, 
a  fair  calculation  of  hazards  will  lead  us  to  risk  her 
displeasure  in  the  first  instance.  An  inquiry  natur 
ally  arises  of  this  kind :  Whether  from  the  nature  of 
the  treaties  they  have  any  such  intrinsic  value  as  to 
render  it  inexpedient  to  put  them  in  jeopardy  by 
raising  a  question  about  their  operation  or  validity? 

Here,  it  may  freely  be  pronounced,  there  is  no 
difficulty.  The  military  stipulations  they  contain 
are  contrary  to  that  neutrality  in  the  quarrels  of 
Europe,  which  it  is  our  true  policy  to  cultivate  and 
maintain.  And  the  commercial  stipulations  to  be 
found  in  them  present  no  peculiar  advantages. 

They  seem  to  us  nothing  or  scarcely  any  thing 
which  an  inevitable  course  of  circumstances  would 
not  produce.  It  would  be  our  interest,  in  the  ab- 


Hamilton  to  Washington  391 

stract,  to  be  disengaged  from  them,  and  take  the 
chance  of  future  negotiation,  for  a  better  treaty  of 
commerce. 

It  might  be  observed,  by  way  of  objection  to  what 
has  been  said,  that  an  admission  of  the  operation  of 
the  treaties  has  been  considered  as  equivalent  to 
taking  part  with  France. 

It  is  true  that  the  two  things  have  been  considered 
as  equivalent  to  each  other,  and  in  strict  reasoning 
this  ought  to  be  the  case. — Because, 

1.  If  there  be  an  option,  the  effect  of  not  using  it 
would  be  to  pass  from  a  state  of  neutrality  to  that  of 
being  an  ally — thereby  authorizing  the  Powers  at  war 
with  France  to  treat  us  as  an  enemy. 

2.  If  under  the  operation  of  the  treaties  we  are 
not  bound  to  embark  in  the  war,  it  must  be  owing 
either  to  casualty  or  inability. 

If  the  war  is  not  offensive  on  the  part  of  France, 
an  attack  on  the  West  India  Islands  would  leave  us 
no  escape  but  in  the  plea  of  inability. 

The  putting  ourselves  in  a  situation,  in  which  it 
might  so  happen  that  we  could  preserve  our  neu 
trality  under  no  other  plea  than  that  of  inability,  is, 
in  all  the  politico-legal  relations  of  the  subject,  to 
make  ourselves  a  party.  In  other  words,  the  plac 
ing  ourselves  in  a  position  in  which  it  would  depend 
on  casualty  whether  it  would  not  become  our  duty 
to  engage  in  the  war,  ought,  in  a  general  question  of 
establishing  or  recognizing  a  political  relation  with 
a  foreign  Power  embarked  in  war,  to  be  regarded  in 
the  same  light  as  the  taking  part  with  that  Power  in 
the  war. 


392  Alexander  Hamilton 

To  do  a  thing,  or  to  contract  or  incur  an  obligation 
of  doing  it,  are  not  in  such  a  question  materially 
different. 

There  remain  some  miscellaneous  views  of  the  sub 
ject,  which  will  serve  to  fortify  the  general  reasoning 

I.  The   conduct   of   the   present   government  of 
France  gives  a  sanction  to  other  nations  to  use  some 
latitude    of  discretion  in  respect  to  their  treaties 
with  the  former  government.     That  government,  it- 
is  understood,  has   formally  declared   null  various 
stipulations  of  the  ancient  government  with  foreign 
Powers,  on  the  principle  of  their  inapplicability  to 
the  new  order  of  things.     Were  it  to  be  urged,  that 
an  erroneous  conduct  on  the  part  of  France  will  not 
justify  a  like  conduct  on  our  part,  it  might  be  solidly 
replied,  that  a  rule  of  practice  formally  adopted  by 
any  nation  for  regulating  its  political  obligations 
towards  other  nations,  may  justly  be  appealed  to  as 
a  standard  for  regulating  the  obligations  of  those 
nations  toward  her.     Suppose  this  general  ground 
to  have  been  explicitly  taken  by  France,  that  all 
treaties  made  by  the  old  government  became  void 
by  the  Revolution,  unless  recognized  by  the  existing 
authority,  can  it  be  doubted  that  every  other  nation 
would  have  had  a  right  to  adopt  the  same  principle 
of  conduct  towards  France?     It  cannot.     By  parity 
of  reasoning,  as  far  as  France  may  in  practice  have 
pursued  that  principle,  other  nations  may  justifiably 
plead  the  example. 

II.  In  addition  to  the  embarrassments  heretofore 
suggested  as  incident  to  the  admission  of  the  present 
operation  of  the  treaties,  this  very  particular  one 


Hamilton  to  Washington  393 

may  attend  our  case.  An  island  may  be  taken  by 
Great  Britain,  or  Holland,  with  the  avowed  intention 
of  holding  it  for  the  future  king  of  France,  the  suc 
cessor  of  Louis  XVI.  Can  it  be  possible  that  a 
treaty  made  with  Louis  XVI.  should  oblige  us  to 
embark  in  the  war  to  rescue  a  part  of  his  dominions 
from  his  immediate  successor?  Under  all  the  cir 
cumstances  of  the  case,  would  the  national  integrity 
of  delicacy  permit  it?  Was  it  clear  that  Louis 
merited  his  death  as  a  perfidious  tyrant,  the  last 
question  might  receive  a  different  answer  from 
what  can  now  be  given  to  it! 

Ought  the  United  States  to  involve  themselves  in 
a  dilemma  of  this  kind? 

III.  In  national  questions,  the  general  conduct  of 
nations  has  great  weight.     When  all  Europe  is,  or  is 
likely  to  be,  armed  in  opposition  to  the  authority  of 
the  present  government  of  France,  would  it  not  be 
to  carry  theory  to  an  extreme,  to  pronounce  that  the 
United  States  are  under  an  absolute,  indispensable 
obligation,  not  only  to  acknowledge  respectfully  the 
authority  of  that  government,  but  to  admit  the  im 
mediate  operation  of  treaties,  which  would  constitute 
them  at  once  its  ally? 

IV.  Prudence,  at  least,  seems  to  dictate  the  course 
of  reserving  the  question  in  order  that  further  re 
flection  and  a  more  complete  development  of  circum 
stances  shall  enable  us  to  make  a  decision  both  right 
and  safe.     It  does  not  appear  necessary  to  precipitate 
the  fixing  of  our  relations  to  France  beyond  the 
possibility  of  retraction.     It  is  putting  too  suddenly 
too  much  to  hazard. 


394  Alexander  Hamilton 

It  may  be  asked — Does  not  an  unqualified  recep 
tion  of  the  minister  determine  the  point? 

Perhaps  it  does  not;  yet  there  is  no  satisfactory 
guide  by  which  to  decide  the  precise  import  and  ex 
tent  of  such  a  reception  by  which  to  pronounce  that 
it  would  not  conclude  us  as  to  the  treaties.  There 
is  great  room  to  consider  the  epoch  of  receiving  a 
minister  from  the  republic  as  that  when  we  ought 
to  explain  ourselves  on  the  point  in  question — and 
silence  at  that  time  as  a  waiver  of  our  option. 

It  is  probable  that  on  the  part  of  France  it  will  be 
urged  to  have  this  effect ;  and  if  it  should  be  truly  so 
considered  by  her,  to  raise  the  question  afterwards 
would  lead  to  complaint,  accusation,  ill  humor. 

It  seems  most  candid  and  most  safe  to  anticipate 
— not  to  risk  the  imputation  of  inconsistency.  It 
seems  advisable  to  be  able  to  say  to  foreign  Powers, 
if  questioned:  "  In  receiving  the  minister  of  France, 
we  have  not  acknowledged  ourself  its  ally.  We  have 
reserved  the  point  for  future  consideration." 

It  may  be  asked,  whether  the  reception,  at  any 
rate,  is  not  inconsistent  with  the  reservation  recom 
mended. 

It  does  not  appear  to  be  so.  The  acknowledg 
ment  of  a  government  by  the  reception  of  its  am 
bassador,  and  the  acknowledgment  of  it  as  an  ally, 
are  things  different  and  separable  from  each  other. 
However,  the  first,  where  a  connection  before  existed 
between  the  two  nations,  may  imply  the  last,  if 
nothing  is  said;  this  implication  may  clearly  be  re 
pelled,  by  a  declaration  that  it  is  not  the  intention 
of  the  party.  Such  a  declaration  would  be  in  the 


Hamilton  to  Washington  395 

nature  of  a  protest  against  the  implication ;  and  the 
declared  intent  would  govern.  It  is  a  rule  that 
" expressum  facit  cessare  taciturn." 

It  may  likewise  be  asked  whether  we  are  not  too 
late  for  the  ground  proposed  to  be  taken — whether 
the  payment  on  account  of  the  debt  to  France, 
subsequent  to  the  last  change,  be  not  an  acknow 
ledgment  that  all  engagements  to  the  former  govern 
ment  are  to  be  fulfilled  to  the  present. 

The  two  objects  of  a  debt  in  money,  and  a  treaty 
of  alliance,  have  no  necessary  connection.  They  are 
governed  by  considerations  altogether  different  and 
irrelative. 

The  payment  of  a  debt  is  a  matter  of  perfect  and 
strict  obligation.  It  must  be  done  at  all  events.  It 
is  to  be  regulated  by  circumstances  of  time  and  place, 
and  ought  to  be  done  with  precise  punctuality. 

In  the  case  of  a  nation,  whoever  acquires  possession 
of  its  political  power,  whoever  becomes  master  of  its 
goods,  of  the  national  property,  must  pay  all  the  debts 
which  the  government  of  the  nation  has  contracted. 

In  like  manner,  on  the  principle  of  reciprocity,  the 
sovereign  in  possession  is  to  receive  the  debts  due  to 
the  government  of  the  nation.  These  debts  are  at 
all  events  to  be  paid ;  and  possession  alone  can  guide 
as  to  the  party  to  whom  they  are  to  be  paid. 

Questions  of  property  are  very  different  from 
those  of  political  connection. 

Nobody  can  doubt  that  the  debt  due  to  France  is 
at  all  events  to  be  paid,  whatever  form  of  government 
may  take  place  in  that  country. 

As  little  is  it  to  be  doubted,  that  it  is  possible  for 


396  Alexander  Hamilton 

a  form  of  government  to  take  place  in  France,  justi 
fying  the  dissolution  of  a  political  connection  which 
before  subsisted  with  that  country. 

Treaties  between  nations  are  capable  of  being 
affected  by  a  great  variety  of  considerations,  casuali- 
ties,  and  contingencies.  Forms  of  government,  it  is 
evident,  may  be  the  considerations  of  them.  Re 
volutions  of  government,  by  changing  those  forms, 
may  consequently  vary  the  obligations  of  parties. 

Hence  the  payment  of  a  debt  to  the  sovereign  in 
possession  does  not  imply  an  admission  of  the  present 
operation  of  political  treaties.  It  may  so  happen, 
that  there  is  a  strict  obligation  to  pay  the  debt,  and 
a  perfect  right  to  withdraw  from  the  treaties. 

And  while  we  are  not  bound  to  expose  ourselves 
to  the  resentment  of  the  governing  power  of  France, 
by  refusing  to  pay  a  debt  at  the  time  and  place  stipu 
lated;  so  neither  are  we  bound,  pending  a  contested 
revolution  of  government,  to  expose  ourselves  to 
the  resentment  of  other  nations,  by  declaring  our 
selves  the  ally  of  that  power,  in  virtue  of  treaties 
contracted  with  a  former  sovereign,  who  still  pursues 
his  claim  to  govern,  supported  by  the  general  sense 
and  arm  of  Europe. 

ALEXANDER  HAMILTON. 


HAMILTON   TO    WASHINGTON 

May  2,  1793. 

Answers  to  remaining  questions  proposed  by  the  President 
of  the  United  States  on  the  i8th  of  April  last 

QUESTION  4. — Are  the  United  States  obliged  by 
good  faith  to  consider  the  treaties  heretofore  made 


Hamilton  to  Washington  397 

with  France  as  applying  to  the  present  situation  of 
the  parties  ?  May  they  either  renounce  them  or  hold 
them  suspended  till  the  government  of  France  shall 
be  established? 

ANSWER. — The  war  is  plainly  an  offensive  war  on 
the  part  of  France.  Burlemaqui,  an  approved  writer, 
Vol.  II.,  Part  IV.,  Chapter  III.,  sec.  4  and  5,  thus 
defines  the  different  species  of  war:  "  Neither  are  we 
to  believe  (says  he)  that  he  who  first  injures  another 
begins  by  that  an  offensive  war,  and  that  the  other, 
who  demands  satisfaction  for  the  injury  received,  is 
always  upon  the  defensive.  There  are  a  great  many 
unjust  acts  which  may  kindle  a  war,  and  which,  how 
ever,  are  not  the  war,  as  the  ill  treatment  of  a  prince's 
ambassador,  the  plundering  of  his  subjects,  etc. 

"  If,  therefore,  we  take  up  arms  to  revenge  such 
an  unjust  act,  we  commence  an  offensive  but  a  just 
war;  and  the  prince  who  has  done  the  injury,  and 
will  not  give  satisfaction,  makes  a  defensive  but  an 
unjust  war.  An  offensive  war  is,  therefore,  unjust 
only  when  it  is  undertaken  without  a  lawful  cause; 
and  then  the  defensive  war,  which  on  other  occasions 
might  be  unjust,  becomes  just. 

"  We  must,  therefore,  affirm  in  general,  that  the  first 
who  takes  up  arms,  whether  justly  or  unjustly,  com 
mences  an  offensive  war;  and  he  who  opposes  him, 
whether  with  or  without  reason,  begins  a  defensive 


war." 


This  definition  of  offensive  and  defensive  war  is 
conformable  to  the  ideas  of  writers  on  the  laws  of 
nations  in  general,  and  is  adopted  almost  verbatim 
by  Barbeyrac,  in  his  notes  on  III.  and  IV.  of  Book 


Alexander  Hamilton 

VII. ,  Chap.  VI.,  Puffendorf's  Law  of  Nature  and 
Nations. 

France,  it  is  certain,  was  the  first  to  declare  war 
against  every  one  of  the  Powers  with  which  she  is  at 
war.  Whether  she  had  good  cause  or  not,  therefore, 
in  each  instance,  the  war  is  completely  offensive  on 
her  part. 

The  forms  which  she  has  employed  in  some  of 
her  declarations  (when,  after  reciting  the  aggressions 
she  alleges  to  have  been  committed  against  her  by 
a  particular  Power,  she  proceeds  to  pronounce  that 
war  exists  between  her  and  such  Power)  cannot  alter 
the  substance  of  the  thing.  The  aggressions  com 
plained  of,  if  ever  so  well  founded,  and  however  they 
may  have  been  of  a  nature  to  kindle  the  war,  were  not 
the  war  itself.  The  war  began,  in  each  case,  by  the 
declaration  and  by  the  commencement  of  hostilities 
on  the  part  of  France.  It  was,  therefore,  clearly 
offensive  on  her  part. 

With  regard  to  the  causes  that  led  to  the  war  in 
each  case,  it  requires  more  exact  information  than  I 
have  to  pronounce  upon  them  with  confidence.  As 
regards  Austria  and  Prussia,  the  suggestion  on  one 
hand  is,  that  a  combination  was  formed  to  over 
throw  the  new  constitution  of  France,  and  that  the 
declaration  on  the  part  of  the  latter  country  was 
only  an  anticipation  of  what  would  soon  have  pro 
ceeded  from  the  confederated  Powers.  On  the  other 
hand,  it  is  affirmed  that  the  preparations  and  ar 
rangements  on  their  part  were  merely  provisional  and 
eventual,  and  that  the  republican  party  in  France 
precipitated  a  war  under  the  idea  that  it  would  fur- 


Hamilton  to  Washington  399 

nish  opportunities  for  accusing  and  criminating  the 
king's  administration,  and  finally  overthrow  the 
royalty.  Waiving  all  definitive  opinion  on  this 
point,  better  guides  will  enable  us  to  pronounce 
with  more  certainty  in  the  other  cases. 

In  respect  to  Holland,  there  seems  to  be  no  doubt 
that  the  aggression  began  with  France. 

France,  in  different  treaties,  had  recognized  a 
right  in  the  Dutch  to  the  exclusive  navigation  of 
the  river  Scheldt. 

It  appears  that  she  had  a  leading  agency  in  ad 
justing  a  controversy  on  this  point,  between  the  late 
Emperor  Joseph  and  the  Netherlands. 

The  28th  article  of  a  treaty  between  those  parties, 
concluded  at  Fontainebleau  the  8th  of  November, 
1785,  is  in  these  words: 

"His  most  Christian  Majesty  contributed  to  the 
completion  of  the  arrangement  made  between  the 
high  contracting  parties  (namely,  the  Emperor  and 
the  States  General),  by  his  friendly  intervention  and 
his  effectual  and  just  mediation.  His  said  Majesty  is 
requested  by  the  high  contracting  parties  to  charge 
himself  likewise  with  being  the  guaranty  of  the 
present  treaty." 

Nevertheless,  the  pro  visionary  Executive  Council, by 
a  decree  of  the  1 6th  of  November,  1792,  break  through 
all  these  formal  and  express  engagements,  on  the 
pretext  of  their  being  contrary  to  natural  right,  and 
declare  the  navigation  of  the  Scheldt  and  Meuse  free. 

Such  an  infraction  of  treaties,  on  such  a  ground, 
cannot  be  justified  without  subverting  all  the  founda 
tions  of  positive  and  pactitious  right  among  nations. 


4OO  Alexander  Hamilton 

It  is  equally  agreeable  to  the  doctrine  of  theorists, 
and  to  the  practice  of  nations,  that  rights  to  the 
common  use  of  waters  of  the  description  in  question, 
may  be  relinquished  and  qualified  by  treaty.  To 
resume  them,  therefore,  on  the  ground  of  the  im- 
prescripiibility,  as  it  is  called,  of  natural  rights,  is  to 
set  up  a  new  rule  of  conduct,  contrary  to  the  common 
sense  and  common  practice  of  mankind,  amounting, 
in  the  party  which  attempts  the  resumption,  to  an 
unequivocal  injury  to  the  party  against  which  it  is 
attempted. 

In  respect  to  Great  Britain  the  case  is  not  equally 
clear;  but  there  is  sufficient  ground  to  pronounce, 
that  she  had  cause  of  complaint,  prior  to  any  given 
on  her  part. 

It  is  known  that  in  the  early  periods  of  the  French 
Revolution  she  adopted  the  ground  of  neutrality,  and 
nothing  is  alleged  against  her  till  after  the  loth  of 
August. 

That  event  led  her  to  withdraw  her  minister  from 
the  court  of  France;  but  before  his  departure,  he 
left  a  note  declarative  of  the  intention  of  Great 
Britain  to  pursue  still  a  pacific  course,  accompanied, 
indeed,  with  a  cautious  intimation  that  personal 
violence  to  the  king  would  excite  the  general 
indignation  of  Europe. 

But  it  will  hardly  be  affirmed  that  this  procedure 
amounted  to  an  aggression.  To  recall  a  minister 
from,  or  not  to  keep  one  at,  any  court,  is  of  itself  an 
act  of  indifference.  To  recall,  under  such  circum 
stances  as  took  place  on  the  icth  of  August,  was  not 
an  extraordinary  step.  Every  government  had  a 


Hamilton  to  Washington  401 

right  to  deliberate,  and  was  bound  for  its  own  safety 
to  consider  well,  when  it  would  recognize  a  new 
order  of  things.  The  keeping  of  a  minister  at  France, 
after  the  deposition  of  the  king,  might  be  deemed  a 
sanction  of  the  change,  and,  indeed,  was  useless,  until 
it  was  intended  to  give  that  sanction. 

It  was  not  therefore  incumbent  upon  any  Power 
to  pursue  this  course,  especially  one  which  was  not 
in  the  condition  of  an  ally. 

The  intimation  with  regard  to  the  king,  to  charac 
terize  it  in  the  most  exceptionable  light,  was  at  most 
an  act  of  officiousness.  Relating  to  a  thing  not  at 
the  time  in  agitation,  it  could  only  be  considered  as 
a  caution  to  avoid  a  measure  which  might  beget 
misunderstanding. 

The  conduct  of  France  shows  that  she  did  not  at 
the  time  consider  this  step  as  an  injury,  for  she  con 
tinued  a  minister  at  the  court  of  London,  and  con 
tinued  to  negotiate. 

The  next  step  of  Great  Britain  in  order  of  time, 
which  is  complained  of  by  France,  and  the  first  of  a 
really  hostile  complexion,  is  the  restriction  on  the 
exportation  of  corn  to  France,  by  way  of  exception 
to  a  general  permission  to  export  that  article. 

This  was  an  unfriendly  measure.  It  happened,  as 
far  as  I  am  able  to  trace  it,  in  the  latter  part  of 
December,  1792. 

But  prior  to  these  causes  of  dissatisfaction,  an 
alarm  had  been  given  by  France  to  Great  Britain 

The  Convention,  on  the  igth  of  November,  passed 
a  decree  in  these  words: 

"  The  National  Convention  declare,  in  the  name  of 

VOL.  IV. — 26. 


402  Alexander  Hamilton 

the  French  nation,  that  they  will  grant  FRATERNITY 
and  ASSISTANCE  TO  EVERY  PEOPLE  who  wish  to  re- 
cover  their  liberty;  and  they  charge  the  executive 
power  to  send  the  necessary  orders  to  the  generals 
to  give  assistance  to  such  people,  and  to  defend  those 
citizens  who  may  have  been  or  who  may  be  vexed  for  the 
cause  of  liberty."  Which  decree  was  ordered  to  be 
printed  IN  ALL  LANGUAGES. 

This  decree  ought  justly  to  be  regarded  in  an 
exceptionable  light  by  the  government  of  every 
country.  For  though  it  be  lawful  and  meritorious 
to  assist  a  people  in  a  virtuous  and  rational  struggle 
for  liberty,  when  the  particular  case  happens,  yet  it  is 
not  justifiable  in  any  government  or  nation  to  hold 
out  to  the  world  a  general  invitation  and  encourage 
ment  to  revolution  and  insurrection,  under  a  promise 
of  fraternity  and  assistance. 

Such  a  step  is  of  a  nature  to  disturb  the  repose  of 
mankind,  to  excite  fermentation  in  every  country, 
to  endanger  government  everywhere.  Nor  can 
there  be  a  doubt  that  wheresoever  a  spirit  of  this 
kind  appears,  it  is  lawful  to  repress  and  repel  it. 

But  this  generally  exceptionable  proceeding  might 
be  looked  upon  by  Great  Britain  as  having  a  more 
particular  reference  to  her,  from  some  collateral 
circumstances. 

It  is  known  that  various  societies  were  instituted 
in  Great  Britain  with  the  avowed  object  of  reforms 
in  the  government.  These  societies  presented  ad 
dresses  to  the  Convention  of  France,  and  received 
answers,  containing  an  interchange  of  sentiments 
justly  alarming  to  the  British  Government. 


Hamilton  to  Washington  403 

It  will  suffice,  by  way  of  illustration,  to  cite  pass 
ages  from  two  of  these  answers,  each  given  by  the 
President  of  the  Convention,  at  a  sitting  on  the  28th 
of  November:  one,  to  a  deputation  from  the  Society 
for  Constitutional  Information  in  London ;  the  other, 
to  a  deputation  of  English  and  Irish  citizens  at  Paris. 

"The  shades  of  PENN,  of  HAMPDEN,  and  of  SYD 
NEY  hover  over  your  heads,  and  the  moment  without 
doubt  approaches  in  which  the  French  will  bring  con 
gratulations  to  the  NATIONAL  CONVENTION  OF  GREAT 
BRITAIN. 

"  Nature  and  principles  draw  towards  us  England, 
Scotland,  and  Ireland.  Let  the  cries  of  friendship 
resound  through  the  two  republics.  Again  prin 
ciples  are  waging  war  against  tyranny,  which  will 
fall  under  the  blows  of  philosophy.  Royalty  in 
Europe  is  either  destroyed  or  on  the  point  of  perish 
ing  on  the  ruins  of  feodalty;  and  the  declaration  of 
rights  placed  by  the  side  of  thrones  is  a  devouring  fire 
which  will  consume  them.  WORTHY  REPUBLICANS," 
etc. 

Such  declarations  to  such  societies  are  a  comment 
upon  the  decree,  are  in  every  sense  inconsistent  with 
what  was  due  to  a  just  respect  for  a  neutral  nation, 
and  amounted  to  so  direct  a  patronage  of  a  revolu 
tion,  in  the  essential  principles  of  its  government,  as 
authorized  even  a  declaration  of  war. 

It  is  true  that  Mr.  Chauvelin,  in  a  note  to  Lord 
Grenville,  of  the  2;th  of  December,  1792,  declares 
that  the  "  National  Convention  never  meant  that  the 
French  Republic  should  favor  insurrections,  should 
espouse  the  quarrels  of  a  few  seditious  persons,  or 


404  Alexander  Hamilton 

should  endeavor  to  excite  disturbances  in  any  neu 
tral  or  friendly  country;  the  decree  being  only  ap 
plicable  to  a  people  who,  after  having  acquired  their 
liberty,  should  call  for  the  fraternity,  the  assistance 
of  the  Republic,  by  the  solemn  and  unequivocal  ex 
pression  of  the  general  will." 

But  this  explanation  could  not  change  the  real 
nature  and  tendency  of  the  decree,  which,  holding 
out  a  general  promise  of  fraternity  and  assistance 
to  every  people  who  wished  to  recover  their  liberty, 
did  favor  insurrections,  and  was  calculated  to  excite 
disturbances  in  neutral  and  friendly  countries. 

Still  less  could  it  efface  the  exceptionable  and 
offensive  nature  of  the  reception  which  was  given, 
and  the  declarations  which  were  made,  to  the  revo 
lutionary  or  reforming  societies  of  Great  Britain. 

The  answer  of  Lord  Grenville  very  justly  ob 
serves,  that  "Neither  satisfaction  nor  security  is 
found  in  the  terms  of  an  explanation  which  still  de 
clares  to  the  promoters  of  sedition  in  every  country, 
what  are  the  cases  in  which  they  may  count  before 
hand  on  the  support  and  succor  of  France,  and 
which  reserves  to  that  country  the  right  of  mixing 
herself  in  the  internal  affairs  of  another,  whenever 
she  shall  judge  it  proper,  and  on  principles  incom 
patible  with  the  political  institutions  of  all  the 
countries  of  Europe. " 

Besides  the  declarations  which  have  been  men 
tioned  to  the  different  English  societies,  and  which 
apply  particularly  to  Great  Britain,  there  are  other 
acts  of  France  which  were  just  causes  of  umbrage 
and  alarm  to  all  the  governments  of  Europe. 


Hamilton  to  Washington  405 

Her  decree  of  the  i5th  of  December  is  one  of  them. 
This  decree,  extraordinary  in  every  respect,  which 
contemplates  the  total  subversion  of  all  the  ancient 
establishments  of  every  country  into  which  the  arms 
of  France  should  be  carried,  has  the  following  article : 

"  The  French  nation  declare — That  it  will  treat  as 
enemies  the  people  who,  refusing  or  renouncing  liberty 
and  equality,  are  desirous  of  preserving  their  prince 
and  privileged  casts,  or  of  entering  into  an  accommoda 
tion  with  them.  The  nation  promises  and  engages 
not  to  lay  down  its  arms  until  the  sovereignty  and 
liberty  of  the  people,  on  whose  territories  the  French 
armies  shall  have  entered,  shall  be  established,  and 
not  to  consent  to  any  arrangement  or  treaty  with  the 
prince  and  privileged  persons  so  dispossessed,  with 
whom  the  republic  is  at  war." 

This  decree  cannot  but  be  regarded  as  an  outrage 
little  short  of  a  declaration  of  war  against  every  gov 
ernment  of  Europe,  and  as  a  violent  attack  upon 
the  freedom  of  opinion  of  all  mankind. 

The  incorporation  of  the  territories  conquered  by 
the  arms  of  France  with  France  herself,  is  another  of 
the  acts  alluded  to,  as  giving  just  cause  of  umbrage 
and  alarm  to  neutral  nations  in  general.  It  is  a  prin 
ciple  well  established  by  the  laws  of  nations,  that 
the  property  and  dominion  of  conquered  places  do 
not  become  absolute  in  the  conquerors,  until  they 
have  been  ceded  or  relinquished  by  a  treaty  of  peace 
or  some  equivalent  termination  of  the  war. 

Till  then  it  is  understood  to  be  in  a  state  of  sus 
pense  (the  conqueror  having  only  a  possessory  and 
qualified  title),  liable  to  such  a  disposition  as  may 


406  Alexander  Hamilton 

be  made  by  the  compact  which  terminates  the  war. 
Hence  the  citizen  of  the  neutral  nation  can  acquire 
no  final  or  irrevocable  title  to  land  by  purchase  of 
the  conqueror  during  the  continuance  of  the  war. 
This  principle,  it  is  evident,  is  of  the  greatest  im 
portance  to  the  peace  and  security  of  nations — 
greatly  facilitating  an  adjustment  of  the  quarrels  in 
which  they  happen  at  any  time  to  be  involved. 

But  the  incorporation  which  has  been  mentioned, 
and  which  actually  took  place  with  respect  to  the 
territories  of  different  Powers,  Savoy,  Antwerp,  etc., 
was  a  direct  violation  of  that  very  important  and 
fundamental  principle;  and  of  those  rights  which 
the  laws  of  war  reserve  to  every  Power  at  war;  a 
violation  tending  to  throw  insuperable  difficulties  in 
the  way  of  peace.  After  once  having  adopted  those 
territories  as  part  of  herself,  she  became  bound  to 
maintain  them  to  the  last  extremity  by  all  those 
peremptory  rules  which  forbid  a  nation  to  consent 
to  its  own  dismemberment. 

That  incorporation,  therefore,  changed  entirely  the 
principle  of  the  war  on  the  part  of  France.  It  ceased 
to  be  a  war  for  the  defence  of  her  rights,  for  the  pre 
servation  of  her  liberty.  It  became  a  war  of  acquisi 
tion,  of  extension  of  territory  and  dominion,  and  in 
a  manner  altogether  subversive  of  the  laws  and 
usages  of  nations,  and  tending  to  the  aggrandize 
ment  of  France,  to  a  degree  dangerous  to  the  inde 
pendence  and  safety  of  every  country  in  the  world. 

There  is  no  principle  better  supported  by  the  doc 
trines  of  writers,  the  practice  of  nations,  and  the 
dictates  of  right  reason,  than  this — that  whenever  a 


Hamilton  to  Washington  407 

nation  adopts  maxims  of  conduct  tending  to  the 
disturbance  of  the  tranquillity  and  established  order 
of  its  neighbors,  or  manifesting  a  spirit  of  self-ag 
grandizement,  it  is  lawful  for  other  nations  to  com 
bine  against  it,  and  by  force  to  control  the  effects  of 
those  maxims  and  that  spirit.  The  conduct  of 
France  in  the  instances  which  have  been  stated, 
calmly  and  impartially  viewed,  was  an  offence 
against  nations,  which  naturally  made  it  a  common 
cause  among  them  to  check  her  career. 

The  pretext  of  propagating  liberty  can  make  no 
difference.  Every  nation  has  a  right  to  carve  out 
its  own  happiness  in  its  own  way,  and  it  is  the  height 
of  presumption  in  another  to  attempt  to  fashion  its 
political  creed. 

These  acts  and  proceedings  are  all  prior  in  time  to 
the  last  aggressive  step  of  Great  Britain,  the  ordering 
out  of  the  kingdom  the  person  who  was  charged  with 
a  diplomatic  mission  to  that  court  from  the  govern 
ment  of  France. 

The  style  and  manner  of  that  proceeding  rendered 
it  undoubtedly  an  insult,  and  if  the  conduct  of 
France  before  that  time  had  been  unexceptionable, 
the  war  declared  by  France,  though  offensive  in  its 
nature,  would  have  been  justifiable  in  its  motive. 

With  regard  to  Spain,  the  war  was  likewise  de 
clared  by  France,  and  is  consequently  offensive  on 
her  part.  The  conduct  of  the  former  towards  the 
latter,  previous  to  this  event,  appears  not  only  to 
have  been  moderate,  but  even  timid. 

The  war  on  the  part  of  Portugal  appears  to  have 
been  offensive. 


408  Alexander  Hamilton 

The  result  from  what  has  been  said  is,  that  the 
war  in  which  France  is  engaged  is  in  fact  an  offensive 
war  on  her  part  against  all  the  Powers  with  which 
she  is  engaged,  except  one;  and  in  principle,  to  speak 
in  the  most  favorable  terms  for  her,  is  at  least  a 
mixed  case — a  case  of  mutual  aggression. 

The  inference  from  this  state  of  things  is  as  plain 
as  it  is  important.  The  casus  fcederis  of  the  guaranty 
in  the  treaty  of  alliance  between  the  United  States 
and  France  cannot  take  place,  though  her  West 
India  Islands  should  be  attacked. 

The  express  denomination  of  this  treaty  is  "  Traite 
d' Alliance  eventuelle  et  defensive" — Treaty  of  Alli 
ance  eventual  and  defensive. 

The  second  article  of  the  treaty  also  calls  it 
a  "defensive  alliance."  This,  then,  constitutes  the 
leading  feature,  the  characteristic  quality  of  the 
treaty.  By  this  principle  every  stipulation  in  it  is 
to  be  judged. 


HAMILTON   TO   WASHINGTON  x 

(Cabinet  Paper.) 

May  15,  1793. 
State  of  facts  as  supposed 

Mr.  Genet,  Minister  Plenipotentiary  from  the  Re 
public  of  France,  arrives  in  Charleston.  There  he 
causes  two  privateers  to  be  fitted  out,  to  which  he 

1  This  letter  marks  the  beginning  of  the  troubles  with  Genet.  That 
zealous  and  annoying  individual,  as  soon  as  he  had  landed,  commis 
sioned  privateers  which  at  once  began  to  prey  on  British  commerce, 
seizing  one  vessel  within  the  capes  of  the  Delaware.  In  general  he 
made  the  United  States  a  base  of  operations  against  England,  and 
undertook  to  drag  us  into  war  as  the  ally  of  France.  This  letter  and 
those  which  follow  are  almost  entirely  self-explanatory. 


Hamilton  to  Washington  409 

issues  commissions  to  cruise  against  the  enemies  of 
France.  There  also  the  privateers  are  manned,  and 
partly  with  citizens  of  the  United  States,  who  are 
enlisted  or  engaged  for  the  purpose  without  the 
privity  or  permission  of  the  government  of  this 
country,  before  even  Mr.  Genet  has  delivered  his 
credentials,  or  been  recognized  as  a  public  minister. 
One  or  both  of  these  privateers  make  captures  of 
British  vessels  in  the  neighborhood  of  our  coast,  and 
bring  or  send  their  prizes  into  our  ports.  The  Brit 
ish  Minister  Plenipotentiary,  among  other  things, 
demands  a  restitution  of  these  prizes.  Ought  the 
demand  to  be  complied  with? 

I  am  of  opinion  that  it  ought  to  be  complied  with, 
and  for  the  following  reasons. 

The  proceedings  in  question  are  highly  exception 
able,  both  as  they  respect  our  rights  and  as  they 
make  us  an  instrument  of  hostilities  against  Great 
Britain. 

The  jurisdiction  of  every  independent  nation  within 
its  own  territories  naturally  excludes  all  exercise  of 
authority  by  any  other  government  within  those 
territories,  unless  by  its  own  consent,  or  in  conse 
quence  of  stipulations  in  treaties.  Every  such  ex 
ercise  of  authority,  therefore,  not  warranted  by 
consent  or  treaty,  is  an  intrusion  on  the  jurisdiction 
of  the  country  within  which  it  is  exercised,  and 
amounts  to  an  injury  and  affront,  more  or  less  great, 
according  to  the  nature  of  the  case. 

The  equipping,  manning,  and  commissioning  of 
vessels  of  war — the  enlisting,  levying,  or  raising  of 
men  for  military  service,  whether  by  land  or  sea, 


410  Alexander  Hamilton 

all  which  are  essentially  of  the  same  nature,  are 
among  the  highest  and  most  important  exercises  of 
sovereignty. 

It  is,  therefore,  an  injury  and  an  affront  of  a  very 
serious  kind,  for  one  nation  to  do  acts  of  the  above 
description  within  the  territories  of  another,  without 
its  consent  or  permission. 

This  is  a  principle  so  obvious  in  itself,  that  it  does 
not  stand  in  need  of  confirmation  from  authorities; 
yet  the  following  passage  from  VATEL,  as  to  one  of 
the  points  included  in  the  case,  is  so  pertinent  and 
forcible,  that  it  cannot  be  improper  to  quote  it.  It 
is  found  Book  III.,  Chap.  II.,  sec.  15,  in  these  words; 
"  As  the  right  of  levying  soldiers  belongs  solely  to  the 
nation,  so  no  person  is  to  enlist  soldiers  in  a  foreign 
country  without  the  permission  of  the  sovereign. 
They  who  undertake  to  enlist  soldiers  in  a  foreign 
country,  without  the  sovereign's  permission,  and 
in  general,  whoever  alienates  the  subjects  of  another, 
violates  one  of  the  most  sacred  rights  both  of  the 
prince  and  of  the  state.  Foreign  recruiters  are 
hanged  immediately,  and  very  justly;  as  it  is  not  to 
be  presumed  that  their  sovereign  ordered  them  to 
commit  the  crime;  and  if  they  did  receive  such  an 
order,  they  ought  not  to  obey  it,  their  sovereign 
having  no  right  to  command  what  is  contrary  to  the 
law  of  nature.  It  is  not,  I  say,  apprehended  that 
these  recruiters  act  by  order  of  their  sovereign, 
and  usually  they  who  have  practised  seduction  only 
are,  if  taken,  severely  punished.  If  they  have  used 
violence,  and  made  their  escape,  they  are  claimed, 
and  the  men  they  have  carried  off  demanded.  But 


Hamilton  to  Washington  411 

if  it  appears  that  they  acted  by  order,  such  a  proceeding 
in  a  foreign  sovereign  is  justly  considered  as  an  injury, 
and  as  a  sufficient  cause  for  declaring  war  against  him, 
unless  he  condescends  to  make  suitable  reparation.1' 

The  word  soldier,  here  made  use  of,  is  to  be  under 
stood  to  mean  all  persons  engaged  or  enlisted  for 
military  service,  seamen  as  well  as  landsmen.  The 
principle  applies  equally  to  the  former  as  to  the 
latter.  This,  it  is  imagined,  will  not  be  questioned. 

In  the  case  under  consideration,  there  was  neither 
treaty  nor  consent  to  warrant  what  was  done;  and 
the  case  is  much  stronger  than  a  mere  levying  of 
men. 

The  injury  and  insult  to  our  government,  then, 
under  the  facts  stated,  cannot  be  doubted.  The 
right  to  reparation  follows  of  course.  It  remains 
to  inquire  whether  we  are  under  an  obligation 
to  redress  any  injury  which  may  have  accrued  to 
Great  Britain  from  the  irregularity  committed  to 
wards  us.  The  existence  of  such  an  obligation  is 
affirmed  upon  the  following  grounds : 

It  is  manifestly  contrary  to  the  duty  of  a  neutral 
nation  to  suffer  itself  to  be  made  the  instrument  of 
hostility  by  one  Power  at  war  against  another.  In 
doing  it,  such  nation  becomes  an  associate,  a  party. 

The  United  States  would  become  effectually  an 
instrument  of  hostility  to  France  against  the  other 
Powers  at  war,  if  France  could,  ad  libitum,  build, 
equip,  and  commission,  in  their  ports,  vessels  of  war- 
man  those  vessels  with  their  seamen — send  them  out 
of  their  ports  to  cruise  against  the  enemies  of  France 
— bring  or  send  the  vessels  and  property  taken  from 


412  Alexander  Hamilton 

those  enemies  into  their  ports — dispose  of  them 
there;  with  a  right  to  repeat  these  expeditions  as 
often  as  she  should  find  expedient. 

By  the  same  rule,  that  France  could  do  these 
things,  she  could  issue  commissions  among  us  at 
pleasure  for  raising  any  number  of  troops — could 
march  those  troops  toward  our  frontiers — attack 
from  thence  the  territories  of  Spain  or  England — 
return  with  the  plunder  which  had  been  taken  within 
our  territories — go  again  on  new  expeditions,  and 
repeat  them  as  often  as  was  found  advantageous. 

There  can  be  no  material  difference  between  the 
two  cases — between  preparing  the  means  in,  and 
carrying  on  from  our  ports  naval  expeditions,  and 
preparing  the  means  in,  and  carrying  on  from  our 
territories  land  expeditions  against  the  enemies  of 
France.  The  principle  in  each  case  would  be  the 
same. 

And  from  both  or  either  would  result  a  state  of 
war  between  us  and  those  enemies,  of  the  worst  kind 
for  them,  as  long  as  it  was  tolerated.  I  say  a  state  of 
war  of  the  worst  kind,  because  while  the  resources 
of  our  country  would  be  employed  in  annoying  them, 
the  instruments  of  this  annoyance  would  be  occa 
sionally  protected  from  pursuit  by  the  privileges  of 
our  ostensible  neutrality. 

It  is  easy  to  see  that  such  a  state  of  things  would 
not  be  tolerated  longer  than  till  it  was  perceived, 
and  that  we  should  quickly  and  with  good  reason  be 
treated  as  an  associate  of  the  power  whose  instru 
ment  we  had  been  made. 

If  it  is  inconsistent  with  the  duties  of  neutrality 


Hamilton  to  Washington  413 

to  permit  the  practices  described  to  an  indefinite 
extent,  it  must  be  alike  inconsistent  with  those 
duties  to  permit  them  to  any  extent.  The  quality 
of  the  fact,  not  the  degree,  must  be  the  criterion. 

It  has  indeed  been  agreed  that  we  are  bound  to 
prevent  the  practices  in  question  in  future,  and  that 
an  assurance  shall  be  given  to  the  British  minister, 
that  effectual  measures  will  be  taken  for  that  purpose. 

But  it  is  denied  that  we  are  bound  to  interpose, 
to  remedy  the  effects  which  have  hitherto  ensued. 

The  obligation  to  prevent  an  injury,  usually,  if 
not  universally,  includes  that  of  repairing  or  re 
dressing  it  when  it  has  happened. 

If  it  be  contrary  to  the  duty  of  the  United  States  as 
a  neutral  nation,  to  suffer  cruisers  to  be  fitted  out 
of  their  ports  to  annoy  the  British  trade,  it  comports 
with  their  duty  to  remedy  the  injury  which  may 
have  been  sustained,  when  it  is  in  their  power  so  to  do. 

If  it  be  said  that  what  was  done  took  place  before 
the  government  could  be  prepared  to  prescribe  a 
preventive,  and  that  this  creates  a  dispensation  from 
the  obligation  to  redress,  the  answer  is: 

That  a  government  is  responsible  for  the  conduct 
of  all  parts  of  a  community  over  which  it  presides; 
that  it  is  to  be  supposed  to  have  at  all  times  a  com 
petent  police  everywhere  to  prevent  infractions  of  its 
duty  toward  foreign  nations ;  that  in  the  case  in  ques 
tion,  the  magistracy  of  the  place  ought  not  to  have 
permitted  what  was  done,  and  that  the  government 
is  answerable  for  the  consequences  of  its  omissions. 

It  is  true  that  in  a  number  of  cases  a  government 
may  excuse  itself  for  the  non-performance  of  its 


414  Alexander  Hamilton 

duty,  on  account  of  the  want  of  time  to  take  due 
precautions,  from  the  consideration  of  the  thing 
having  been  unexpected  and  unforeseen,  etc.;  and 
justice  often  requires  that  excuses  of  this  kind,  bona 
fide  offered,  should  be  admitted  as  satisfactory. 

But  such  things  are  only  excuses,  not  justifica 
tions,  and  they  are  only  then  to  be  received  when  a 
remedy  is  not  within  the  reach  of  the  party. 

If  the  privateers  expedited  from  Charleston  had 
been  sent  to  the  French  dominions,  there  to  operate 
out  of  our  reach,  the  excuse  of  want  of  time  to  take 
due  precautions  ought  to  have  been  satisfactory  to 
Great  Britain.  But  now  that  they  have  sent  their 
prizes  into  our  ports,  that  excuse  cannot  avail  us. 
We  have  it  in  our  power  to  administer  a  specific 
remedy,  by  causing  restitution  of  the  property  taken, 
and  it  is  conceived  to  be  our  duty  to  do  so.  It  is 
objected  to  this,  that  the  commissions  which  were 
issued  are  valid  between  the  parties  at  war,  though 
irregular  with  respect  to  us ;  that  the  captures  made 
under  them  are  therefore  valid  captures,  vesting  the 
property  in  the  captors,  of  which  they  cannot  be  de 
prived  without  a  violation  of  their  rights,  and  an 
aggression  on  our  part. 

It  is  believed  to  be  true  that  the  commissions  are 
in  a  legal  sense  valid  as  between  the  parties  at  war. 
But  the  inference  drawn  from  this  position  does  not 
seem  to  follow. 

It  has  been  seen  that  what  has  been  done  on  the 
part  of  the  French  is  a  violation  of  our  rights,  for 
which  we  have  a  claim  to  reparation,  and  a  right  to 
make  war,  if  it  be  refused.  We  may  reasonably 


Hamilton  to  Washington  4J5 

demand,  then,  as  the  reparation  to  which  we  are 
entitled,  restitution  of  the  property  taken,  with  or 
without  an  apology  for  the  infringement  of  our 
sovereignty.  This  we  have  a  right  to  demand,  as  a 
species  of  reparation  consonant  with  the  nature  of 
the  injury,  and  enabling  us  to  do  justice  to  the  party, 
in  injuring  whom  we  have  been  made  instrumental. 
It  can  therefore  be  no  just  cause  of  complaint  on  the 
part  of  the  captors,  that  they  are  required  to  sur 
render  a  property,  the  means  of  acquiring  which  took 
their  origin  in  a  violation  of  our  rights. 

On  the  other  hand,  there  is  a  claim  upon  us  to 
arrest  the  effects  of  the  injury  or  annoyance  to 
which  we  have  been  made  accessory.  To  insist, 
therefore,  upon  the  restitution  of  the  property  taken 
will  be  to  enforce  a  right,  in  order  to  the  performance 
of  a  duty. 

The  effects  of  captures  under  the  commissions, 
however  valid  between  the  parties  at  war,  have  no 
validity  against  us.  Originating  in  a  violation  of 
our  rights,  we  are  nowise  bound  to  respect  them. 

Why,  then,  (it  may  be  asked)  not  send  them  to 
the  animadversion  and  decision  of  the  courts  of  jus 
tice?  Because  it  is  believed  they  are  not  competent 
to  the  decision;  the  whole  is  an  affair  between  the 
governments  of  the  parties  concerned,  to  be  settled 
by  reasons  of  state,  not  rules  of  law. 

'Tis  the  case  of  an  infringement  of  our  sover 
eignty,  to  the  prejudice  of  a  third  party;  in  which 
the  government  is  to  demand  a  reparation,  with  the 
double  view  of  vindicating  its  own  rights,  and  doing 
justice  to  the  suffering  party. 


4i 6  Alexander  Hamilton 

A  comparison  of  this  case  with  that  of  contraband 
articles  can  only  mislead — a  neutral  nation  has  a 
general  right  to  trade  with  a  Power  at  war.  The 
exception  of  contraband  articles  is  an  exception  of 
necessity;  it  is  a  qualification  of  the  general  right  of 
the  neutral  nation  in  favor  of  the  safety  of  the  belli 
gerent  party.  And  it  is  from  this  cause,  and  the 
difficulty  of  tracing  it  in  the  course  of  commercial 
dealings,  that  for  the  peace  of  nations,  the  external 
penalty  of  confiscation  is  alone  established.  The 
neutral  nation  is  only  bound  to  abandon  its  subjects 
to  that  penalty,  not  to  take  internal  measures  to 
prevent  and  punish  the  practice.  The  state  of 
peace  between  two  nations,  on  the  other  hand,  makes 
it  intrinsically  criminal  in  either  nation,  or  in  the 
subjects  of  either,  to  engage  in  actual  hostilities 
against  the  other.  The  sovereign  of  each  nation  is 
bound  to  prevent  this  by  internal  regulations  and 
measures;  and  of  course  to  give  redress  where  the 
offence  has  been  committed. 

What  has  been  agreed  to  be  done  in  the  present 
case  acknowledges  the  distinction  and  establishes 
the  consequences.  While  it  was  refused  to  inter 
fere  to  prevent  the  shipment  of  arms,  it  has  been 
agreed  that  measures  should  be  taken  towards 
punishing  our  citizens  who  engaged  on  board  the 
privateers;  and  to  assure  the  British  minister  that 
effectual  measures  would  be  taken  to  prevent  a 
repetition  of  the  thing  complained  of.  Hence  a 
recognized  distinction  of  principle,  and  a  virtual 
recognition  of  the  consequences  contended  for. 

As  little  to  the  purpose  is  the  example  of  cases  in 


Hamilton  to  Jefferson  417 

which  particular  nations  permit  the  levying  of  troops 
among  them  by  the  parties  at  war.  The  almost  con 
tinually  warlike  posture  of  Europe,  can  alone  have 
produced  the  toleration  of  a  practice  so  inconsistent 
with  morality  and  humanity;  but  allowing  these 
examples  their  full  force,  they  are  at  an  infinite 
distance  from  the  case  of  raising,  equipping,  and 
organizing,  within  the  neutral  territory  an  armed 
force — sending  it  on  expeditions  against  a  party  at 
war,  and  bringing  back  their  spoils  into  the  neutral 
country. 

If  the  view  which  has  been  taken  of  the  subject  be 
a  just  one,  Great  Britain  will  have  a  right  to  consider 
our  refusal  to  cause  restitution  to  be  made,  as  equi 
valent  to  our  becoming  an  accomplice  in  the  hostility 
— as  a  departure  from  neutrality — as  an  aggression 
upon  her.  Hence  we  shall  furnish  the  cause  of  war, 
and  endanger  the  existence  of  it. 

I  infer,  then,  that  we  equally  owe  it  to  ourselves, 
and  to  Great  Britain,  to  cause  restitution  to  be  made 
of  the  property  taken.  In  the  case  of  so  palpable 
and  serious  a  violation  of  our  rights,  aggravated  by 
several  collateral  circumstances,  the  mention  of 
which  is  purposely  waived,  a  decided  conduct  ap 
pears  most  consistent  with  our  honor  and  with  our 
future  safety.  A.  HAMILTON. 

HAMILTON   TO   JEFFERSON 
(Cabinet  Paper.) 
TREASURY  DEPARTMENT,  June  3,  1793. 

SIR: — It  was  not  till  within  an  hour  that  I  received 
your  letter  of  the  ist,  with  the  papers  accompanying 

VOL.  IV. — 27. 


4i 8  Alexander  Hamilton 

it.  I  approve  all  the  drafts  of  letters  as  they 
stand,  except  that  I  have  some  doubts  about  the 
concluding  sentence  of  that  on  the  subject  of  HEN- 
FIELD.  J  If  the  facts  are  (as  I  presume  they  are) 
established,  may  it  not  be  construed  into  a  wish  that 
there  may  be  found  no  law  to  punish  a  conduct  in 
our  citizens  which  is  of  a  tendency  dangerous  to  the 
peace  of  the  nation,  and  injurious  to  Powers  with 
whom  we  are  on  terms  of  peace  and  neutrality? 

I  should  also  like  to  substitute,  for  the  words, 
"have  the  favorable  issue  you  desire,"  these  words, 
"  issue  accordingly. " 

I  retain  till  to-morrow  the  paper  relating  to  an 
agent  to  the  Choctaws.  My  judgment  is  not  en 
tirely  made  up  on  the  point — the  state  of  my  family 
and  my  own  health  having  prevented  due  reflection 
upon  it. 

With  great  respect,  I  have  the  honor  to  be,  etc. 


HAMILTON   TO    WASHINGTON 

(Cabinet  Paper.) 

June  5,  1793. 

The  Secretary  of  the  Treasury,  to  whom  were 
referred,  by  the  President  of  the  United  States, 
sundry  documents  communicated  by  the  Minister 
Plenipotentiary  of  the  Republic  of  France,  respect 
fully  makes  the  following  report  thereupon: 

The  object  of  the  communication  appears  to  be 
to  engage  the  United  States  to  enter  into  arrange- 

1  Henfield  had  been  arrested  for  enlisting  at  Charleston  on  a  French 
privateer,  The  Citoyen  Genet,  in  order  to  serve  (to  quote  the  language 
of  the  Attorney-General)  "against  a  nation  at  peace  with  the  United 
States,  in  violation  of  treaties  and  the  supreme  law  of  the  land." 


Hamilton  to  Washington  419 

ments  for  discharging  the  residue  of  the  debt  which 
they  owe  to  France  by  an  anticipated  payment  of  the 
instalments  not  yet  due,  either  in  specie,  bank  bills 
of  equal  currency  with  specie,  or  in  government 
bonds,  bearing  interest,  and  payable  at  certain 
specified  periods,  upon  condition  that  the  sum  ad 
vanced  shall  be  invested  in  productions  of  the  United 
States  for  the  supply  of  the  French  dominions. 

This  object  is  the  same  which  came  under  con 
sideration  on  certain  propositions  lately  made  by 
Col.  W.  S.  Smith,  who  appears  to  have  been  charged 
by  the  Provisional  Executive  Council  of  France  with 
a  negotiation  concerning  it;  in  reference  to  which  it 
was  determined  by  the  President,  with  the  concurring 
opinions  of  the  Heads  of  Departments,  and  the  Attor 
ney-General,  that  the  measure  was  ineligible,  and 
that  the  proposer  would  be  informed  that  it  did  not 
consist  with  the  arrangements  of  the  government  to 
adopt  it. 

The  grounds  of  the  determination  were  purely 
political — nothing  has  hitherto  happened  to  weaken 
them.  The  decision  on  the  application  of  the  Min 
ister  Plenipotentiary  of  France  will  therefore  na 
turally  correspond  with  that  on  the  propositions  of 
Col.  Smith.  This,  indeed,  is  signified  to  be  the  in 
tention  of  the  President. 

It  consequently  only  remains  to  make  known  the 
determination  to  the  minister,  in  answer  to  his  ap 
plication,  with  or  without  reasons. 

The  following  considerations  seem  to  recommend 
a  simple  communication  of  the  determination  with 
out  reasons,  viz. : 


42O  Alexander  Hamilton 

I.  The   United  States  not  being  bound  by  the 
terms  of  their  contract  to  make  the  anticipated  pay 
ment  desired,  there  is  no  necessity  for  a  specification 
of  the  motives  for  not  doing  it. 

II.  No  adequate  reasons  but  the  true  ones  can  be 
assigned  for  the  non-compliance,   and  the  assign 
ment  of  these  would  not  be  wholly  without  in 
convenience.     The  mention  of  them  might  create 
difficulties  in  some  future  stage  of  affairs,  when  they 
may  have  lost  a  considerable  portion  of  their  force. 

The  following  answer,  in  substance,  is  presumed, 
then,  to  be  the  most  proper  which  can  be  given: 

"That  a  proposition  to  the  same  effect  was  not 
long  since  brought  forward  by  Col.  Smith,  as  having 
been  charged  with  a  negotiation  on  the  subject  by 
the  Provisional  Executive  Council  of  France.  That 
it  was  then,  upon  full  consideration,  concluded  not 
to  accede  to  the  measure,  for  reasons  which  continue 
to  operate,  and  consequently  lead  at  this  time  to 
the  same  conclusion;  that  an  explanation  of  these 
reasons  would  with  pleasure  be  entered  into,  were  it 
not  for  the  considerations  that  it  could  have  no 
object  of  present  utility,  and  might  rather  serve  to 
occasion  embarrassments  in  future." 

Which  is  humbly  submitted. 

A.  HAMILTON. 

The  above  having  been  communicated  by  the 
President  to  me,  I  wrote  the  following  letter. 

THOMAS  JEFFERSON. 


Jefferson  to  Washington  421 

JEFFERSON   TO   WASHINGTON 
(Cabinet  Paper.) 

June  6,  1793. 

SIR: — I  cannot  but  think  that  to  decline  the  pro 
positions  of  Mr.  Genet,  on  the  subject  of  our  debt, 
without  assigning  any  reason  at  all,  would  have  a 
very  dry  and  unpleasant  aspect  indeed.  We  are, 
then,  to  examine  what  are  good  reasons  for  the  re 
fusal,  which  of  them  may  be  spoken  out,  and  which 
not. 

1.  Want  of  confidence  in  the  continuance  of  the 
present  form  of  government,  and  consequently  the 
advance  to  them  might  commit  us  with  their  suc 
cessors.     This  cannot  be  spoken  out. 

2.  They  propose  to  take  the  debt  in  produce.     It 
would  be  better  for  us  that  it  should  be  done  in 
moderate  masses,  yearly,  than  in  one  year.     This 
cannot  be  professed. 

3.  When  Mr.  de  Calonne  was  Minister  of  Finance, 
a  Dutch  company  proposed  to  buy  up  the  whole  of 
our  debt,  by  dividing  it  into  actions  or  shares.     I 
think  Mr.  Claviere,  now  Minister  of  Finance,  was 
their  agent.     It  was  observed  to  Mr.  de  Calonne, 
that  to  create  such  a  mass  of  American  paper,  divide 
it  into  shares,  and  let  them  deluge  the  market,  would 
depreciate  them,  the  rest  of  our  paper,  and  our  credit 
in  finance ;  that  the  credit  of  a  nation  was  a  delicate 
and  important  thing,  and  should  not  be  risked  in 
such  an  operation.     Mr.  de  Calonne,  sensible  of  the 
injury  of  the  operation  to  us,  declined  it.     In  May, 
1791,  there  came  through  Mr.  Otto  a  similar  pro 
position  from  S.  J.  &  Co.     We  had  received  letters 


422  Alexander  Hamilton 

on  the  subject  from  Mr.  Short,  urging  this  same 
reason  strongly.  It  was  referred  to  the  Secretary  of 
the  Treasury,  who,  in  a  letter  to  yourself,  assigned 
the  reasons  against  it,  and  these  were  communi 
cated  to  Mr.  Otto,  who  acquiesced  in  them.  This 
objection,  then,  having  been  sufficient  to  decline  the 
proposition  twice  before,  and  having  been  urged  to 
the  two  preceding  forms  of  government  (the  ancient, 
and  that  of  1791),  will  it  not  be  considered  by  them 
as  founded  in  objections  to  the  present  form? 

4.  The  law  allows  the  whole  debt  to  be  paid  only 
on  condition  it  can  be  done  on  terms  advantageous 
to  the  United  States.     The  minister  foresees  this 
objection,  and  thinks  he  answers  it  by  observing  the 
advantage  which  the  payment  in  produce  will  occa 
sion.     It  would  be  easy  to  show  that  this  wras  not 
the  sort  of  advantage  the  Legislature  meant,  but  a 
lower  rate  of  interest. 

5.  I  cannot  but  suppose  that  the  Secretary  of  the 
Treasury,  who  is  much  more  familiar  than  I  am 
with  the  money  operations  of  the  Treasury,  would, 
on  examination,  be  able  to  derive  practical  objec 
tions  from  them.     We  pay  to  France  but  five  per 
cent.     The  people  of  this  country  would  never  sub 
scribe  their  money  but  for  six.     If  to  remedy  this 
obligation  at  less  than  five  per  cent,  were  offered  and 
accepted  by  Mr.  Genet,  he  must  part  with  them  im 
mediately  at  a  considerable  discount  to  indemnify 
the  loss  of  the  one  per  cent.,  and  at  a  still  greater 
discount  to  bring  them  down  to  par  with  our  present 
six  per  cents.,  so  that  the  operation  would  be  equally 
disgraceful  to  us  and  losing  to  them,  etc.,  etc. 


Jefferson  to  Washington  423 

I  think  it  very  material  myself  to  keep  alive  the 
friendly  sentiments  of  that  country,  as  far  as  can  be 
done  without  risking  war  or  double  payments.  If 
the  instalments  falling  due  in  this  year  can  be  ad 
vanced  without  incurring  more  dangers,  I  should  be 
for  doing  it.  We  now  see  by  the  declaration  of  the 
Prince  of  Saxe  Coburg,  on  the  part  of  Austria  and 
Prussia,  that  the  ultimate  point  they  desire  is  to 
restore  the  Constitution  of  1791.  Were  this  even 
to  be  done  before  the  pay  days  of  this  year,  there  is 
no  doubt  in  my  mind  but  that  that  government  (as 
republican  as  the  present  except  in  the  form  of  its 
Executive)  would  confirm  an  advance  so  moderate 
in  sum  and  time. 

I  am  sure  the  nation  of  France  would  never  suffer 
their  government  to  go  to  war  with  us  for  such  a 
bagatelle,  and  the  more  surely  if  that  bagatelle  shall 
have  been  granted  by  us  so  as  to  please  and  not  to 
displease  the  nation,  so  as  to  keep  their  affections 
engaged  on  our  side ;  so  that  I  should  have  no  fear 
in  advancing  the  instalments  of  this  year  at  epochs 
convenient  to  the  Treasury,  but  at  any  rate  I  should 
be  for  assigning  reasons  for  not  changing  the  form 
of  the  debt. 

These  thoughts  are  very  hastily  thrown  on  paper, 
as  will  be  but  too  evident.  I  have  the  honor  to 
be,  with  sentiments  of  sincere  attachment  and  re 
spect,  sir, 

Your  most  obedient  and  most  humble  servant, 

TH.  JEFFERSON. 


424  Alexander  Hamilton 

JEFFERSON   TO    WASHINGTON 

(Cabinet  Paper.) 

The  President  concurring  with  the  preceding  let 
ter,  and  so  signifying  to  Col.  Hamilton,  he  erased 
the  words,  " which  is  humbly  submitted,"  in  the 
former  report,  and  added  in  the  same  paper  as 
follows: 

"  If,  nevertheless,  the  President  should  be  of 
opinion  that  reasons  ought  to  be  assigned,  the  fol 
lowing  seem  to  be  the  best  which  the  nature  of  the 
case  will  admit,  viz. : 

"Two  modes  of  reimbursing  or  discharging  by 
anticipation  the  residue  of  the  debt  which  the  United 
States  owes  to  France  are  proposed. 

"  The  first,  by  a  payment  in  specie,  or  bank  bills 
having  a  currency  equal  with  specie,  which  amounts 
to  the  same  thing. 

"The  second,  by  government  bonds,  bearing  in 
terest,  and  payable  at  certain  specified  periods. 

"  With  regard  to  the  first  expedient,  the  resources 
of  the  Treasury  of  the  United  States  do  not  admit 
of  its  being  adopted.  The  government  has  relied 
for  the  means  of  reimbursing  the  foreign  debt  of  the 
country  on  loans  to  be  made  abroad ;  the  late  events 
in  Europe  have  thrown  a  temporary  obstacle  in  the 
way  of  these  loans,  producing  an  inability  to  make 
anticipated  payments  of  sums  hereafter  to  grow  due. 

"  With  regard  to  the  second  expedient,  it  has  re 
peatedly  come  under  consideration,  and  has  uniform 
ly  been  declined  as  ineligible.  The  government  has 
perceived  and  continues  to  perceive  great  inconveni 
ence  to  its  credit,  tending  to  the  derangement  of 


Jefferson  to  Washington  425 

its  general  operations  of  finance,  in  every  plan  which 
is  calculated  to  throw  suddenly  upon  the  market  a 
large  additional  sum  of  its  bonds.  The  present  state 
of  things,  for  obvious  reasons,  would  serve  to  aug 
ment  the  evil  of  such  a  circumstance;  while  the 
existing  and  possible  exigencies  of  the  United  States 
admonish  them  to  be  particularly  cautious,  at  the 
present  juncture,  of  any  measure  which  may  in  any 
degree  serve  to  impair  or  hazard  their  credit. 

"  These  considerations  are  the  more  readily  yielded 
to,  from  a  belief  that  the  utility  of  the  measure  to 
France  might  not,  on  experiment,  prove  adequate 
to  the  sacrifices  which  she  would  have  to  make  on 
the  sale  of  the  bonds. 

"All  which  is  humbly  submitted." 

This  being  put  into  my  hands  by  the  President,  I 
wrote  the  following  note. 


JEFFERSON   TO   WASHINGTON 

(Cabinet  Paper.) 

June  17,  1793. 

Th.  Jefferson  has  the  honor  of  returning  to  the 
President  the  Report  of  the  Secretary  of  the  Treasury 
on  the  proposition  of  Mr.  Genet.  He  is  of  the  opin 
ion  that  all  may  be  omitted  which  precedes  the 
words,  "Two  modes  of  reimbursing,'*  etc.,  which 
follows  "of  the  reasons  that  are  proper  and  not 
offensive."  The  following  passage  should  perhaps 
be  altered:  "It  has  repeatedly  come  under  con 
sideration,  and  has  uniformly  been  declined  as  in 
eligible."  The  present  proposition  varies  from  that 


426  Alexander  Hamilton 

repeatedly  offered  in  the  circumstances  which  are 
of  some  importance,  and  is  accordingly  made  by  the 
minister,  viz.,  the  offer  to  take  the  payment  in  the 
produce  of  the  United  States.  A  very  slight  altera 
tion  will  qualify  this  expression — thus  agreeing  to 
the  fact  without  abating  the  force  of  the  argument. 


HAMILTON   TO   WASHINGTON 

(Cabinet  Paper.) 
TREASURY  DEPARTMENT,  8th  June,  1793. 

SIR: — I  have  the  honor  to  send  you  a  report  on  the 
communication  from  the  Minister  Plenipotentiary  of 
France,  respecting  the  reimbursement  of  the  residue 
of  the  debt  of  the  United  States  to  that  country, 
altered  in  conformity  to  your  desire ;  and  to  be,  with 
perfect  respect,  etc. 

ALEXANDER  HAMILTON. 

TREASURY  DEPARTMENT,  June  8,  1793. 

The  Secretary  of  the  Treasury,  to  whom  was  re 
ferred  a  communication  from  the  Minister  Plenipo 
tentiary  of  the  Republic  of  France,  on  the  subject 
of  the  debt  of  the  United  States  to  France,  respect 
fully  makes  thereupon  the  following  report: 

The  object  of  this  communication  is  to  engage  the 
United  States  to  enter  into  an  arrangement  for  dis 
charging  the  residue  of  the  debt  which  they  owe  to 
France  by  an  anticipated  payment  of  the  instalments 
not  yet  due,  either  in  specie  or  bank  bills  of  equal 
currency  with  specie,  or  in  government  bonds  bear 
ing  interest  and  payable  at  certain  specified  periods, 
upon  condition  that  the  sum  advanced  shall  be  in- 


Hamilton  to  Washington  427 

vested  in  productions  of  the  United  States  for  the 
supply  of  the  French  dominions. 

With  regard  to  the  first  expedient,  namely,  a  pay 
ment  in  specie  or  bank  bills,  the  resources  of  the 
Treasury  of  the  United  States  do  not  admit  of  its 
being  adopted.  The  government  has  relied  for  the 
means  of  reimbursing  its  foreign  debt  on  new  loans 
to  be  made  abroad.  The  late  events  in  Europe  have 
thrown  a  temporary  obstacle  in  the  way  of  these 
loans — producing,  consequently,  an  inability  to  make 
payment,  by  anticipation  of  the  residue  of  the  debt 
hereafter  to  grow  due. 

With  regard  to  the  second  expedient,  that  of  gov 
ernment  bonds  payable  at  certain  specified  periods, 
this  in  substance,  though  in  other  forms,  has  re 
peatedly  come  under  consideration,  and  has  as  often 
been  declined  as  ineligible.  Great  inconveniences 
to  the  credit  of  the  government,  tending  to  derange 
its  general  operations  of  finance,  have  been  and  must 
continue  to  be  perceived,  in  every  plan  which  is 
calculated  to  throw  suddenly  upon  the  market  a 
large  additional  sum  of  its  bonds.  The  present  state 
of  things,  for  obvious  reasons,  would  serve  to  aug 
ment  the  evil  of  such  a  circumstance;  while  the 
existing  and  possible  exigencies  of  the  United  States 
admonish  them  to  be  particularly  cautious,  at  this 
juncture,  of  any  measure  which  may  tend  to  hazard 
or  impair  their  credit. 

These  considerations  greatly  outweigh  the  advan 
tage,  which  is  suggested  as  an  inducement  to  the 
measure  (the  condition  respecting  which,  is  the  prin 
cipal  circumstance  of  difference  between  the  present 


428  Alexander  Hamilton 

and  former  propositions),  to  arise  from  an  invest 
ment  of  the  sum  to  be  advanced  in  the  products  of  the 
country;  an  advantage  on  which  perhaps  little  stress 
can  be  laid,  in  the  present  and  probable  state  of 
foreign  demand  for  those  products. 

The  motives  which  dissuade  from  the  adoption  of 
the  proposed  measure  may,  it  is  conceived,  be  the 
more  readily  yielded  to  from  the  probability  that 
the  utility  of  it  to  France  might  not,  on  experiment, 
prove  an  equivalent  for  the  sacrifices  which  she 
might  have  to  make  in  the  disposition  of  the  bonds. 


HAMILTON   TO   JEFFERSON 
(Cabinet  Paper.) 

TREASURY  DEPARTMENT,  June  10,  1793. 

SIR: — The  Comptroller  of  the  Treasury  has  re 
ported  to  me,  that  on  examining  the  subsisting  con 
tracts  between  the  United  States  and  the  government 
of  France  and  the  Farmers  General,  and  a  comparison 
thereof  with  the  foreign  accounts  and  documents 
transmitted  to  the  Treasury,  the  following  facts 
appear: 

That  previous  to  the  treaty  of  February,  1778,  the 
sum  of  three  millions  of  livres  had  been  advanced  by 
the  government  of  France  to  the  agents  of  the  United 
States,  under  the  title  of  gratuities,  for  which  no  re 
imbursement  was  to  be  made. 

That  the  payments,  which  composed  the  before- 
mentioned  sum  of  three  millions  of  livres,  are  stated, 
in  a  letter  of  Mr.  Durival  to  Mr.  Grand,  dated  in 
1786,  to  have  been  made  at  the  following  periods: 


Hamilton  to  Jefferson  429 

One  million  delivered  by  the  Royal  Treasury  the 
loth  of  June,  1776,  and  two  other  millions  advanced 
also  by  the  Royal  Treasury  in  1777,  on  four  receipts 
of  the  deputies  of  Congress,  of  the  i7th  of  January, 
3d  of  April,  loth  of  June,  and  i$th  of  October  of  the 
same  year. 

In  the  accounts  of  Mr.  Ferdinand  Grand,  banker 
of  the  United  States,  the  following  sums  are  credited, 
viz.: 

1777,  January  31  ....         500,000  livres. 

April  26  ....         500,000      " 

June  4  ....  1,000,000      " 

July  3  ....         500,000      " 

October  10  .         .         .         .         500,000      " 

Amount  in  the  whole       .         .         .      3,000,000  livres. 

The  Farmers  General  of  France  claim  a  large 
balance  from  the  United  States,  on  account  of  one 
million  of  livres,  which  they  contend  was  advanced 
in  June,  1777,  in  consequence  of  a  special  contract 
with  Messrs.  Franklin  and  Deane,  to  be  repaid  by 
the  delivery  of  tobacco  at  certain  stipulated  prices, 
and  the  advance  made  by  the  Farmers  General  is 
said  to  be  the  same  money  as  is  credited  by  Mr. 
Grand  on  the  4th  of  June,  1777. 

After  a  careful  examination  of  the  foreign  ac 
counts,  it  is  found  that  no  more  than  three  millions 
of  livres  have  been  credited  by  any  agent  of  the 
United  States. 

An  opinion  was  entertained  by  the  late  officers  of 
the  Treasury,  that  the  sum  claimed  by  the  Farmers 
General  composed  a  part  of  the  sum  supplied  as 


430  Alexander  Hamilton 

gratuitous  aid  by  the  government.  Subsequent  ex 
planations  have,  however,  rendered  it  probable  that, 
including  the  claim  of  the  Farmers  General,  the  sum 
of  four  millions  of  livres  was  in  fact  received;  it  is, 
however,  indispensable  that  it  should  be  known  to 
whom  the  money  was  paid. 

The  most  direct  mode  of  obtaining  this  informa 
tion  will  be,  to  call  for  copies  of  the  receipts  men 
tioned  in  Mr.  Durival's  letter  of  1786,  and  more 
particularly  a  copy  of  that  said  to  have  been  given 
on  the  loth  of  June,  1776. 

And  as  explanatory  of  the  transaction,  he  has 
sent  me  the  documents  herewith  transmitted. 

The  most  likely  conjecture,  in  my  mind,  consider 
ing  the  period  of  the  advance,  and  the  circumstances 
of  that  period,  is,  that  the  unaccounted  for  million 
went  into  the  hands  of  M.  de  Beaumarchais.  The 
supplies  which  he  furnished  to  the  United  States 
exceeded  his  own  probable  resources,  besides  the 
imprudence  of  having  hazarded  so  much  at  that 
stage  of  our  affairs  upon  our  ability  to  pay.  And 
there  were  many  symptoms,  at  the  time,  of  his  hav 
ing  been  secretly  put  in  motion  by  the  government. 

It  has  now  become  urgent  that  the  truth  of  the 
case  should  be  known.  An  account  has  recently 
passed  the  auditor's  office,  admitting  in  favor  of  M. 
de  Beaumarchais  a  balance  of  four  hundred  and 
twenty-two  thousand  two  hundred  and  sixty-five 
dollars  and  thirteen  cents,  with  a  reservation  only 
of  the  question  of  the  million.  If  he  has  received 
that  million  which  has  been  acknowledged  as  a  free 
gift  from  the  French  government,  it  is  unjust  that  he 


Hamilton  to  Washington  431 

should  be  able  to  establish  a  claim  against  the 
United  States  for  supplies  which  must  have  been  the 
proceeds  of  that  sum.  If  he  has  never  received 
the  million,  every  day's  suspension  of  his  claim,  after 
the  immense  delays  heretofore  incurred,  is  a  grievous 
hardship  upon  him.  It  concerns  materially  the  in 
terests,  and  more  the  justice,  the  credit,  and  the 
character  of  the  United  States,  that  as  speedy  a 
solution  as  possible  of  the  enigma  may  be  obtained. 
With  a  view  to  this,  I  have  the  honor  to  make  you 
the  present  communication,  that  you  may  be  pleased 
to  take  such  steps  as  shall  appear  to  you  the 
most  proper  and  efficacious  to  procure,  as  speedily 
as  the  nature  of  the  case  will  admit,  the  requisite 
explanations. 


HAMILTON   TO    WASHINGTON 

(Cabinet  Paper.) 

(Private.) 

PHILADELPHIA,  June  15,  1793. 

SIR: — The  inclosed  report  will,  I  trust,  make  it 
appear  that  there  are  good  reasons  relative  to  the 
execution  of  the  purposes  specified  in  the  laws  for 
making  a  further  loan  to  the  extent  proposed. 

But,  bottoming  the  proceeding  upon  the  direct 
object  of  the  laws,  as  the  legal  and  primary  in 
ducement,  it  appears  to  me  justifiable  and  wise  to 
embrace,  as  secondary  and  collateral  motives,  the 
probable  operation  of  the  measure  on  the  public  in 
terests,  in  ways  not  immediately  indicated  in  the  laws. 
On  this  ground,  I  think  the  legal  considerations  for 


432  Alexander  Hamilton 

a  further  loan  are  enforced  by  the  general  state  of 
affairs  at  the  present  juncture. 

Should  a  general  Indian  war  ensue,  and,  still  more, 
should  we  unfortunately  be  involved  in  a  European 
war,  nothing  could  be  more  convenient  than  to  have 
anticipated  such  a  resource,  which  the  Legislature 
might  apply  to  the  new  exigencies,  as  far  as  regards 
the  purchase  of  the  debt,  without  any  violation  of 
principle. 

In  the  event  of  a  European  war  breaking  out,  it 
would  probably  be  too  late  to  attempt  what,  before 
hand,  would  be  practicable  without  difficulty. 

With  perfect  respect,  and  the  truest  attachment, 
etc. 


PACIFICUS  * 

(From  the  Gazette  of  the  United  States.) 

NO.  I 

June  29,  1793. 

As  attempts  are  making  very  dangerous  to  the 
peace,  and,  it  is  to  be  feared,  not  very  friendly  to 
the  Constitution,  of  the  United  States,  it  becomes 
the  duty  of  those  who  wish  well  to  both,  to  en 
deavor  to  prevent  their  success. 

1  The  disturbance  raised  by  Genet  spread  rapidly,  and  there  was 
great  popular  feeling  and  much  excitement  in  favor  of  France.  In 
fact  a  French  party  was  formed  and  democratic  societies  sprang  up 
everywhere.  The  flame  was  fanned  by  the  opposition,  and  the  result 
was  a  series  of  attacks  upon  the  administration,  and  especially  upon 
Washington,  for  issuing  the  proclamation  of  neutrality.  In  this  state 
of  affairs  Hamilton  took  the  field  in  the  essays  signed  Pacificus,  de 
fending  the  neutrality  policy  and  the  right  and  duty  of  the  President 
to  issue  the  proclamation.  As  always,  his  writings  produced  a  marked 
effect,  and  Jefferson  instigated  Madison  to  publish  a  reply  signed  Hel- 
vidius,  but  Hamilton  had  the  best  of  the  discussion. 


Pacificus  433 

The  objections  which  have  been  raised  against 
the  proclamation  of  neutrality,  lately  issued  by  the 
President,  have  been  urged  in  a  spirit  of  acrimony 
and  invective,  which  demonstrates  that  more  was 
in  view  than  merely  a  free  discussion  of  an  im 
portant  public  measure.  They  exhibit  evident  in 
dications  of  a  design  to  weaken  the  confidence  of 
the  people  in  the  author  of  the  measure,  in  order  to 
remove  or  lessen  a  powerful  obstacle  to  the  success 
of  an  opposition  to  the  government,  which,  how 
ever  it  may  change  its  form  according  to  circum 
stances,  seems  still  to  be  persisted  in  with  more 
untiring  industry. 

This  reflection  adds  to  the  motives  connected 
with  the  measure  itself,  to  recommend  endeavors 
by  proper  explanations,  to  place  it  in  a  just  light. 
Such  explanations,  at  least,  cannot  but  be  satis 
factory  to  those  who  may  not  themselves  have 
leisure  or  opportunity  for  pursuing  an  investigation 
of  the  subject,  and  who  may  wish  to  perceive  that 
the  policy  of  the  government  is  not  inconsistent 
with  its  obligations  or  its  honor. 

The  objections  in  question  fall  under  four  heads : 

1.  That  the  proclamation  was  without  authority. 

2 .  That  it  was  contrary  to  our  treaties  with  France. 

3.  That  it  was  contrary  to  the  gratitude  which  is 
due  from  this  to  that  country,  for  the  succors  af 
forded  to  us  in  our  own  revolution. 

4.  That  it  was  out  of  time  and  unnecessary. 

In  order  to  judge  of  the  solidity  of  the  first  of 
these  objections,  it  is  necessary  to  examine  what  is 
the  nature  and  design  of  a  proclamation  of  neutrality. 

VOL    IV. — 28. 


434  Alexander  Hamilton 

It  is  to  make  known  to  the  Powers  at  war,  and  to 
the  citizens  of  the  country  whose  government  does 
the  act,  that  such  country  is  in  the  condition  of  a 
nation  at  peace  with  the  belligerent  parties,  and 
under  no  obligations  of  treaty  to  become  an  asso 
ciate  in  the  war  with  either,  and  that  this  being  its 
situation,  its  intention  is  to  observe  a  corresponding 
conduct  by  performing  towards  each  the  duties  of 
neutrality;  to  warn  all  persons  within  the  jurisdic 
tion  of  that  country  to  abstain  from  acts  that  shall 
contravene  those  duties,  under  the  penalties  which 
the  laws  of  the  land,  of  which  the  jus  gentium  is 
part,  will  inflict. 

This,  and  no  more,  is  conceived  to  be  the  true 
import  of  a  proclamation  of  neutrality. 

It  does  not  imply  that  the  nation  which  makes 
the  declaration  will  forbear  to  perform  to  either 
of  the  warring  Powers  any  stipulations  in  treaties 
which  can  be  executed  without  becoming  a  party  in 
the  war.  It  therefore  does  not  imply  in  our  case 
that  the  United  States  will  not  make  those  distinc 
tions  between  the  present  belligerent  Powers  which 
are  stipulated  in  the  7th  and  226.  articles  of  our 
treaty  with  France,  because  they  are  not  incom 
patible  with  the  state  of  neutrality  and  will  in  no 
shape  render  the  United  States  an  associate  or  party 
in  the  war.  This  must  be  evident  when  it  is  con 
sidered  that  even  to  furnish  determinate  succors 
of  ships  or  troops  to  a  Power  at  war,  in  consequence 
of  antecedent  treaties  having  no  particular  reference 
to  the  existing  quarrel,  is  not  inconsistent  with 
neutrality;  a  position  equally  well  established  by 


Pacificus  435 

the  doctrines  of  writers  and  the  practice  of  na 
tions.1 

But  no  special  aids,  succors,  or  favors,  having 
relation  to  war,  not  positively  and  precisely  stipu 
lated  by  some  treaty  of  the  above  description,  can 
be  afforded  to  either  party  without  a  breach  of 
neutrality. 

In  stating  that  the  proclamation  of  neutrality 
does  not  imply  the  non-performance  of  any  stipu 
lations  of  treaties  which  are  not  of  a  nature  to  make 
the  nation  an  associate  in  the  war,  it  is  conceded 
that  an  execution  of  the  clause  of  guaranty,  con 
tained  in  the  eleventh  article  of  our  treaty  of  alli 
ance  with  France,  would  be  contrary  to  the  sense 
and  spirit  of  the  proclamation  because  it  would 
engage  us  with  our  whole  force  as  an  auxiliary  in 
the  war;  it  would  be  much  more  than  the  case  of  a 
definite  succor,  previously  ascertained. 

It  follows  that  the  proclamation  is  virtually  a 
manifestation  of  the  sense  of  government,  that  the 
United  States  are,  under  the  circumstances  of  the 
case,  not  bound  to  execute  the  clause  of  guaranty. 

If  this  be  a  just  view  of  the  force  and  import  of 
the  proclamation,  it  will  remain  to  see  whether  the 
President,  in  issuing  it,  acted  within  his  proper 
sphere,  or  stepped  beyond  the  bounds  of  his  con 
stitutional  authority  and  duty. 

It  will  not  be  disputed  that  the  management  of 
the  affairs  of  this  country  with  foreign  nations  is 
confided  to  the  Government  of  the  United  States. 

It  can  as  little  be  disputed  that  a  proclamation  of 

1  See  Vatel,  Book  III.,  chap,  vi.,  §  101. 


436  Alexander  Hamilton 

neutrality,  when  a  nation  is  at  liberty  to  decline  or 
avoid  a  war  in  which  other  nations  are  engaged,  and 
means  to  do  so,  is  a  usual  and  a  proper  measure.  Its 
main  object  is  to  prevent  the  nation's  being  responsi 
ble  for  acts  done  by  its  citizens,  without  the  privity 
or  connivance  of  the  government,  in  contravention  of 
the  principles  of  neutrality  x;  an  object  of  the  great 
est  moment  to  a  country  whose  true  interest  lies  in 
the  preservation  of  peace. 

The  inquiry,  then,  is,  what  department  of  our 
government  is  the  proper  one  to  make  a  declaration 
of  neutrality,  when  the  engagements  of  the  nation 
permit,  and  its  interests  require  that  it  should  be 
done? 

A  correct  mind  will  discern  at  once,  that  it  can 
belong  neither  to  the  legislative  nor  judicial  depart 
ment,  and  therefore  of  course  must  belong  to  the 
executive. 

The  legislative  department  is  not  the  organ  of 
intercourse  between  the  United  States  and  foreign 
nations.  It  is  charged  neither  with  making  nor 
interpreting  treaties.  It  is  therefore  not  naturally 
that  member  of  the  government  which  is  to  pro 
nounce  on  the  existing  condition  of  the  nation  with 
regard  to  foreign  powers,  or  to  admonish  the  citizens 
of  their  obligations  and  duties  in  consequence ;  still 
less  is  it  charged  with  enforcing  the  observance  of 
those  obligations  and  duties. 

It  is  equally  obvious,  that  the  act  in  question  is 
foreign  to  the  judiciary  department.  The  province 
of  that  department  is  to  decide  the  litigation  in  par- 

1  See  Vatel,  Book  III.,  chap,  vii.,  §  113. 


Pacificus  437 

ticular  cases.  It  is  indeed  charged  with  the  inter 
pretations  of  treaties,  but  it  exercises  this  function 
only  where  contending  parties  bring  before  it  a 
specific  controversy.  It  has  no  concern  with  pro 
nouncing  upon  the  external  political  relations  of 
treaties  between  government  and  government.  This 
position  is  too  plain  to  need  being  insisted  upon. 

It  must,  then,  of  necessity  belong  to  the  executive 
department  to  exercise  the  function  in  question, 
when  a  proper  case  for  it  occurs. 

It  appears  to  be  connected  with  that  department 
in  various  capacities: — As  the  organ  of  intercourse 
between  the  nation  and  foreign  nations;  as  the  in 
terpreter  of  the  national  treaties,  in  those  cases  in 
which  the  judiciary  is  not  competent — that  is,  be 
tween  government  and  government;  as  the  power 
which  is  charged  with  the  execution  of  the  laws,  of 
which  treaties  form  a  part;  as  that  which  is  charged 
with  the  command  and  disposition  of  the  public 
force. 

This  view  of  the  subject  is  so  natural  and  obvious, 
so  analogous  to  general  theory  and  practice,  that  no 
doubt  can  be  entertained  of  its  justness,  unless  to  be 
deduced  from  particular  provisions  of  the  Constitu 
tion  of  the  United  States. 

Let  us  see,  then,  if  cause  for  such  doubt  is  to  be 
found  there. 

The  second  article  of  the  Constitution  of  the 
United  States,  section  first,  establishes  this  general 
proposition,  that  "the  EXECUTIVE  POWER  shall  be 
vested  in  a  President  of  the  United  States  of 
America." 


438  Alexander  Hamilton 

The  same  article,  in  a  succeeding  section,  proceeds 
to  delineate  particular  cases  of  executive  power.  It 
declares,  among  other  things,  that  the  President 
shall  be  commander-in-chief  of  the  army  and  navy 
of  the  United  States,  and  of  the  militia  of  the  several 
States,  when  called  into  the  actual  service  of  the 
United  States;  that  he  shall  have  power,  by  and 
with  the  advice  and  consent  of  the  Senate,  to  make 
treaties;  that  it  shall  be  his  duty  to  receive  am 
bassadors  and  other  public  ministers,  and  to  take  care 
that  the  laws  be  faithfully  executed. 

It  would  not  consist  with  the  rules  of  sound  con 
struction,  to  consider  this  enumeration  of  particular 
authorities  as  derogating  from  the  more  comprehen 
sive  grant  in  the  general  clause,  further  than  as  it 
may  be  coupled  with  express  restrictions  or  limita 
tions  ;  as  in  regard  to  the  co-operation  of  the  Sen 
ate  in  the  appointment  of  officers  and  the  making 
of  treaties;  which  are  plainly  qualifications  of  the 
general  executive  powers  of  appointing  officers  and 
making  treaties.  The  difficulty  of  a  complete  enu 
meration  of  all  the  cases  of  executive  authority 
would  naturally  dictate  the  use  of  general  terms, 
and  would  render  it  improbable  that  a  specification 
of  certain  particulars  was  designed  as  a  substitute 
for  those  terms,  when  antecedently  used.  The  dif 
ferent  mode  of  expression  employed  in  the  Constitu 
tion,  in  regard  to  the  two  powers,  the  legislative 
and  the  executive,  serves  to  confirm  this  inference. 
In  the  article  which  gives  the  legislative  powers  of 
the  government,  the  expressions  are :  "  All  legislative 
powers  herein  granted  shall  be  vested  in  a  Congress 


Pacificus  439 

of  the  United  States."  In  that  which  grants  the 
executive  power,  the  expressions  are:  "  The  executive 
power  shall  be  vested  in  a  President  of  the  United 
States." 

The  enumeration  ought  therefore  to  be  considered 
as  intended  merely  to  specify  the  principal  articles 
implied  in  the  definition  of  executive  power ;  leav 
ing  the  rest  to  flow  from  the  general  grant  of  that 
power,  interpreted  in  conformity  with  other  parts 
of  the  Constitution,  and  with  the  principles  of  free 
government. 

The  general  doctrine  of  our  Constitution,  then,  is, 
that  the  executive  power  of  the  nation  is  vested  in  the 
President;  subject  only  to  the  exceptions  and  quali 
fications  which  are  expressed  in  the  instrument. 

Two  of  these  have  been  already  noticed :  the  par 
ticipation  of  the  Senate  in  the  appointment  of 
officers,  and  in  the  making  of  treaties.  A  third  re 
mains  to  be  mentioned :  the  right  of  the  Legislature 
"to  declare  war,  and  grant  letters  of  marque  and 
reprisal." 

With  these  exceptions,  the  executive  power  of  the 
United  States  is  completely  lodged  in  the  President. 
This  mode  of  construing  the  Constitution  has  indeed 
been  recognized  by  Congress  in  formal  acts,  upon 
full  consideration  and  debate;  of  which  the  power 
of  removal  from  office  is  an  important  instance.  It 
will  follow,  that  if  a  proclamation  of  neutrality  is 
merely  an  executive  act,  as,  it  is  believed,  has  been 
shown,  the  step  which  has  been  taken  by  the  Presi 
dent  is  liable  to  no  just  exception  on  the  score  of 
authority. 


44°  Alexander  Hamilton 

It  may  be  said,  that  this  inference  would  be  just, 
if  the  power  of  declaring  war  had  not  been  vested 
in  the  Legislature;  but  that  this  power  naturally  in 
cludes  the  right  of  judging  whether  the  nation  is  or 
is  not  under  obligations  to  make  war. 

The  answer  is,  that,  however  true  this  position 
may  be,  it  will  not  follow  that  the  executive  is  in  any 
case  excluded  from  a  similar  right  of  judgment,  in 
the  execution  of  its  own  functions. 

If,  on  the  one  hand,  the  Legislature  have  a  right 
to  declare  war,  it  is  on  the  other,  the  duty  of  the 
executive  to  preserve  peace  till  the  declaration  is 
made ;  and  in  fulfilling  this  duty,  it  must  necessarily 
possess  a  right  of  judging  what  is  the  nature  of  the 
obligations  which  the  treaties  of  the  country  impose 
on  the  government;  and  when  it  has  concluded  that 
there  is  nothing  in  them  inconsistent  with  neutrality, 
it  becomes  both  its  province  and  its  duty  to  enforce 
the  laws  incident  to  that  state  of  the  nation.  The 
executive  is  charged  with  the  execution  of  all  laws, 
the  law  of  nations,  as  well  as  the  municipal  law,  by 
which  the  former  are  recognized  and  adopted.  It 
is  consequently  bound,  by  executing  faithfully  the 
laws  of  neutrality,  when  the  country  is  in  a  neutral 
position,  to  avoid  giving  cause  of  war  to  foreign 
Powers. 

This  is  the  direct  end  of  the  proclamation  of  neu 
trality.  It  declares  to  the  United  States  their  situa 
tion  with  regard  to  the  contending  parties,  and 
makes  known  to  the  community,  that  the  laws  in 
cident  to  that  state  will  be  enforced.  In  doing  this, 
it  conforms  to  an  established  usage  of  nations,  the 


Pacificus  441 

operation  of  which,  as  before  remarked,  is  to  obviate 
a  responsibility  on  the  part  of  the  whole  society,  for 
secret  and  unknown  violations  of  the  rights  of  any 
of  the  warring  Powers  by  its  citizens. 

Those  who  object  to  the  proclamation  will  readily 
admit,  that  it  is  the  right  and  duty  of  the  executive 
to  interpret  those  articles  of  our  treaties  which  give 
to  France  particular  privileges,  in  order  to  the  en 
forcement  of  them:  but  the  necessary  consequence 
of  this  is,  that  the  executive  must  judge  what  are 
their  proper  limits;  what  rights  are  given  to  other 
nations,  by  our  contracts  with  them;  what  rights 
the  law  of  nature  and  nations  gives,  and  our  treaties 
permit,  in  respect  to  those  countries  with  which  we 
have  none ;  in  fine,  what  are  the  reciprocal  rights  and 
obligations  of  the  United  States,  and  of  all  and  each 
of  the  Powers  at  war. 

The  right  of  the  executive  to  receive  ambassadors 
and  other  public  ministers,  may  serve  to  illustrate 
the  relative  duties  of  the  executive  and  legislative 
departments.  This  right  includes  that  of  judging, 
in  the  case  of  a  revolution  of  government  in  a  foreign 
country,  whether  the  new  rulers  are  competent 
organs  of  the  national  will,  and  ought  to  be  recog 
nized  or  not;  which,  where  a  treaty  antecedently 
exists  between  the  United  States  and  such  nation, 
involves  the  power  of  continuing  or  suspending  its 
operation.  For  until  the  new  government  is  ac 
knowledged,  the  treaties  between  the  nations,  so  far 
at  least  as  regards  public  rights,  are  of  course 
suspended. 

This   power  of  determining   virtually   upon   the 


442  Alexander  Hamilton 

operation  of  national  treaties,  as  a  consequence  of 
the  power  to  receive  public  ministers,  is  an  important 
instance  of  the  right  of  the  executive  to  decide  upon 
the  obligations  of  the  country  with  regard  to  foreign 
nations.  To  apply  it  to  the  case  of  France,  if  there 
had  been  a  treaty  of  alliance,  offensive  and  defensive, 
between  the  United  States  and  that  country,  the 
unqualified  acknowledgment  of  the  new  government 
would  have  put  the  United  States  in  a  condition  to 
become  an  associate  in  the  war  with  France,  and 
would  have  laid  the  Legislature  under  an  obligation, 
if  required,  and  there  was  otherwise  no  valid  excuse, 
of  exercising  its  power  of  declaring  war. 

This  serves  as  an  example  of  the  right  of  the  execu 
tive,  in  certain  cases,  to  determine  the  condition  of 
the  nation,  though  it  may,  in  its  consequences,  affect 
the  exercise  of  the  power  of  the  Legislature  to 
declare  war.  Nevertheless,  the  executive  cannot 
thereby  control  the  exercise  of  that  power.  The 
Legislature  is  still  free  to  perform  its  duties,  accord 
ing  to  its  own  sense  of  them;  though  the  executive, 
in  the  exercise  of  its  constitutional  powers,  may 
establish  an  antecedent  state  of  things,  which  ought 
to  weigh  in  the  legislative  decisions. 

The  division  of  the  executive  power  in  the  Con 
stitution  creates  a  concurrent  authority  in  the  cases 
to  which  it  relates. 

Hence,  in  the  instance  stated,  treaties  can  only 
be  made  by  the  President  and  Senate  jointly;  but 
their  activity  may  be  continued  or  suspended  by  the 
President  alone. 

No  objection  has  been  made  to  the  President's 


Pacificus  443 

having  acknowledged  the  republic  of  France,  by  the 
reception  of  its  minister,  without  having  consulted 
the  Senate ;  though  that  body  is  connected  with  him 
in  the  making  of  treaties,  and  though  the  conse 
quence  of  his  act  of  reception  is  to  give  operation  to 
those  heretofore  made  with  that  country.  But  he 
is  censured  for  having  declared  the  United  States  to 
be  in  a  state  of  peace  and  neutrality  with  regard 
to  the  Powers  at  war,  because  the  right  of  chang 
ing  that  state,  and  declaring  war,  belongs  to  the 
Legislature. 

It  deserves  to  be  remarked,  that  as  the  participa 
tion  of  the  Senate  in  the  making  of  treaties,  and  the 
power  of  the  Legislature  to  declare  war,  are  excep 
tions  out  of  the  general  "  executive  power"  vested  in 
the  President,  they  are  to  be  construed  strictly,  and 
ought  to  be  extended  no  further  than  is  essential  to 
their  execution. 

While,  therefore,  the  Legislature  can  alone  de 
clare  war,  can  alone  actually  transfer  the  nation 
from  a  state  of  peace  to  a  state  of  hostility,  it  be 
longs  to  the  " executive  power"  to  do  whatever  else 
the  law  of  nations,  co-operating  with  the  treaties  of 
the  country,  enjoin  in  the  intercourse  of  the  United 
States  with  foreign  Powers. 

In  this  distribution  of  authority,  the  wisdom  of 
our  Constitution  is  manifested.  It  is  the  province 
and  duty  of  the  executive  to  preserve  to  the  nation 
the  blessings  of  peace.  The  Legislature  alone  can  in 
terrupt  them  by  placing  the  nation  in  a  state  of  war. 

But  though  it  has  been  thought  advisable  to  vin 
dicate  the  authority  of  the  executive  on  this  broad 


444  Alexander  Hamilton 

and  comprehensive  ground,  it  was  not  absolutely 
necessary  to  do  so.  That  clause  of  the  Constitution 
which  makes  it  his  duty  to  "take  care  that  the 
laws  be  faithfully  executed,"  might  alone  have  been 
relied  upon,  and  this  simple  process  of  argument 
pursued : 

The  President  is  the  Constitutional  EXECUTOR  of 
the  laws.  Our  treaties,  and  the  laws  of  nations, 
form  a  part  of  the  law  of  the  land.  He  who  is  to 
execute  the  laws  must  first  judge  for  himself  of  their 
meaning.  In  order  to  the  observance  of  that  con 
duct  which  the  laws  of  nations,  combined  with  our 
treaties,  prescribed  to  this  country,  in  reference  to 
the  present  war  in  Europe,  it  was  necessary  for  the 
President  to  judge  for  himself,  whether  there  was 
any  thing  in  our  treaties  incompatible  with  an  ad 
herence  to  neutrality.  Having  decided  that  there 
was  not,  he  had  a  right,  and  if  in  his  opinion  the  in 
terest  of  the  nation  required  it,  it  was  his  duty  as 
executor  of  the  laws,  to  proclaim  the  neutrality  of 
the  nation,  to  exhort  all  persons  to  observe  it,  and 
to  warn  them  of  the  penalties  which  would  attend 
its  non-observance. 

The  proclamation  has  been  represented  as  enact 
ing  some  new  law.  This  is  a  view  of  it  entirely 
erroneous.  It  only  proclaims  a  fact,  with  regard  to 
the  existing  state  of  the  nation ;  informs  the  citizens 
of  what  the  laws  previously  established  require  of 
them  in  that  state,  and  notifies  them  that  these  laws 
will  be  put  in  execution  against  the  infractors  of 
them. 

PACIFICUS. 


Pacificus  445 

NO.    II 

July  3,  1793. 

The  second  and  principal  objection  to  the  pro 
clamation,  namely,  that  it  is  inconsistent  with  the 
treaties  between  the  United  States  and  France,  will 
now  be  examined. 

It  has  been  already  shown  that  it  does  not  militate 
against  the  performance  of  any  of  the  stipulations  in 
those  treaties,  which  would  not  make  us  an  associate 
or  party  in  the  war,  and  especially  that  it  does  not 
interfere  with  the  privileges  secured  to  France  by 
the  seventeenth  and  twenty-second  articles  of  the 
treaty  of  commerce,  which,  except  the  clause  of 
guaranty,  constitute  the  most  material  discrimina 
tions  to  be  found  in  our  treaties  in  favor  of  that 
country. 

Official  documents  have  likewise  appeared  in  the 
public  papers,  which  serve  as  a  comment  upon  the 
sense  of  the  proclamation  in  this  particular,  proving 
that  it  was  not  deemed  by  the  executive  incom 
patible  with  the  performance  of  the  stipulations  in 
those  articles,  and  that  in  practice  they  are  intended 
to  be  observed. 

It  has,  however,  been  admitted  that  the  declara 
tion  of  neutrality  excludes  the  idea  of  an  execution 
of  the  clause  of  guaranty. 

It  becomes  necessary,  therefore,  to  examine 
whether  the  United  States  would  have  a  valid  justi 
fication  for  not  complying  with  it,  in  case  of  their 
being  called  upon  for  that  purpose  by  France. 

Without  knowing  how  far  the  reasons  which  have 
occurred  to  me  may  have  influenced  the  President, 


446  Alexander  Hamilton 

there  appear  to  me  to  exist  very  good  and  substan 
tial  grounds  for  a  refusal. 

The  alliance  between  the  United  States  and 
France  is  of  the  defensive  kind.  In  the  caption  it 
is  denominated  a  "treaty  of  alliance  eventual  and 
defensive."  In  the  body  (article  the  second)  it  is 
called  a  defensive  alliance.  The  words  of  that 
article  are  as  follows:  "The  essential  and  direct  end 
of  the  present  defensive  alliance  is  to  maintain 
effectually  the  liberty,  sovereignty,  and  independ 
ence,  absolute  and  unlimited,  of  the  United  States, 
as  well  in  matters  of  government  as  of  commerce." 

The  leading  character,  then,  of  our  alliance  with 
France  being  defensive,  it  will  follow  that  the  mean 
ing,  obligation,  and  force  of  every  stipulation  in  the 
treaty  must  be  tested  by  the  principles  of  such  an 
alliance,  unless  in  any  instance  terms  have  been  used 
which  clearly  and  unequivocally  denoted  a  different 
intent. 

The  principal  question  consequently  is:  What  is 
the  nature  and  effect  of  a  defensive  alliance  ?  When 
does  the  casus  fcederis  take  place  in  relation  to  it? 

Reason,  the  concurring  opinions  of  writers,  and 
the  practice  of  nations  will  all  answer:  "When 
either  of  the  allies  is  attacked,11  when  "war  is  made 
upon  him,  not  when  he  makes  war  upon  another":  in 
other  words,  the  stipulated  assistance  is  to  be  given 
"  when  our  ally  is  engaged  in  a  defensive,  not  when 
he  is  engaged  in  an  offensive,  war."  This  obligation 
to  assist  only  in  a  defensive  war  constitutes  the 
essential  difference  between  an  alliance  which  is 
merely  defensive  and  one  which  is  both  offensive  and 


Pacificus  447 

defensive.  In  the  latter  case  there  is  an  obligation 
to  co-operate  as  well  when  the  war,  on  the  part  of 
our  ally,  is  of  the  latter,  as  when  it  is  of  the  former, 
description.  To  affirm,  therefore,  that  the  United 
States  are  bound  to  assist  France  in  the  war  in 
which  she  is  at  present  engaged,  will  be  to  convert 
our  treaty  with  her  into  an  alliance  offensive  and 
defensive,  contrary  to  the  express  and  reiterated 
declarations  of  the  instrument  itself. 

This  assertion  implies  that  the  war  in  question  is 
an  offensive  war  on  the  part  of  France. 

And  so  it  undoubtedly  is,  with  regard  to  all  the 
Powers  with  whom  she  was  at  war,  at  the  time  of 
issuing  the  proclamation. 

No  position  is  better  established  than  that  the 
nation  which  first  declares  or  actually  begins  a  war, 
whatever  may  have  been  the  causes  leading  to  it,  is 
that  which  makes  an  offensive  war.  Nor  is  there 
any  doubt  that  France  first  declared  and  began  the 
war  against  Austria,  Prussia,  Savoy,  Holland,  Eng 
land,  and  Spain. 

Upon  this  point  there  is  apt  to  be  some  incorrect 
ness  of  ideas.  Those  who  have  not  examined  sub 
jects  of  such  a  nature  are  led  to  imagine  that  the 
party  which  commits  the  first  injury,  or  gives  the 
first  provocation,  is  on  the  offensive  side,  though 
hostilities  are  actually  begun  by  the  other  party. 

But  the  cause  or  the  occasion  of  the  war,  and 
the  war  itself,  are  things  entirely  distinct.  It  is  the 
commencement  of  the  war  itself  which  decides  the 
question,  whether  it  be  offensive  or  defensive.  All 
writers  on  the  laws  of  nations  agree  in  this  doctrine ; 


448  Alexander  Hamilton 

but  it  is  most  accurately  laid  down  in  the  following 
extracts  from  Burlemaqui.1 

11  Neither  are  we  to  believe  [says  he]  that  he  who 
first  injures  another  begins  by  that  an  offensive  war, 
and  that  the  other  who  demands  the  satisfaction 
for  the  injury  received  is  always  on  the  defensive. 
There  are  a  great  many  unjust  acts  which  may 
kindle  a  war,  and  which,  however,  are  not  the  war 
itself;  as  the  ill  treatment  of  a  prince's  ambassadors, 
the  plundering  of  his  subjects,  etc." 

"  If,  therefore,  we  take  up  arms  to  revenge  such  an 
unjust  act,  we  commence  an  offensive  but  a  just  war ; 
and  the  prince  who  has  done  the  injury,  and  will  not 
give  satisfaction,  makes  a  defensive  but  an  unjust 


war." 


"We  must  therefore  affirm,  in  general,  that  the 
first  who  takes  up  arms,  whether  justly  or  unjustly, 
commences  an  offensive  war;  and  he  who  opposes 
him,  whether  with  or  without  reason,  begins  a  de 
fensive  war." 

France,  then,  being  on  the  offensive  in  the  present 
war,  and  our  alliance  with  her  being  defensive  only, 
it  follows  that  the  casus  faderis,  or  condition  of  our 
guaranty,  cannot  take  place;  and  that  the  United 
States  are  free  to  refuse  a  performance  of  that  guar 
anty  if  demanded. 

Those  who  are  disposed  to  justify  indiscrimin 
ately  every  thing  in  the  conduct  of  France,  may 
reply  that  though  the  war,  in  point  of  form,  may  be 
offensive  on  her  part,  yet  in  point  of  principle  it  is 
defensive ;  was  in  each  instance  a  mere  anticipation 

1  Vol.  II.,  book  iv.,  chap,  iii.,  §§  4,  5. 


Pacificus  449 

of  attacks  meditated  against  her,  and  was  justified 
by  previous  aggressions  of  the  opposite  parties. 

It  is  believed  that  it  would  be  a  sufficient  answer 
to  this  observation  to  say,  that  in  determining  the 
legal  and  positive  obligations  of  the  United  States 
the  only  point  of  inquiry  is,  whether  the  war  was  in 
fact  begun  by  France,  or  by  her  enemies;  that  all 
beyond  this  is  too  vague,  too  liable  to  dispute,  too 
much  matter  of  opinion  to  be  a  proper  criterion  of 
national  conduct;  that  when  a  war  breaks  out  be 
tween  two  nations,  all  others,  in  regard  to  the  posi 
tive  rights  of  the  parties,  and  their  positive  duties 
towards  them,  are  bound  to  consider  it  as  equally 
just  on  both  sides ;  that  consequently  in  a  defensive 
alliance,  when  war  is  made  upon  one  of  the  allies,  it 
is  the  duty  of  the  other  to  fulfil  the  conditions  stipu 
lated  on  its  part,  without  inquiry  whether  the  war 
is  rightfully  begun  or  not;  as  on  the  other  hand, 
when  war  is  commenced  by  one  of  the  allies,  the 
other  is  exempted  from  the  obligation  to  assist, 
however  just  the  commencement  of  it  may  have 
been. 

This  doctrine  is  founded  upon  the  utility  of  clear 
and  certain  rules  for  determining  the  reciprocal  du 
ties  of  nations,  in  order  that  as  little  as  possible  may 
be  left  to  opinion,  and  to  the  subterfuges  of  an  over- 
refining  or  unfaithful  casuistry. 

Some  writers  indeed  of  high  authority  affirm,  that 
it  is  a  tacit  condition  of  every  alliance,  that  one  ally 
is  not  bound  to  assist  the  other  in  a  war  manifestly 
unjust.  But  this  is  questioned  by  other  respectable 
authorities  on  the  ground  which  has  been  stated. 


VOL.   IV. — 29 


45°  Alexander  Hamilton 

And  though  the  manifest  injustice  of  the  war  has 
been  affirmed  by  some  to  be  a  good  cause  for  not 
executing  the  formal  obligations  of  a  treaty,  I  have 
nowhere  seen  it  maintained  that  the  abstract  justice 
of  a  war  will  of  itself  oblige  a  nation  to  do  what  its 
formal  obligations  do  not  enjoin:  if  this  however 
were  not  the  true  doctrine,  an  impartial  examination 
would  prove  that  with  respect  to  some  of  the  Powers, 
France  is  not  blameless  in  the  circumstances  which 
preceded  and  led  to  the  war;  that  if  she  received, 
she  also  gave,  causes  of  offence ;  and  that  the  justice 
of  the  war,  on  her  side,  is  in  those  cases  not  a  little 
problematical. 

There  are  prudential  reasons  which  dissuade  from 
going  largely  into  this  examination,  unless  it  shall 
be  rendered  necessary  by  the  future  turn  of  the 
discussion. 

It  will  be  sufficient  here  to  notice  cursorily  the 
following  facts: 

France  committed  an  aggression  upon  Holland, 
in  declaring  the  navigation  of  the  Scheldt  free,  and 
acting  upon  that  declaration;  contrary  to  treaties 
in  which  she  had  explicitly  acknowledged,  and  even 
guaranteed,  the  exclusive  right  of  Holland  to  the 
use  of  that  river;  and  contrary  also  to  the  doctrines 
of  the  best  writers,  and  the  established  usages  of 
nations  in  such  cases. 

She  gave  a  general  and  very  serious  cause  of  alarm 
and  umbrage  by  the  decree  of  the  igth  of  November, 
1792,  whereby  the  convention,  in  the  name  of  the 
French  nation,  declare,  that  they  will  grant  frater 
nity  and  assistance  to  every  people  who  wish  to  re- 


Pacificus  45 1 

cover  their  liberty;  and  charge  the  executive  power 
to  send  the  necessary  orders  to  the  generals  to  give 
assistance  to  such  people,  and  to  defend  those  citi 
zens  who  have  been,  or  who  may  be,  vexed  for  the 
cause  of  liberty;  which  decree  was  ordered  to  be 
printed  in  all  languages. 

This  very  extraordinary  decree  amounted  exactly 
to  what  France  herself  had  most  complained  of — an 
interference  by  one  nation  in  the  internal  govern 
ment  of  another. 

When  a  nation  has  actually  come  to  a  resolution 
to  throw  off  a  yoke,  under  which  it  may  have 
groaned,  and  to  assert  its  liberties,  it  is  justifiable 
and  meritorious  in  another,  to  afford  assistance  to 
the  one  which  has  been  oppressed,  and  is  in  the  act 
of  liberating  itself;  but  it  is  not  warrantable  for  any 
nation  beforehand,  to  hold  out  a  general  invitation 
to  insurrection  and  revolution,  by  promising  to 
assist  every  people  who  may  wish  to  recover  their 
liberty,  and  to  defend  those  citizens  of  every  country 
who  have  been,  or  who  may  be,  vexed  for  the  cause 
of  liberty;  still  less  to  commit  to  the  generals  of  its 
armies,  the  discretionary  power  of  judging  when  the 
citizens  of  a  foreign  country  have  been  vexed  for  the 
cause  of  liberty  by  their  own  government. 

For  Vatel  justly  observes,  as  a  consequence  of  the 
liberty  and  independence  of  nations,  "that  it  does 
not  belong  to  any  foreign  Power  to  take  cognizance 
of  the  administration  of  a  sovereign  of  another 
country,  to  set  himself  up  as  a  judge  of  his  conduct, 
or  to  oblige  him  to  alter  it." 

It  had  a  natural  tendency  to  disturb  the  tranquil- 


45 2  Alexander  Hamilton 

lity  of  nations,  and  to  excite  everywhere  fermenta 
tion  and  revolt ;  it  therefore  justified  neutral  Powers, 
who  were  in  a  situation  to  be  affected  by  it,  in  taking 
measures  to  repress  the  spirit  by  which  it  had  been 
dictated. 

But  the  principle  of  that  decree  received  a  more 
particular  application  to  Great  Britain,  by  some  sub 
sequent  circumstances. 

Among  the  proofs  of  this  are  two  answers,  which 
were  given  by  the  President  of  the  National  Conven 
tion,  at  a  public  sitting  on  the  28th  of  November,  to 
two  different  addresses :  one  presented  by  a  deputation 
from  "The  Society  for  Constitutional  Information  in 
London,"  the  other  by  a  deputation  of  English  and 
Irish  citizens  at  Paris. 

The  following  are  extracts  from  these  answers : 

"The  shades  of  Penn,  of  Hampden,  and  of  Sidney 
hover  over  your  heads;  and  the  moment,  without 
doubt,  approaches,  in  which  the  French  will  bring 
congratulations  to  the  National  Convention  of  Great 
Britain." 

"  Nature  and  principles  draw  towards  us  England, 
Scotland,  and  Ireland.  Let  the  cries  of  friendship 
resound  through  the  TWO  REPUBLICS." — "Principles 
are  waging  war  against  tyranny,  which  will  fall 
under  the  blows  of  philosophy.  ROYALTY  in  Eu 
rope  is  either  destroyed  or  on  the  point  of  perishing, 
on  the  ruins  of  feudality;  and  the  declaration  of 
rights  placed  by  the  side  of  thrones,  is  a  devouring 
fire  which  will  consume  them." — "  Worthy  Repub 
licans,  etc." 

Declarations  of  this  sort  cannot  but  be  viewed  as 


Pacificus  453 

a  direct  application  of  the  principle  of  the  decree  to 
Great  Britain,  and  as  an  open  patronage  of  a  revolu 
tion  in  that  country;  a  conduct  which,  proceeding 
from  the  head  of  the  body  that  governed  France,  in 
the  presence  and  on  behalf  of  that  body,  was  un 
questionably  an  offence  and  injury  to  the  nation  to 
which  it  related. 

The  decree  of  the  i5th  of  November  is  a  further 
cause  of  offence  to  all  the  governments  of  Europe. 
By  that  decree,  "  the  French  nation  declares,  that  it 
will  treat  as  enemies  the  people  who,  refusing  or 
renouncing  liberty  and  equality,  are  desirous  of  pre 
serving  their  prince  and  privileged  castes,  or  of  en 
tering  into  an  accommodation  with  them,  etc." 
This  decree  was  little  short  of  a  declaration  of  war 
against  all  nations  having  princes  and  privileged 
classes. 

The  formal  and  definitive  annexation  to  France 
of  the  territories  over  which  her  arms  had  tem 
porarily  prevailed,  is  another  violation  of  just  and 
moderate  principles,  into  which  the  convention  was 
betrayed  by  an  intemperate  zeal,  if  not  by  a  culpa 
ble  ambition ;  and  of  a  nature  to  justify  the  jealousy 
and  ill-will  of  every  neighboring  state. 

The  laws  of  nations  give  to  a  Power  at  war  nothing 
more  than  a  usufructuary  or  possessory  right  to  the 
territories  which  it  acquires ;  suspending  the  absolute 
property  and  dominion  till  a  treaty  of  peace,  or 
something  equivalent,  shall  have  ceded  or  relin 
quished  the  conquered  territory  to  the  conqueror. 
This  rule  is  one  of  primary  importance  to  the  tran 
quillity  and  security  of  nations  —  facilitating  an 


454  Alexander  Hamilton 

adjustment  of  their  quarrels  and  the  preservation  of 
ancient  limits. 

But  France,  by  incorporating  with  herself  in 
several  instances  the  territories  she  had  acquired, 
violated  that  rule,  and  multiplied  infinitely  the  ob 
stacles  to  peace  and  accommodation.  The  doctrine 
that  a  nation  cannot  consent  to  its  own  dismember 
ment  but  in  a  case  of  extreme  necessity,  immediately 
attached  itself  to  all  the  conquered  territories;  while 
the  progressive  augmentation  of  the  dominions  of 
the  most  powerful  empire  in  Europe,  on  a  principle 
not  of  temporary  possession  but  of  permanent  ac 
quisition,  threatened  the  independence  of  all  other 
countries,  and  gave  to  neighboring  neutral  Powers 
the  jus  test  cause  of  discontent  and  apprehension. 
It  is  a  principle  well  agreed,  and  founded  on  substan 
tial  reasons,  that  whenever  a  particular  state  adopts 
maxims  of  conduct  contrary  to  those  generally 
established  among  nations,  calculated  to  interrupt 
their  tranquillity  and  to  expose  their  safety,  they 
may  justifiably  make  common  cause  to  resist  and 
control  the  state  which  manifests  a  disposition  so 
suspicious  and  exceptionable. 

Whatever  partiality  may  be  entertained  for  the 
general  object  of  the  French  Revolution,  it  is  im 
possible  for  any  well-informed  or  sober-minded  man 
not  to  condemn  the  proceedings  which  have  been 
stated,  as  repugnant  to  the  rights  of  nations,  to  the 
true  principles  of  liberty,  to  the  freedom  of  opinion 
of  mankind ;  or  not  to  acknowledge  as  a  consequence 
of  this,  that  the  justice  of  the  war  on  the  part  of 
France,  with  regard  to  some  of  the  Powers  with 


Pacificus  455 

which  she  is  engaged,  is  from  those  causes  ques 
tionable  enough  to  free  the  United  States  from  all 
embarrassment  on  that  score,  if  indeed  it  be  at  all 
incumbent  upon  them  to  go  into  the  inquiry. 

The  policy  of  a  defensive  alliance  is  so  essentially 
distinct  from  that  of  an  offensive  one,  that  it  is  every 
way  important  not  to  confound  their  effects.  The 
first  kind  has  in  view  the  prudent  object  of  mutual 
defence,  when  either  of  the  allies  is  involuntarily 
forced  into  a  war  by  the  attack  of  some  third  Power. 
The  latter  subjects  the  peace  of  each  ally  to  the  will 
of  the  other,  and  obliges  each  to  partake  in  the 
other's  wars  of  policy  and  interest,  as  well  as  in  those 
of  safety  and  defence.  To  preserve  their  boundaries 
distinct,  it  is  necessary  that  each  kind  should  be 
governed  by  plain  and  obvious  rules. 

This  would  not  be  the  case  if,  instead  of  taking  as 
a  guide  the  simple  fact  of  who  began  the  war,  it  was 
necessary  to  travel  into  metaphysical  niceties  about 
the  justice  or  injustice  of  the  causes  which  led  to  it. 

Inasmuch  also  as  the  not  furnishing  a  stipulated 
succor,  when  it  is  due,  is  itself  a  cause  of  war,  it  is 
very  requisite  that  there  should  be  some  palpable 
criterion  for  ascertaining  when  it  is  due.  This  cri 
terion,  as  before  observed,  in  a  defensive  alliance  is 
the  commencement,  or  not,  of  the  war  by  our  ally 
as  a  mere  matter  of  fact. 

Other  topics  serving  to  illustrate  the  position  that 
the  United  States  are  not  bound  to  execute  the 
clause  of  guaranty,  are  reserved  for  another  paper. 

PACIFICUS. 


456  Alexander  Hamilton 

NO.    Ill 

July  6,  1793. 

France,  at  the  time  of  issuing  the  proclamation, 
was  engaged  in  war  with  a  considerable  part  of 
Europe,  and  likely  to  be  embroiled  with  almost  all 
the  rest,  without  a  single  ally  in  that  quarter  of  the 
globe. 

In  such  a  situation,  it  is  evident,  that  however  she 
may  be  able  to  defend  herself  at  home,  of  which  her 
factions  and  internal  agitations  furnish  the  only 
serious  doubt,  she  cannot  make  external  efforts  in 
any  degree  proportioned  to  those  which  can  be  made 
against  her. 

This  state  of  things  alone  discharges  the  United 
States  from  an  obligation  to  embark  in  her  quarrel. 

It  is  known  that  we  are  wholly  destitute  of  naval 
force.  France,  with  all  the  great  maritime  powers 
united  against  her,  is  unable  to  supply  this  de 
ficiency.  She  cannot  afford  us  that  species  of  co 
operation  which  is  necessary  to  render  our  efforts 
useful  to  her,  and  to  prevent  our  experiencing  the 
destruction  of  our  trade,  and  the  most  calamitous 
inconveniences  in  other  respects. 

Our  guaranty  does  not  look  to  France  herself.  It 
does  not  relate  to  her  immediate  defence,  but  to  the 
defence  and  preservation  of  her  American  colonies; 
objects  of  which  she  might  be  deprived,  and  yet  re 
main  a  great,  a  powerful,  and  a  happy  nation. 

In  the  actual  situation  of  this  country,  and  in  re 
lation  to  a  matter  of  only  secondary  importance  to 
France,  it  may  fairly  be  maintained  that  an  ability 
in  her  to  supply  in  a  competent  degree,  our  de- 


Pacificus  457 

ficiency  of  naval  force,  is  a  condition  of  our  obliga 
tion  to  perform  the  guaranty  on  our  part. 

Had  the  United  States  a  powerful  marine,  or 
could  they  command  one  in  time,  this  reasoning 
would  not  be  solid;  but  circumstanced  as  they  are, 
it  is  presumed  to  be  well  founded. 

There  would  be  no  proportion  between  the  mis 
chiefs  and  perils  to  which  the  United  States  would 
expose  themselves,  by  embarking  in  the  war,  and  the 
benefit  which  the  nature  of  their  stipulation  aims  at 
securing  to  France,  or  that  which  it  would  be  in  their 
power  actually  to  render  her  by  becoming  a  party. 

This  disproportion  would  be  a  valid  reason  for  not 
executing  the  guaranty.  All  contracts  are  to  receive 
a  reasonable  construction.  Self-preservation  is  the 
first  duty  of  a  nation ;  and  though  in  the  performance 
of  stipulations  relating  to  war,  good  faith  requires 
that  its  ordinary  hazards  should  be  fairly  met,  be 
cause  they  are  directly  contemplated  by  such  stipu 
lations,  yet  it  does  not  require  that  extraordinary  and 
extreme  hazards  should  be  run,  especially  where  the 
object  to  be  gained  or  secured  is  only  a  partial  or 
particular  interest  of  the  ally,  for  whom  they  are  to 
be  encountered. 

As  in  the  present  instance,  good  faith  does  not  re 
quire  that  the  United  States  should  put  in  jeopardy 
their  essential  interests,  perhaps  their  very  existence, 
in  one  of  the  most  unequal  contests  in  which  a  nation 
could  be  engaged,  to  secure  to  France — what?  Her 
West  India  islands  and  other  less  important  posses 
sions  in  America.  For  it  is  always  to  be  remembered, 
that  the  stipulations  of  the  United  States  do,  in  no 


45$  Alexander  Hamilton 

event,  reach  beyond  this  point.  If  they  were,  upon 
the  strength  of  their  guaranty,  to  engage  in  the  war, 
and  could  make  any  arrangement  with  the  belligerent 
Powers,  for  securing  to  France  those  islands  and 
those  possessions,  they  would  be  at  perfect  liberty 
instantly  to  withdraw.  They  would  not  be  bound  to 
prosecute  the  war  one  moment  longer. 

They  are  under  no  obligation  in  any  event,  as  far 
as  the  faith  of  treaties  is  concerned,  to  assist  France 
in  defence  of  her  liberty;  a  topic  on  which  so  much 
has  been  said,  so  very  little  to  the  purpose,  as  it 
regards  the  present  question. 

The  contest  in  which  the  United  States  would 
plunge  themselves,  were  they  to  take  part  with 
France,  would  possibly  be  still  more  unequal  than 
that  in  which  France  herself  is  engaged.  With  the 
possessions  of  Great  Britain  and  Spain  on  both  flanks, 
the  numerous  Indian  tribes  under  the  influence  and 
direction  of  those  Powers,  along  our  whole  interior 
frontier,  with  a  long  extended  sea-coast,  with  no 
maritime  force  of  our  own,  and  with  the  maritime 
force  of  all  Europe  against  us,  with  no  fortifications 
whatever,  and  with  a  population  not  exceeding  four 
millions;  it  is  impossible  to  imagine  a  more  unequal 
contest  than  that  in  which  we  should  be  involved  in 
the  case  supposed.  From  such  a  contest  we  are  dis 
suaded  by  the  most  cogent  motives  of  self-preserva 
tion,  no  less  than  of  interest. 

We  may  learn  from  Vatel,  one  of  the  best  writers 
on  the  laws  of  nations,  that  "if  a  state  which  has 
promised  succors  finds  itself  unable  to  furnish  them, 
its  very  inability  is  its  exemption ;  and  if  the  furnish- 


Pacificus  459 

ing  the  succors  would  expose  it  to  an  evident  danger, 
this  also  is  a  lawful  dispensation.  The  case  would 
render  the  treaty  pernicious  to  the  state,  and  there 
fore  not  obligatory.  But  this  applies  to  an  imminent 
danger  threatening  the  safety  of  the  state ;  the  case 
of  such  a  danger  is  tacitly  and  necessarily  reserved  in 
every  treaty/' * 

If  too,  as  no  sensible  and  candid  man  will  deny, 
the  extent  of  the  present  combination  against  France 
is  in  a  degree  to  be  ascribed  to  imprudences  on  her 
part,  the  exemption  to  the  United  States  is  still  more 
manifest  and  complete.  No  country  is  bound  to  par 
take  in  hazards  of  the  most  critical  kind,  which  may 
have  been  produced  or  promoted  by  the  indiscretion 
and  intemperance  of  another.  This  is  an  obvious 
dictate  of  reason,  with  which  the  common  sense  and 
common  practice  of  mankind  coincide. 

To  the  foregoing  considerations,  it  may  perhaps  be 
added  with  no  small  degree  of  force,  that  military 
stipulations  in  national  treaties  contemplate  only  the 
ordinary  case  of  foreign  war,  and  are  irrelative  to 
the  contests  which  grow  out  of  revolutions  of  govern 
ment,  unless  where  they  have  express  reference  to  a 
revolution  begun,  or  where  there  is  a  guaranty  of  the 
existing  constitution  of  a  nation,  or  where  there  is  a 
personal  alliance  for  the  defence  of  a  prince  and  his 
family.2 

The  revolution  in  France  is  the  primitive  source  of 
the  war  in  which  she  is  engaged.  The  restoration 
of  the  monarchy  is  the  avowed  object  of  some  of  her 

1  See  Book  III.,  chap,  vi.,  §  92. 

3  Puffendorf,  Book  VIII.,  chap.  ix.f  §  9. 


460  Alexander  Hamilton 

enemies,  and  the  implied  one  of  all.  That  question, 
then,  is  essentially  involved  in  the  principle  of  the 
war,  a  question  certainly  never  in  the  contemplation 
of  the  government  with  which  our  treaty  was  made, 
and  it  may  thence  be  fairly  inferred,  never  intended 
to  be  embraced  by  it. 

The  inference  is,  that  the  United  States  fulfilled 
the  utmost  that  could  be  claimed  by  the  nation  of 
France,  when  they  so  far  respected  its  decision  as  to 
recognize  the  newly  constituted  authorities,  giving 
operation  to  the  treaty  of  alliance  for  future  occa 
sions,  but  considering  the  present  war  as  a  tacit 
exception.  Perhaps,  too,  this  exception  is  in  other 
respects  due  to  the  circumstances  under  which  the 
engagements  between  the  two  countries  were  con 
tracted.  It  is  impossible,  prejudice  apart,  not  to 
perceive  a  delicate  embarrassment  between  the 
theory  and  fact  of  our  political  relations  to  France. 

On  these  grounds,  also,  as  well  as  that  of  the 
present  war  being  offensive  on  the  side  of  France, 
the  United  States  have  valid  and  honorable  pleas  to 
offer  against  the  execution  of  the  guaranty  if  it 
should  be  claimed  by  France ;  and  the  President  was 
in  every  view  fully  justified  in  pronouncing  that  the 
duty  and  interest  of  the  United  States  dictated  a 
neutrality  in  the  war.  PACIFICUS. 


NO.    IV 

July  10,  1793. 

A  third  objection  to  the  proclamation  is,  that  it  is 
inconsistent  with  the  gratitude  due  to  France  for  the 
services  rendered  to  us  in  our  revolution. 


Pacificus  461 

Those  who  make  this  objection  disavow,  at  the 
same  time,  all  intention  to  maintain  the  position  that 
the  United  States  ought  to  take  part  in  the  war. 
They  profess  to  be  friends  to  our  remaining  at  peace. 
What  then  do  they  mean  by  the  objection? 

If  it  be  no  breach  of  gratitude  to  refrain  from 
joining  France  in  the  war,  how  can  it  be  a  breach  of 
gratitude  to  declare  that  such  is  our  disposition  and 
intention  ? 

The  two  positions  are  at  variance  with  each  other; 
and  the  true  inference  is,  either  that  those  who  make 
the  objection  really  wish  to  engage  this  country  in 
the  war,  or  that  they  seek  a  pretext  for  censuring  the 
conduct  of  the  Chief  Magistrate,  for  some  purpose 
very  different  from  the  public  good. 

They  endeavor  in  vain  to  elude  this  inference  by 
saying  that  the  proclamation  places  France  upon  an 
equal  footing  with  her  enemies,  while  our  treaties 
require  distinctions  in  her  favor,  and  our  relative 
situation  would  dictate  kind  offices  to  her,  which 
ought  not  to  be  granted  to  her  adversaries. 

They  are  not  ignorant  that  the  proclamation  is 
reconcilable  with  both  those  objects,  as  far  as  they 
have  any  foundation  in  truth  or  propriety. 

It  has  been  shown  that  the  promise  of  "  a  friendly 
and  impartial  conduct"  toward  all  the  belligerent 
Powers  is  not  incompatible  with  the  performance  of 
any  stipulations  in  our  treaties,  which  would  not 
include  our  becoming  an  associate  in  the  war;  and  it 
has  been  observed  that  the  conduct  of  the  executive, 
in  regard  to  the  seventeenth  and  twenty-second 
articles  of  the  treaty  of  commerce,  is  an  unequivocal 


462  Alexander  Hamilton 

comment  upon  the  terms.  They  were,  indeed, 
naturally  to  be  understood,  with  the  exception  of 
those  matters  of  positive  compact,  which  would  not 
amount  to  taking  part  in  the  war;  for  a  nation  then 
observes  a  friendly  and  impartial  conduct  toward  two 
contending  Powers,  when  it  only  performs  to  one  of 
them  what  it  is  obliged  to  do  by  stipulations  and 
antecedent  treaties,  which  do  not  constitute  a  parti 
cipation  in  the  war. 

Neither  do  those  expressions  imply  that  the  United 
States  will  not  exercise  their  discretion  in  doing  kind 
offices  to  some  of  the  parties,  without  extending  them 
to  others,  so  long  as  they  have  no  relation  to  war; 
for  kind  offices  of  that  description  may,  consistently 
with  neutrality,  be  shown  to  one  party  and  refused  to 
another. 

If  the  objectors  mean  that  the  United  States  ought 
to  favor  France,  in  things  relating  to  war,  and  where 
they  are  not  bound  to  do  it  by  treaty,  they  must  in 
this  case  also  abandon  their  pretension  of  being 
friends  to  peace.  For  such  a  conduct  would  be  a 
violation  of  neutrality,  which  could  not  fail  to  pro 
duce  war. 

It  follows  then,  that  the  proclamation  is  reconcila 
ble  with  all  that  those  who  censure  it  contend  for; 
taking  them  upon  their  own  ground,  that  nothing 
is  to  be  done  incompatible  with  the  preservation  of 
peace. 

But  though  this  would  be  a  sufficient  answer  to  the 
objection  under  consideration,  yet  it  may  not  be 
without  use  to  indulge  some  reflections  on  this  very 
favorite  topic  of  gratitude  to  France,  since  it  is  at  this 


Pacificus  463 

shrine  that  we  are  continually  invited  to  sacrifice  the 
true  interests  of  the  country;  as  if  "  all  for  love,  and 
the  world  well  lost,"  were  a  fundamental  maxim  in 
politics. 

Faith  and  justice  between  nations  are  virtues  of  a 
nature  the  most  necessary  and  sacred.  They  can 
not  be  too  strongly  inculcated,  nor  too  highly  re 
spected.  Their  obligations  are  absolute,  their  utility 
unquestionable;  they  relate  to  objects  which,  with 
probity  and  sincerity,  generally  admit  of  being 
brought  within  clear  and  intelligible  rules. 

But  the  same  cannot  be  said  of  gratitude.  It  is 
not  very  often  that  between  nations  it  can  be  pro 
nounced  with  certainty  that  there  exists  a  solid 
foundation  for  the  sentiment;  and  how  far  it  can 
justifiably  be  permitted  to  operate,  is  always  a 
question  of  still  greater  difficulty. 

The  basis  of  gratitude  is  a  benefit  received  or  in 
tended,  which  there  was  no  right  to  claim,  originat 
ing  in  a  regard  to  the  interest  or  advantage  of  the 
party  on  whom  the  benefit  is,  or  is  meant  to  be,  con 
ferred.  If  a  service  is  rendered  from  views  relative 
to  the  immediate  interest  of  the  party  who  performs 
it,  and  is  productive  of  reciprocal  advantages,  there 
seems  scarcely,  in  such  a  case,  to  be  an  adequate 
basis  for  a  sentiment  like  that  of  gratitude. 

The  effect  at  least  would  be  wholly  dispropor- 
tioned  to  the  cause,  if  such  a  service  ought  to  beget 
more  than  a  disposition  to  render  in  turn  a  corre 
spondent  good  office,  founded  on  mutual  interest  and 
reciprocal  advantage.  But  gratitude  would  require 
much  more  than  this:  it  would  exact  to  a  certain 


464  Alexander  Hamilton 

extent  even  a  sacrifice  of  the  interest  of  the  party 
obliged  to  the  service  or  benefit  of  the  one  by  whom 
the  obligation  had  been  conferred. 

Between  individuals,  occasion  is  not  unfrequently 
given  for  the  exercise  of  gratitude.  Instances  of 
conferring  benefits  from  kind  and  benevolent  dis 
positions  or  feelings  toward  the  person  benefited, 
without  any  other  interest  on  the  part  of  the  person 
who  renders  the  service,  than  the  pleasure  of  doing 
a  good  action,  occur  every  day  among  individuals. 
But  among  nations  they  perhaps  never  occur.  It 
may  be  affirmed  as  a  general  principle,  that  the  pre 
dominant  motive  of  good  offices  from  one  nation  to 
another,  is  the  interest  or  advantage  of  the  nation 
which  performs  them. 

Indeed,  the  rule  of  morality  in  this  respect  is 
not  precisely  the  same  between  nations  as  between 
individuals.  The  duty  of  making  its  own  welfare 
the  guide  of  its  actions,  is  much  stronger  upon  the 
former  than  upon  the  latter;  in  proportion  to  the 
greater  magnitude  and  importance  of  national  com 
pared  with  individual  happiness,  and  to  the  greater 
permanency  of  the  effects  of  national  than  of  indi 
vidual  conduct.  Existing  millions,  and  for  the  most 
part  future  generations,  are  concerned  in  the  present 
measures  of  a  government;  while  the  consequences 
of  the  private  actions  of  an  individual  ordinarily 
terminate  with  himself,  or  are  circumscribed  within 
a  narrow  compass. 

Whence  it  follows  that  an  individual  may,  on  numer 
ous  occasions,  meritoriously  indulge  the  emotions  of 
generosity  and  benevolence,  not  only  without  an 


Pacificus  465 

eye  to,  but  even  at  the  expense  of,  his  own  interest. 
But  a  government  can  rarely,  if  at  all,  be  justifiable 
in  pursuing  a  similar  course ;  and,  if  it  does  so,  ought 
to  confine  itself  within  much  stricter  bounds.1  Good 
offices  which  are  indifferent  to  the  interest  of  a 
nation  performing  them,  or  which  are  compensated 
by  the  existence  or  expectation  of  some  reasonable 
equivalent,  or  which  produce  an  essential  good  to 
the  nation  to  which  they  are  rendered,  without  real 
detriment  to  the  affairs  of  the  benefactors,  pre 
scribe  perhaps  the  limits  of  national  generosity  or 
benevolence. 

It  is  not  here  meant  to  recommend  a  policy  ab 
solutely  selfish  or  interested  in  nations ;  but  to  show, 
that  a  policy  regulated  by  their  own  interest,  as  far 
as  justice  and  good  faith  permit,  is,  and  ought  to  be, 
their  prevailing  one;  and  that  either  to  ascribe  to 
them  a  different  principle  of  action,  or  to  deduce, 
from  the  supposition  of  it,  arguments  for  a  self- 
denying  and  self-sacrificing  gratitude  on  the  part  of 
a  nation  which  may  have  received  from  another 
good  offices,  is  to  misrepresent  or  misconceive  what 
usually  are,  and  ought  to  be,  the  springs  of  national 
conduct. 

These  general  reflections  will  be  auxiliary  to  a  just 
estimate  of  our  real  situation  with  regard  to  France, 
of  which  a  closer  view  will  be  taken  in  a  succeeding 
paper.  PACIFICUS. 

1  This  conclusion  derives  confirmation  from  the  reflection,  that  under 
every  form  of  government  rulers  are  only  trustees  for  the  happiness  and 
interest  of  their  nation,  and  cannot,  consistently  with  their  trust ,  follow 
the  suggestions  of  kindness  or  humanity  toward  others,  to  the  prejudice 
of  their  constituents. 

VOL.  IV.— 30. 


466  Alexander  Hamilton 

NO.  v 

July  13,  1793. 

France,  the  rival,  time  immemorial,  of  Great 
Britain,  had,  in  the  course  of  the  war  which  ended  in 
1763,  suffered  from  the  successful  arms  of  the  latter 
the  severest  losses  and  the  most  mortifying  defeats. 
Britain  from  that  moment  had  acquired  an  ascendant 
in  the  affairs  of  Europe,  and  in  the  commerce  of  the 
world,  too  decided  and  too  humiliating  to  be  endured 
without  extreme  impatience,  and  an  eager  desire  of 
finding  a  favorable  opportunity  to  destroy  it,  and  to 
repair  the  breach  which  had  been  made  in  the  na 
tional  glory.  The  animosity  of  wounded  pride  con 
spired  with  calculations  of  interest  to  give  a  keen 
edge  to  that  impatience,  and  to  that  desire. 

The  American  revolution  offered  the  occasion.  It 
early  attracted  the  notice  of  France,  though  with 
extreme  circumspection.  As  far  as  countenance 
and  aid  may  be  presumed  to  have  been  given  prior 
to  the  epoch  of  the  acknowledgment  of  our  inde 
pendence,  it  will  be  no  unkind  derogation  to  assert, 
that  they  were  marked  neither  with  liberality  nor 
with  vigor;  that  they  wore  the  appearance  rather 
of  a  desire  to  keep  alive  disturbances  which  might 
embarrass  a  rival,  than  of  a  serious  design  to  assist 
a  revolution,  or  a  serious  expectation  that  it  could 
be  effected. 

The  victories  of  Saratoga,  the  capture  of  an  army, 
which  went  a  great  way  toward  deciding  the  issue  of 
the  contest,  decided  also  the  hesitations  of  France. 
They  established  in  the  government  of  that  country 
a  confidence  of  our  ability  to  accomplish  our  purpose, 


Pacificus  467 

and,  as  a  consequence  of  it,  produced  the  treaties  of 
alliance  and  commerce. 

It  is  impossible  to  see  in  all  this  any  thing  more 
than  the  conduct  of  a  jealous  competitor,  embracing 
a  most  promising  opportunity  to  repress  the  pride 
and  diminish  the  power  of  a  dangerous  rival,  by 
seconding  a  successful  resistance  to  its  authority, 
with  the  object  of  lopping  off  a  valuable  portion  of 
its  dominions.  The  dismemberment  of  this  country 
from  Great  Britain  was  an  obvious  and  a  very  im 
portant  interest  of  France.  It  cannot  be  doubted 
that  it  was  both  the  determining  motive  and  an 
adequate  compensation  for  the  assistance  afforded 
to  us. 

Men  of  sense,  in  this  country,  derived  encourage 
ment  to  the  part  which  their  zeal  for  liberty  prompted 
them  to  take  in  our  revolution,  from  the  probability 
of  the  co-operation  of  France  and  Spain.  It  will  be 
remembered  that  this  argument  was  used  in  the 
publications  of  the  day ;  but  upon  what  was  it 
bottomed?  Upon  the  known  competition  between 
those  nations  and  Great  Britain,  upon  their  evident 
interest  to  reduce  her  power  and  circumscribe  her 
empire ;  not  certainly  from  motives  of  regard  to  our 
interest,  or  of  attachment  to  our  cause.  Whoever 
should  have  alleged  the  latter,  as  the  grounds  of  the 
expectation  held  out,  would  have  been  then  justly 
considered  as  a  visionary  or  a  deceiver.  And  who 
ever  shall  now  ascribe  to  such  motives  the  aid  which 
we  did  receive,  would  not  deserve  to  be  viewed  in  a 
better  light. 

The  inference  from  these  facts  is  not  obscure.    Aid 


468  Alexander  Hamilton 

and  co-operation,  founded  upon  a  great  interest, 
pursued  and  obtained  by  the  party  rendering  them, 
is  not  a  proper  stock  upon  which  to  engraft  that 
enthusiastic  gratitude  which  is  claimed  from  us  by 
those  who  love  France  more  than  the  United  States. 

This  view  of  the  subject,  extorted  by  the  extrava 
gancy  of  such  a  claim,  is  not  meant  to  disparage  the 
just  pretensions  of  France  to  our  good- will.  Though 
neither  in  the  motives  to  the  succors  which  she  fur 
nished,  nor  in  their  extent  (considering  how  power 
fully  the  point  of  honor,  in  such  war,  reinforced  the 
considerations  of  interest  when  she  was  once  en 
gaged),  can  be  found  a  sufficient  basis  for  that  grati 
tude  which  is  the  theme  of  so  much  declamation, 
yet  we  shall  find,  in  the  manner  of  affording  them, 
just  cause  for  our  esteem  and  friendship. 

France  did  not  attempt,  in  the  first  instance,  to 
take  advantage  of  our  situation  to  extort  from  us 
any  humiliating  or  injurious  concessions  as  the  price 
of  her  assistance ;  nor  afterwards,  in  the  progress  of 
the  war,  to  impose  hard  terms  as  the  condition  of 
particular  aids. 

Though  this  course  was  certainly  dictated  by 
policy,  yet  it  was  a  magnanimous  policy,  such  as 
always  constitutes  a  title  to  the  approbation  and 
esteem  of  mankind,  and  a  claim  to  the  friendship  and 
acknowledgment  of  the  party  in  whose  favor  it  is 
practised. 

But  these  sentiments  are  satisfied  on  the  part  of 
the  nation,  when  they  produce  sincere  wishes  for  the 
happiness  of  the  party  from  whom  it  has  experienced 
such  conduct,  and  a  cordial  disposition  to  render  all 


Pacificus  469 

good  and  friendly  offices  which  can  be  rendered 
without  prejudice  to  its  own  solid  and  permanent 
interests. 

To  ask  of  a  nation  so  situated,  to  make  a  sacrifice 
of  substantial  interest;  to  expose  itself  to  the  jeal 
ousy,  ill-will,  or  resentment  of  the  rest  of  the  world; 
to  hazard,  in  an  eminent  degree,  its  own  safety  for 
the  benefit  of  the  party  who  may  have  observed 
towards  it  the  conduct  which  has  been  described, 
would  be  to  ask  more  than  the  nature  of  the  case 
demands,  more  than  the  fundamental  maxims  of 
society  authorize,  more  than  the  dictates  of  sound 
reason  justify. 

A  question  has  arisen,  with  regard  to  the  proper 
object  of  that  gratitude  which  is  so  much  insisted 
upon :  whether  it  be  the  unfortunate  prince  by  whom 
the  assistance  received  was  given,  or  the  nation  of 
whom  he  was  the  chief  or  the  organ?  It  is  ex 
tremely  interesting  to  the  national  justice,  to  form 
right  conceptions  on  this  point. 

The  arguments  which  support  the  latter  idea  are 
as  follows: 

"Louis  the  XVI.  was  but  the  constitutional  agent  of 
the  French  people.  He  acted  for  and  on  behalf  of  the 
nation ;  it  was  with  their  money  and  their  blood  he 
supported  our  cause.  It  is  to  them,  therefore,  not  to 
him,  that  our  obligations  are  due.  Louis  the  XVI., 
in  taking  our  part,  was  no  doubt  actuated  by  state 
policy.  An  absolute  prince  could  not  love  liberty. 
But  the  people  of  France  patronized  our  cause  with 
zeal,  from  sympathy  in  its  object.  The  people,  there 
fore,  not  its  monarch,  are  entitled  to  our  sympathy/' 


Alexander  Hamilton 

This  reasoning  may  be  ingenious,  but  it  is  not 
founded  in  nature  or  fact. 

Louis  the  XVI.,  though  no  more  than  the  consti 
tutional  agent  of  the  nation,  had  at  the  time  the  sole 
power  of  managing  its  affairs,  the  legal  right  of  direct 
ing  its  will  and  its  force.  It  belonged  to  him  to  assist 
us,  or  not,  without  consulting  the  nation ;  and  he  did 
assist  without  such  consultation.  His  will  alone  was 
active;  that  of  the  nation  passive.  If  there  was 
kindness  in  the  decision,  demanding  a  return  of  good 
will,  it  was  the  kindness  of  Louis  the  XVI. — his  heart 
was  the  depository  of  the  sentiment.  Let  the  genu 
ine  voice  of  nature,  then,  unperverted  by  political 
subtleties,  pronounce  whether  the  acknowledgment, 
which  may  be  due  for  that  kindness  can  be  equitably 
transferred  from  him  to  others  who  had  no  share 
in  the  decision;  whether  the  principle  of  gratitude 
ought  to  determine  us  to  behold  with  indifference  his 
misfortunes,  and  with  satisfaction  the  triumphs  of 
his  foes. 

The  doctrine,  that  the  prince  is  the  organ  of  his 
nation,  is  conclusive  to  enforce  the  obligations  of 
good  faith  between  two  states — in  other  words,  the 
observance  of  duties  stipulated  in  treaties  for  na 
tional  purposes;  and  it  will  even  suffice  to  continue 
to  a  nation  a  claim  to  the  friendship  and  good- will  of 
another,  resulting  from  friendly  offices  done  by  its 
prince ;  but  it  would  be  to  carry  the  principle  much 
too  far,  and  to  render  it  infinitely  too  artificial,  to 
attribute  to  it  the  effect  of  transferring  such  a  claim 
from  the  prince  to  the  nation,  by  way  of  opposition 
and  contrast.  Friendship,  good-will,  gratitude  for 


Pacificus  471 

favors  received,  have  so  inseparable  a  reference  to 
the  motives  with  which,  and  to  the  persons  by  whom, 
they  were  rendered,  as  to  be  incapable  of  being 
transferred  to  another  at  his  expense. 

But  Louis  the  XVI.,  it  is  said,  acted  from  reasons 
of  state,  without  regard  to  our  cause,  while  the  people 
of  France  patronized  it  with  zeal  and  attachment. 

As  far  as  the  assertion  with  regard  to  the  monarch 
may  be  well  founded,  and  is  an  objection  to  our 
gratitude  to  him,  it  destroys  the  whole  fabric  of 
gratitude  to  France.  For  our  gratitude  is,  and  must 
be,  relative  to  the  services  performed.  The  nation 
can  only  claim  it  on  the  score  of  their  having  been 
rendered  by  their  agent  with  their  means.  If  the 
views  with  which  he  performs  them  divested  them 
of  the  merit  which  ought  to  inspire  gratitude,  none 
is  due.  The  nation  no  more  than  their  agent  can 
claim  it. 

With  regard  to  the  individual  good  wishes  of  the 
citizens  of  France,  as  they  did  not  produce  the  serv 
ices  rendered  to  us  as  a  nation,  they  can  be  no 
foundation  for  national  gratitude.  They  can  only 
call  for  a  reciprocation  of  individual  good  wishes. 
They  cannot  form  the  basis  of  public  obligation. 

But  the  assertion  takes  more  for  granted  than 
there  is  reason  to  believe  true. 

Louis  the  XVI.  no  doubt  took  part  in  our  contest 
from  reasons  of  state;  but  Louis  the  XVI.  was  a 
man,  humane  and  kind-hearted.  The  acts  of  his 
early  youth  had  entitled  him  to  this  character.  It 
is  natural  for  a  man  of  this  disposition  to  become 
interested  in  the  cause  of  those  whom  he  protects  or 


472  Alexander  Hamilton 

aids;  and  if  the  concurrent  testimony  of  the  period 
may  be  credited,  there  was  no  man  in  France  more 
personally  friendly  to  the  cause  of  this  country  than 
Louis  XVI.  I  am  much  misinformed  if  repeated 
declarations  of  the  venerable  Franklin  did  not  attest 
this  fact. 

It  is  a  just  tribute  to  the  people  of  France  to  admit 
that  they  manifested  a  lively  interest  in  the  cause  of 
America;  but  while  motives  are  scanned,  who  can 
say  how  much  of  it  is  to  be  ascribed  to  the  antipathy 
which  they  bore  to  their  rival  neighbor — how  much 
to  their  sympathy  in  the  object  of  our  pursuit?  It 
is  certain  that  the  love  of  liberty  was  not  a  national 
sentiment  in  France  when  a  zeal  for  our  cause  first 
appeared  among  that  people. 

There  is  reason  to  believe,  too,  that  the  attach 
ment  to  our  cause,  which  ultimately  became  very 
extensive,  if  not  general,  did  not  originate  with  the 
mass  of  the  French  people.  It  began  with  the  circles 
more  immediately  connected  with  the  court,  and  was 
thence  diffused  through  the  nation. 

This  observation,  besides  its  tendency  to  rectify 
ideas  which  are  calculated  to  give  a  false  current 
to  the  public  feeling,  may  serve  to  check  the  spirit 
of  illiberal  invective,  which  has  been  wantonly  in 
dulged  against  those  distinguished  friends  of  America, 
who,  though  the  authors  of  the  French  revolution, 
have  fallen  victims  to  it;  because  their  principles 
would  not  permit  them  to  go  the  whole  length  of  an 
entire  subversion  of  the  monarchy. 

The  preachers  of  gratitude  are  not  ashamed  to 
brand  Louis  the  XVI.  as  a  tyrant,  La  Fayette  as  a 


Pacificus  473 

traitor.     But  how  can  we  wonder  at  this,  when  they 
insinuate  a  distrust  even  of  a !!! 

In  urging  the  friendly  disposition  to  our  cause, 
manifested  by  the  people  of  France,  as  a  motive  to 
our  gratitude  towards  that  people,  it  ought  not  to 
be  forgotten,  that  those  dispositions  were  not  con 
fined  to  the  inhabitants  of  that  country.  They 
were  eminently  shared  by  the  people  of  the  United 
Provinces,  produced  to  us  valuable  pecuniary  aids 
from  their  citizens,  and  eventually  involved  them  in 
the  war  on  the  same  side  with  us.  It  may  be  added, 
too,  that  here  the  patronage  of  our  cause  em 
phatically  began  with  the  mass  of  the  community, 
not  originating  as  in  France  with  the  government, 
but  finally  implicating  the  government  in  the 
consequences. 

Our  cause  had  also  numerous  friends  in  other 
countries — even  in  that  with  which  we  were  at  war. 
Conducted  with  prudence,  moderation,  justice,  and 
humanity,  it  may  be  said  to  have  been  a  popular 
cause  among  mankind,  conciliating  the  countenance 
of  princes  and  the  affection  of  nations. 

The  dispositions  of  the  individual  citizens  of 
France  can  therefore  in  no  sense  be  urged,  as  con 
stituting  a  peculiar  claim  to  our  gratitude.  As  far 
as  there  is  foundation  for  it,  it  must  be  referred  to 
the  services  rendered  to  us,  and,  in  the  first  instance, 
to  the  unfortunate  monarch  that  rendered  them. 
This  is  the  conclusion  of  nature  and  reason. 

PACIFICUS. 


474  Alexander  Hamilton 

NO.    VI 

July  17,  1793. 

The  very  men  who  not  long  since,  with  a  holy 
zeal,  would  have  been  glad  to  make  an  auto  da  fe  of 
any  one  who  should  have  presumed  to  assign  bounds 
to  our  obligations  to  Louis  the  XVI.,  are  now  ready 
to  consign  to  the  flames  those  who  venture  even  to 
think  that  he  died  a  proper  object  of  our  sympathy 
or  regret.  The  greatest  pains  are  taken  to  excite 
against  him  our  detestation.  His  supposed  per 
juries  and  crimes  are  sounded  in  the  public  ear,  with 
all  the  exaggerations  of  intemperate  declaiming.  All 
the  unproved  and  contradicted  allegations  which 
have  been  brought  against  him  are  taken  for  granted, 
as  the  oracles  of  truth,  on  no  better  grounds  than 
the  mere  general  presumptions:  that  he  could  not 
have  been  a  friend  to  a  revolution  which  stripped  him 
of  so  much  power;  that  it  is  not  likely  the  conven 
tion  would  have  pronounced  him  guilty,  and  con 
signed  him  to  so  ignominious  a  fate,  if  he  had  been 
really  innocent. 

It  is  possible  that  time  may  disclose  facts  and 
proofs  which  will  substantiate  the  guilt  imputed  to 
Louis ;  but  these  facts  and  proofs  have  not  yet  been 
authenticated  to  the  world,  and  justice  admonishes 
us  to  wait  for  their  production  and  authentication. 

Those  who  have  most  closely  attended  to  the 
course  of  the  transaction  find  least  cause  to  be  con 
vinced  of  the  criminality  of  the  deceased  monarch. 
While  his  counsel,  whose  characters  give  weight 
to  their  assertions,  with  an  air  of  conscious  truth, 
boldly  appeal  to  facts  and  proofs,  in  the  knowledge 


Pacificus  475 

and  possession  of  the  convention,  for  the  refutation 
of  the  charges  brought  against  him,  the  members  of 
that  body,  in  all  the  debates  upon  the  subject  which 
have  reached  this  country,  either  directly  from 
France,  or  circuitously  through  England,  appear  to 
have  contented  themselves  with  assuming  the  exist 
ence  of  the  facts  charged,  and  inferring  from  them  a 
criminality  which,  after  the  abolition  of  the  royalty, 
they  were  interested  to  establish. 

The  presumption  of  guilt  drawn  from  the  sugges 
tions  which  have  been  stated  is  more  than  counter 
balanced  by  an  opposite  one,  which  is  too  obvious 
not  to  have  occurred  to  many,  though  I  do  not 
recollect  yet  to  have  met  with  it  in  print.  It  is  this: 

If  the  convention  had  possessed  clear  evidence  of 
the  guilt  of  Louis,  they  would  have  promulgated  it  to 
the  world  in  an  authentic  and  unquestionable  shape. 
Respect  for  the  opinion  of  mankind,  regard  for  their 
own  character,  the  interest  of  their  cause,  made  this 
an  indispensable  duty;  nor  can  the  omission  be 
satisfactorily  ascribed  to  any  other  reason  than  the 
want  of  such  evidence. 

The  inference  is,  that  the  melancholy  catastrophe 
of  Louis  XVI.  was  the  result  of  a  supposed  political 
expediency,  rather  than  of  real  criminality. 

In  a  case  so  circumstanced,  does  it,  can  it  consist 
with  our  justice  or  our  humanity,  to  partake  in  the 
angry  and  vindictive  passions  which  it  is  endeavored 
to  excite  against  the  unfortunate  monarch?  Was  it 
a  crime  in  him  to  have  been  born  a  prince?  Could 
this  circumstance  forfeit  his  title  to  the  commisera 
tion  due  to  his  misfortunes  as  a  man? 


476  Alexander  Hamilton 

Would  gratitude  dictate  to  a  people,  situated  as  are 
the  people  of  this  country,  to  lend  their  aid  to  extend 
to  the  son  the  misfortunes  of  the  father?  Should  we 
not  be  more  certain  of  violating  no  obligation  of  that 
kind,  and  of  not  implicating  the  delicacy  of  our 
national  character,  by  taking  no  part  in  the  contest, 
than  by  throwing  our  weight  into  either  scale? 

Would  not  a  just  estimate  of  the  origin  and  pro 
gress  of  our  relations  to  France,  viewed  with  reference 
to  the  mere  question  of  gratitude,  lead  us  to  this  re 
sult — that  we  ought  not  to  take  part  against  the  son 
and  successor  of  a  father,  on  whose  sole  will  de 
pended  the  assistance  which  we  received;  that  we 
ought  not  to  take  part  with  him  against  the  nation, 
whose  blood  and  whose  treasure  had  been,  in  the 
hands  of  the  father,  the  means  of  that  assistance? 

But  we  are  sometimes  told,  by  way  of  answer,  that 
the  cause  of  France  is  the  cause  of  liberty ;  and  that 
we  are  bound  to  assist  the  nation  on  the  score  of  their 
being  engaged  in  the  defence  of  that  cause.  How 
far  this  idea  ought  to  carry  us,  will  be  the  subject  of 
future  examination. 

It  is  only  necessary  here  to  observe  that  it  presents 
a  question  essentially  different  from  that  which  has 
been  in  discussion.  If  we  are  bound  to  assist  the 
French  nation,  on  the  principle  of  their  being  em 
barked  in  the  defence  of  liberty,  this  is  a  con 
sideration  altogether  foreign  to  that  of  gratitude. 
Gratitude  has  reference  only  to  kind  offices  received. 
The  obligation  to  assist  the  cause  of  liberty  must  be 
deduced  from  the  merits  of  that  cause  and  from  the 
interest  we  have  in  its  support.  It  is  possible  that 


Pacificus  477 

the  benefactor  may  be  on  one  side;  the  defenders 
and  supporters  of  liberty  on  the  other.  Gratitude 
may  point  one  way,  the  love  of  liberty  another.  It 
is  therefore  important  to  just  conclusions,  not  to 
confound  the  two  things. 

A  sentiment  of  justice,  more  than  the  importance 
of  the  question  itself,  has  led  to  so  particular  a  dis 
cussion  respecting  the  proper  object  of  whatever 
acknowledgment  may  be  due  from  the  United  States, 
for  the  aid  which  they  received  from  France  during 
their  own  revolution. 

The  extent  of  the  obligation  which  it  may  impose 
is  by  far  the  most  interesting  inquiry.  And  though 
it  is  presumed,  that  enough  has  been  already  said  to 
evince,  that  it  does  in  no  degree  require  us  to  embark 
in  the  war,  yet  there  is  another  and  a  very  simple 
view  of  the  subject,  which  is  too  convincing  to  be 
omitted. 

The  assistance  derived  from  France  was  afforded 
by  a  great  and  powerful  nation,  possessing  numerous 
armies,  a  respectable  fleet,  and  the  means  of  render 
ing  it  a  match  for  the  force  to  be  encountered.  The 
position  of  Europe  was  favorable  to  the  enterprise; 
a  general  disposition  prevailing  to  see  the  power 
of  Britain  abridged.  The  co-operation  of  Spain  was 
very  much  a  matter  of  course,  and  the  probability  of 
other  Powers  becoming  engaged  on  the  same  side  not 
remote.  Great  Britain  was  alone,  and  likely  to  con 
tinue  so ;  France  had  a  great  and  persuasive  interest 
in  the  separation  of  this  country  from  her.  In  this 
situation,  with  much  to  hope  and  little  to  fear,  she 
took  part  in  our  quarrel. 


478  Alexander  Hamilton 

France  is  at  this  time  singly  engaged  with  the 
greatest  part  of  Europe,  including  all  the  first-rate 
Powers  except  one ;  and  in  danger  of  being  engaged 
with  the  rest.  To  use  the  emphatic  language  of  a 
member  of  the  national  convention,  she  has  but  one 
enemy,  and  that  is  all  Europe.  Her  internal  affairs 
are,  without  doubt,  in  serious  disorder;  her  navy 
comparatively  inconsiderable.  The  United  States 
are  a  young  nation :  their  population,  though  rapidly 
increasing,  still  small;  their  resources,  though  grow 
ing,  not  great;  without  armies,  without  fleets; 
capable,  from  the  nature  of  the  country  and  the 
spirit  of  its  inhabitants,  of  immense  exertions  for  self- 
defence,  but  little  capable  of  those  external  efforts 
which  could  materially  serve  the  cause  of  France. 
So  far  from  having  any  direct  interest  in  going  to 
war,  they  have  the  strongest  motives  of  interest  to 
avoid  it.  By  embarking  with  France  in  the  war, 
they  would  have  incomparably  more  to  apprehend 
than  to  hope. 

This  contrast  of  situations  and  inducements  is 
alone  a  conclusive  demonstration,  that  the  United 
States  are  not  under  an  obligation,  from  gratitude, 
to  join  France  in  the  war.  The  utter  disparity  be 
tween  the  circumstances  of  the  service  to  be  rendered, 
and  of  the  service  received,  proves  that  the  one  can 
not  be  an  adequate  basis  of  obligation  for  the  other. 
There  would  be  a  manifest  want  of  equality,  and 
consequently  of  reciprocity. 

But  complete  justice  would  not  be  done  to  this 
question  of  gratitude,  were  no  notice  to  be  taken  of 
the  address  which  has  appeared  in  the  public  papers 


Pacificus  479 

(the  authenticity  of  which  has  not  been  impeached), 
from  the  convention  of  France  to  the  United  States, 
announcing  the  appointment  of  the  present  Minister 
Plenipotentiary.  In  that  address  the  convention 
informs  us,  that  "the  support  which  the  ancient 
French  court  had  afforded  the  United  States  to 
recover  their  independence,  was  only  the  fruit  of  a 
base  speculation;  and  that  their  glory  offended  its 
ambitious  views,  and  the  ambassadors  of  France  bore 
the  criminal  orders  of  stopping  the  career  of  their 
prosperity." 

If  this  information  is  to  be  admitted  in  the  full 
force  of  the  terms,  it  is  very  fatal  to  the  claim  of 
gratitude  toward  France.  An  observation  similar  to 
one  made  in  a  former  paper  occurs  here.  If  the 
organ  of  the  nation,  on  whose  will  the  aid  which  was 
given  depended,  acted  not  only  from  motives  irrela 
tive  to  our  advantage,  but  from  unworthy  motives, 
or,  as  is  alleged,  from  a  base  speculation;  if  after 
ward  he  displayed  a  temper  hostile  to  the  confirma 
tion  of  our  security  and  prosperity,  he  acquired  no 
title  to  our  gratitude  in  the  first  instance,  or  he  for 
feited  it  in  the  second.  And  the  people  of  France, 
who  can  only  demand  it  in  virtue  of  the  conduct  of 
their  agent,  must,  together  with  him,  renounce  the 
pretension.  It  is  an  obvious  principle,  that  if  a 
nation  can  claim  merit  from  the  good  deeds  of  its 
sovereign,  it  must  answer  for  the  demerit  of  his 
misdeeds. 

But  some  deductions  are  to  be  made  from  the 
suggestions  in  the  address  of  the  convention,  on  ac 
count  of  the  motives  which  evidently  dictated  the 


480  Alexander  Hamilton 

communication.  Their  zeal  to  alienate  the  good- will 
of  this  country  from  the  late  monarch,  and  to  increase 
the  odium  of  the  French  nation  against  the  monarchy, 
which  was  so  ardent  as  to  make  them  overlook  the 
tendency  of  their  communication  to  deprive  their 
votaries  among  us  of  the  plea  of  gratitude,  may  justly 
be  suspected  of  exaggeration. 

The  truth  probably  is,  that  the  base  speculation 
charged,  amounts  to  nothing  more  than  that  the  gov 
ernment  of  France,  in  affording  us  assistance,  was 
actuated  by  the  motives  which  have  been  attributed 
to  it,  namely,  the  desire  of  promoting  the  interest  of 
France,  by  lessening  the  power  of  Great  Britain,  and 
opening  a  new  channel  of  commerce  to  herself;  that 
the  orders  said  to  have  been  given  to  the  ambassadors 
of  France,  to  stop  the  career  of  our  prosperity,  are 
resolvable  into  a  speculative  jealousy  of  the  ministers 
of  the  day,  lest  the  United  States,  by  becoming  as 
powerful  and  great  as  they  are  capable  of  being 
under  an  efficient  government,  might  prove  formida 
ble  to  the  European  possessions  in  America.  With 
these  qualifications,  the  address  offers  no  new  dis 
covery  to  the  intelligent  and  unbiassed  friends  of 
their  country.  They  knew  long  ago,  that  the  interest 
of  France  had  been  the  governing  motive  of  the  aid 
afforded;  and  they  saw  clearly  enough  in  the  con 
versation  and  conduct  of  her  agents,  while  the  present 
Constitution  of  the  United  States  was  under  con 
sideration,  that  the  government,  of  which  they  were 
the  instruments,  would  have  preferred  our  remaining 
under  the  old  form.  They  perceived,  also,  that  these 
views  had  their  effect  upon  some  of  the  devoted 


Pacificus  481 

partisans  of  France  among  ourselves;  as  they  now 
perceive,  that  the  same  characters  are  embodying, 
with  all  the  aid  they  can  obtain,  under  the  same 
banner,  to  resist  the  operation  of  that  government 
of  which  they  withstood  the  establishment. 

All  this  was  and  is  seen,  and  the  body  of  the 
people  of  America  are  too  discerning  to  be  long  in 
the  dark  about  it;  too  wise  to  have  been  misled 
by  foreign  or  domestic  machinations,  they  adopted  a 
Constitution  which  was  necessary  to  their  safety  and 
to  their  happiness;  too  wise  still  to  be  ensnared  by 
the  same  machinations,  they  will  support  the  govern 
ment  they  have  established,  and  will  take  care  of 
their  own  peace,  in  spite  of  the  insidious  efforts  which 
are  employed  to  detach  them  from  the  one  and  to 
disturb  the  other. 

The  information  which  the  address  of  the  conven 
tion  contains  ought  to  serve  as  an  instructive  lesson 
to  the  people  of  this  country.  It  ought  to  teach  us 
not  to  overrate  foreign  friendships,  and  to  be  upon 
our  guard  against  foreign  attachments.  The  former 
will  generally  be  found  hollow  and  delusive;  the 
latter  will  have  a  natural  tendency  to  lead  us  aside 
from  our  own  true  interest,  and  to  make  us  the  dupes 
of  foreign  influence.  Both  serve  to  introduce  a  prin 
ciple  of  action  which  in  its  effects,  if  the  expression 
may  be  allowed,  is  anti-national.  Foreign  influence 
is  truly  the  Grecian  horse  to  a  republic.  We  cannot 
be  too  careful  to  exclude  its  entrance.  Nor  ought 
we  to  imagine  that  it  can  only  make  its  approaches 
in  the  gross  form  of  direct  bribery.  It  is  then  most 
dangerous  when  it  comes  under  the  patronage  of  our 


VOL.   IV.— 31 


482  Alexander  Hamilton 

passions,  tinder  the  auspices  of  national  prejudice  and 
partiality. 

I  trust  the  morals  of  this  country  are  yet  too  good 
to  leave  much  to  be  apprehended  on  the  score  of 
bribery.  Caresses,  condescensions,  flattery,  in  uni 
son  with  our  prepossessions,  are  infinitely  more  to  be 
feared ;  and  as  far  as  there  is  opportunity  for  corrup 
tion,  it  is  to  be  remembered  that  one  foreign  Power 
can  employ  this  resource  as  well  as  another,  and  that 
the  effect  must  be  mAich  greater  when  it  is  combined 
with  other  means  of  influence  than  where  it  stands 
alone. 

PACIFICUS. 

NO.    VII 

July  20,  1793. 

The  remaining  objection  to  the  proclamation  of 
neutrality  still  to  be  discussed  is,  that  it  was  out  of 
time  and  unnecessary. 

To  give  color  to  this  objection  it  is  asked,  why  did 
not  the  proclamation  appear  when  the  war  com 
menced  with  Austria  and  Prussia  ?  Why  was  it  for 
borne  till  Great  Britain,  Holland,  and  Spain  became 
engaged  ?  Why  did  not  the  government  wait  till  the 
arrival  at  Philadelphia  of  the  minister  of  the  French 
Republic?  Why  did  it  volunteer  a  declaration  not 
required  of  it  by  any  of  the  belligerent  parties? 

To  most  of  these  questions,  solid  answers  have 
already  appeared  in  the  public  prints;  little  more 
can  be  done  than  to  repeat  and  enforce  them. 

Austria  and  Prussia  are  not  maritime  powers. 
Contraventions  of  neutrality  as  against  them  were 


Pacificus  483 

not  likely  to  take  place  to  any  extent,  or  in  a  shape 
that  would  attract  their  notice.  It  would,  therefore, 
have  been  useless,  if  not  ridiculous,  to  have  made  a 
formal  declaration  on  the  subject,  while  they  were 
the  only  parties  opposed  to  France. 

But  the  reverse  of  this  is  the  case  with  regard  to 
Spain,  Holland,  and  England.  These  are  all  com 
mercial  and  maritime  nations.  It  was  to  be  expected 
that  their  attentions  would  be  immediately  drawn 
toward  the  United  States  with  sensibility,  and  even 
with  jealousy.  It  was  to  be  feared  that  some  of  our 
citizens  might  be  tempted  by  the  prospect  of  gain 
to  go  into  measures  which  would  injure  them,  and 
hazard  the  peace  of  the  country.  Attacks  by  some 
of  these  Powers  upon  the  possessions  of  France  in 
America  were  to  be  looked  for  as  a  matter  of  course. 
While  the  views  of  the  United  States  as  to  that  par 
ticular  were  problematical,  they  would  naturally 
consider  us  as  a  Power  that  might  become  their 
enemy.  This  they  would  have  been  the  more  apt  to 
do  on  account  of  these  public  demonstrations  of 
attachment  to  the  cause  of  France,  of  which  there 
has  been  so  prodigal  a  display.  Jealousy,  everybody 
knows,  especially  if  sharpened  by  resentment,  is  apt 
to  lead  to  ill  treatment;  ill  treatment,  to  hostility. 

In  proportion  to  the  probability  of  our  being  re 
garded  with  a  suspicious,  and  consequently  an  un 
friendly,  eye  by  the  Powers  at  war  with  France ;  in 
proportion  to  the  danger  of  imprudences  being  com 
mitted  by  any  of  our  citizens,  which  might  occasion 
a  rupture  with  them,  the  policy  on  the  part  of  the 
government,  of  removing  all  doubt  as  to  its  own 


484  Alexander  Hamilton 

disposition,  and  of  deciding  the  condition  of  the 
United  States,  in  the  view  of  the  parties  concerned, 
became  obvious  and  urgent. 

Were  the  United  States  now,  what,  if  we  do  not 
rashly  throw  away  the  advantages  we  possess,  they 
may  expect  to  be  in  fifteen  or  twenty  years,  there 
would  have  been  more  room  for  an  insinuation  which 
has  been  thrown  out,  namely,  that  they  ought  to 
have  secured  to  themselves  some  advantage  as  the 
consideration  of  their  neutrality, — an  idea,  however, 
the  justice  and  magnanimity  of  which  cannot  be 
commended.  But  in  their  present  situation,  with 
their  present  strength  and  resources,  an  attempt  of 
that  kind  could  have  only  served  to  display  pre 
tensions  at  once  excessive  and  unprincipled.  The 
chance  of  obtaining  any  collateral  advantage,  if  such 
a  chance  there  was,  by  leaving  doubt  of  their  inten 
tions  as  to  peace  or  war,  could  not  wisely  have  been 
put,  for  a  single  instant,  in  competition  with  the 
tendency  of  a  contrary  conduct  to  secure  our  peace. 

The  conduciveness  of  the  declaration  of  neutrality 
to  that  end  was  not  the  only  recommendation  to  the 
adoption  of  the  measure .  It  was  of  great  importance 
that  our  own  citizens  should  understand,  as  soon 
as  possible,  the  opinion  which  the  government  enter 
tained  of  the  nature  of  our  relations  to  the  warring 
parties,  and  of  the  propriety  or  expediency  of  our  tak 
ing  a  side  or  remaining  neuter.  The  arrangements 
of  our  merchants  could  not  but  be  very  differently 
affected  by  the  one  hypothesis  or  the  other;  and 
it  would  necessarily  have  been  very  detrimental  and 
perplexing  to  them  to  have  been  left  in  uncertainty. 


Pacificus  485 

It  is  not  requisite  to  say  how  much  our  agriculture 
and  other  interests  would  have  been  likely  to  have 
suffered  by  embarrassments  to  our  merchants. 

The  idea  of  its  having  been  incumbent  on  the  gov 
ernment  to  delay  the  measure  for  the  arrival  of  the 
minister  of  the  French  republic,  is  as  absurd  as  it  is 
humiliating.  Did  the  executive  stand  in  need  of  the 
logic  of  a  foreign  agent  to  enlighten  it  as  to  the 
duties  or  interests  of  the  nation  ?  Or  was  it  bound  to 
ask  his  consent  to  a  step  which  appeared  to  itself  con 
sistent  with  the  former,  and  conducive  to  the  latter  ? 

The  sense  of  our  treaties  was  to  be  learnt  from  the 
instruments  themselves.  It  was  not  difficult  to  pro 
nounce  beforehand  that  we  had  a  greater  interest  in 
the  preservation  of  peace,  than  in  any  advantages 
with  which  France  might  tempt  our  participation  in 
the  war.  Commercial  privileges  were  all  that  she 
could  offer  of  real  value  in  our  estimation,  and  a  carte 
blanche  on  this  head  would  have  been  an  inadequate 
recompense  for  renouncing  peace,  and  committing 
ourselves  voluntarily  to  the  chances  of  so  precarious 
and  perilous  a  war.  Besides,  if  the  privileges  which 
might  have  been  conceded  were  not  founded  in  a 
real,  permanent,  mutual  interest,  of  what  value 
would  be  the  treaty  that  should  concede  them? 
Ought  not  the  calculation,  in  such  case,  to  be  upon 
a  speedy  resumption  of  them,  with  perhaps  a  quarrel 
as  the  pretext?  On  the  other  hand,  may  we  not 
trust  that  commercial  privileges,  which  are  truly 
founded  in  mutual  interest,  will  grow  out  of  that 
interest,  without  the  necessity  of  giving  a  premium 
for  them  at  the  expense  of  our  peace  ? 


Alexander  Hamilton 

To  what  purpose,  then,  was  the  executive  to  have 
waited  for  the  arrival  of  the  minister?  Was  it  to 
give  opportunity  to  contentious  discussions,  to  in 
triguing  machinations,  to  the  clamors  of  a  faction 
won  to  a  foreign  interest? 

Whether  the  declaration  of  neutrality  issued  upon 
or  without  the  requisition  of  any  of  the  belligerent 
Powers,  can  only  be  known  to  their  respective  min 
isters,  and  to  the  proper  officers  of  our  government. 
But  if  it  be  true  that  it  issued  without  any  such 
requisition,  it  is  an  additional  indication  of  the  wis 
dom  of  the  measure. 

It  is  of  much  importance  to  the  end  of  preserving 
peace,  that  the  belligerent  nations  should  be  thor 
oughly  convinced  of  the  sincerity  of  our  intentions  to 
observe  the  neutrality  we  profess;  and  it  cannot  fail 
to  have  weight  in  producing  this  conviction,  that  the 
declaration  of  it  was  a  spontaneous  act,  not  stimu 
lated  by  any  requisition  on  the  part  of  either  of  them, 
but  proceeding  purely  from  our  own  view  of  our  duty 
and  interest. 

It  was  not  surely  necessary  for  the  government  to 
wait  for  such  a  requisition,  while  there  were  advan 
tages,  and  no  disadvantages,  in  anticipation.  The 
benefit  of  an  early  notification  to  our  merchants 
conspired  with  the  consideration  just  mentioned  to 
recommend  the  course  which  was  pursued. 

If,  in  addition  to  the  rest,  the  early  manifestation 
of  the  views  of  the  government  has  had  any  effect  in 
fixing  the  public  opinion  on  the  subject,  and  in  coun 
teracting  the  success  of  the  efforts  which,  it  was  to  be 
foreseen,  would  be  made  to  distract  and  disunite,  this 


Pacificus  487 

alone  would  be  a  great  recommendation  of  the  policy 
of  having  suffered  no  delay  to  intervene. 

What  has  been  already  said,  in  this  and  in  preced 
ing  papers,  affords  a  full  answer  to  the  suggestion 
that  the  proclamation  was  unnecessary.  It  would 
be  a  waste  of  time  to  add  more. 

But  there  has  been  a  criticism  several  times  re 
peated,  which  may  deserve  a  moment's  attention. 
It  has  been  urged  that  the  proclamation  ought  to 
have  contained  some  reference  to  our  treaties;  and 
that  the  generality  of  the  promise  to  observe  a  con 
duct  friendly  and  impartial  towards  the  belligerent 
Powers,  ought  to  have  been  qualified  with  expres 
sions  equivalent  to  these,  "  as  far  as  may  consist  with 
the  treaties  of  the  United  States." 

The  insertion  of  such  a  clause  would  have  entirely 
defeated  the  object  of  a  proclamation,  by  rendering 
the  intention  of  the  government  equivocal.  That 
object  was  to  assure  the  Powers  at  war,  and  our  own 
citizens,  that  in  the  opinion  of  the  executive  it  was 
consistent  with  the  duty  and  interest  of  the  nation 
to  observe  neutrality,  and  that  it  was  intended  to 
pursue  a  conduct  corresponding  with  that  opinion. 
Words  equivalent  to  those  contended  for  would 
have  rendered  the  other  part  of  the  declaration 
nugatory,  by  leaving  it  uncertain  whether  the  executive 
did  or  did  not  believe  a  state  of  neutrality  to  be  con 
sistent  with  our  treaties.  Neither  foreign  Powers  nor 
our  own  citizens  would  have  been  able  to  have 
drawn  any  conclusion  from  the  proclamation,  and 
both  would  have  had  a  right  to  consider  it  as  a  mere 
equivocation. 


488  Alexander  Hamilton 

By  not  inserting  any  such  ambiguous  expressions, 
the  proclamation  was  susceptible  of  an  intelligible 
and  proper  construction.  While  it  denoted  on  the 
one  hand  that,  in  the  judgment  of  the  executive, 
there  was  nothing  in  our  treaties  obliging  us  to  be 
come  a  party  in  the  war,  it  left  it  to  be  expected, 
on  the  other,  that  all  stipulations  compatible  with 
neutrality,  according  to  the  laws  and  usages  of  na 
tions,  would  be  enforced.  It  follows  that  the  pro 
clamation  was,  in  this  particular,  exactly  what  it 
ought  to  have  been. 

The  words,  "make  known  the  disposition  of  the 
United  States,"  have  also  given  a  pretext  for  cavil. 
It  has  been  asked,  how  could  the  President  under 
take  to  declare  the  disposition  of  the  United  States? 
The  people,  for  aught  he  knew,  may  have  a  very 
different  sentiment.  Thus,  a  conformity  with  re 
publican  propriety  and  modesty  is  turned  into  a 
topic  of  accusation. 

Had  the  President  announced  his  own  disposition, 
he  would  have  been  chargeable  with  egotism,  if  not 
presumption.  The  constitutional  organ  of  inter 
course  between  the  United  States  and  foreign  na 
tions,  whenever  he  speaks  to  them,  it  is  in  that 
capacity ;  it  is  in  the  name  and  on  the  behalf  of  the 
United  States.  It  must,  therefore,  be  with  greater 
propriety  that  he  speaks  of  their  disposition  than  of 
his  own. 

It  is  easy  to  imagine  that  occasions  frequently 
occur  in  the  communications  to  foreign  governments 
and  foreign  agents,  which  render  it  necessary  to 
speak  of  the  friendship  or  friendly  disposition  of  the 


Pacificus  489 

United  States,  of  their  disposition  to  cultivate  har 
mony  and  good  understanding,  to  reciprocate  neigh 
borly  offices,  and  the  like.  It  is  usual,  for  example, 
when  public  ministers  are  received,  for  some  com 
plimentary  expressions  to  be  interchanged.  It  is 
presumable  that  the  late  reception  of  the  French 
minister  did  not  pass  without  some  assurance  on 
the  part  of  the  President  of  the  friendly  disposition 
of  the  United  States  towards  France.  Admitting  it 
to  have  happened,  would  it  be  deemed  an  improper 
arrogation?  If  not,  why  was  it  more  so,  to  declare 
the  disposition  of  the  United  States  to  observe  a 
neutrality  in  the  existing  war? 

In  all  such  cases,  nothing  more  is  to  be  understood 
than  an  official  expression  of  the  political  disposition 
of  the  nation,  inferred  from  its  political  relations, 
obligations,  and  interests.  It  is  never  to  be  sup 
posed  that  the  expression  is  meant  to  convey  the 
precise  state  of  the  individual  sentiments  or  opinions 
of  the  great  mass  of  the  people. 

Kings  and  princes  speak  of  their  own  dispositions, 
the  magistrates  of  republics  of  the  dispositions  of 
their  nations.  The  President,  therefore,  has  evidently 
used  the  style  adapted  to  his  situation,  and  the 
criticism  upon  it  is  plainly  a  cavil. 

PACIFICUS.1 

1  The  adoption  of  the  neutrality  policy,  and  the  action  of  Washing 
ton  in  declaring  it,  are  events  of  the  first  moment  in  our  history.  To 
thoroughly  understand  them,  and  the  motives  and  reasons  for  them. 
"Pacificus"  is  indispensable  and  is  the  best  authority. 

END   OF   VOL.    IV. 


THIS    BOOK    IS    DUE   ON    THE    LAST    DATE 
STAMPED  BELOW 


AN  INITIAL  FINE  OF  25  CENTS 

WILL  BE  ASSESSED  FOR  FAILURE  TO  RETURN  THIS  BOOK 
ON  THE  DATE  DUE.  THE  PENALTY  WILL  INCREASE  TO 
50  CENTS  ON  THE  FOURTH  DAY  AND  TO  $1.00  ON  THE 
SEVENTH  DAY  OVERDUE. 


JAN  2  3  196$ 


\ 

«T,  j>  1865 

JUNl    1967 

RET'O  AUG  151956 

jCou 


73 


DOE.' 

IUEJAN6    198i5UG 


JV  27  1981  REC'I) 
CO 


UCU  -  3RARY 

JUN  3  0  1986 


30  1988 


Book  Slip-20m-9,'60(B3010s4)458 


.  

Call  Number: 

E302 

Hamilton,  A. 
Works. 

H3 
190U 
v.U 

213623 


H3 


llllllllllllllil 

1  17R  OH79R   994.9 


