LIBRARY 

UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA 
DAVIS 

THE CONNOISSEUR'S FEDERAL EDI 
TION OF THE WORKS OF ALEXANDER 
HAMILTON IS LIMITED TO FOUR HUN 
DRED SIGNED AND NUMBERED SETS OF 
WHICH THIS IS NUMBER _£&¥_ 

f;^^7fe&*^^ 

The Works of 

Alexander Hamilton 

Edited by 

Henry Cabot Lodge 

" The sacred rights of mankind are not to be rummaged for among old parchments or 
musty records. They are written, as with a sunbeam, in the whole volume of human nature, 
by the hand of the Divinity itself, and can never be erased or obscured by mortal power." 

[HAMILTON— The Farmer Refuted, 1775, &\., i8.J 

" We are laboring hard to establish in this country principles more and more national, 
and free from all foreign ingredients, so that we may be neither •• Greeks nor Trojans,1 but 
truly Americans." — [HAMILTON TO KING, 1796, ^*Et. 39.] 

Volume V 

G. P. Putnam's Sons 

New York and London 
Cbe "Knickerbocker press 
LIBRARY 

UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA 
DAVIS 

TTbc fknicfccrbocfcer press, Hew 

CONTENTS 

PAGB 

FOREIGN RELATIONS — Continued: 

CABINET OPINION 3 

CABINET OPINION — HAMILTON AND KNOX . 5 

WASHINGTON TO JOHN JAY, CHIEF JUSTICE, AND 
JAMES WILSON, JAMES IREDELL, AND WIL 
LIAM PATTERSON, ASSOCIATE-JUSTICES OP 
THE SUPREME COURT OP THE UNITED 
STATES . . . . . . . 12 

QUESTIONS PROPOSED TO BE SUBMITTED TO THE 
JUDGES OF THE SUPREME COURT OF THE 
UNITED STATES . . . . . . 12 

WASHINGTON TO THE HEADS OF DEPARTMENTS 

AND THE ATTORNEY-GENERAL . . . 17 
No JACOBIN . . . . . . . 17 

INSTRUCTIONS TO THE COLLECTORS OF THE CUS 
TOMS 49 

CABINET OPINION — HAMILTON TO WASHINGTON, 54 
NOTES BY HAMILTON, TO FRAME LETTER OF 
SECRETARY OF STATE TO GOUVERNEUR 
MORRIS, MINISTER AT PARIS ... 56 

CABINET OPINION 58 

HAMILTON TO WASHINGTON 61 

AMERICANUS 74 

HAMILTON TO WASHINGTON .... 97 

HAMILTON TO RANDOLPH 119 

PART OF INSTRUCTIONS TO JOHN JAY . . 121 
• HAMILTON TO JAY 123 

iv Contents 

PAGB 

FOREIGN RELATIONS — Continued: 

TREATY PROJECT 129 

HAMILTON TO WASHINGTON . . . .131 

HAMILTON TO RANDOLPH 135 

HAMILTON TO WASHINGTON . . . .138 

HORATIUS 181 

CAMILLUS: DEFENCE OP MR. JAY'S TREATY . 189 

FOREIGN RELATIONS (Continued) 

FOREIGN RELATIONS (Continued] 

CABINET OPINION 

A 

T a meeting held at the State House of the City 
of Philadelphia, July 8, 1793, 

Present: 

The Secretary of State, 

The Secretary of the Treasury, 

The Secretary of War. 

It appeared that a brigantine called the Little 
Sarah has been fitted out at the port of Philadelphia 
with fourteen cannon and all other equipments, in 
dicating that she is intended (as a privateer) to 
cruise under the authority of France, and that she 
is now lying in the river Delaware at some place be 
tween this city and Mud Island ; that a conversation 
has been had between the Secretary of State and the 
Minister Plenipotentiary of France, in which con 
versation the minister refused to give any explicit 
assurance that the brigantine would continue until 
the arrival of the President and his decision in the 
case, but made declarations respecting her not being 
ready to sail within the time of the expected return 
of the President, from which the Secretary of State 

4 Alexander Hamilton 

infers, with confidence, that she will not sail till the 
President will have an opportunity of considering 
and determining the case; that in the course of 
the conversation the minister declared that the ad 
ditional guns which had been taken in by the Little 
Sarah were French property, but the Governor of 
Pennsylvania has declared that he has good ground 
to believe that at least two of her cannon were 
purchased here of citizens of Philadelphia. The 
Governor of Pennsylvania asks advice what steps, 
under the circumstances, he shall pursue. 

The Secretary of the Treasury and the Secretary of 
War are of opinion that it is expedient that immediate 
measures should be taken provisionally for establish 
ing a battery on Mud Island, under cover of a party of 
militia, with discretion that if the brig Sarah should 
attempt to depart before the pleasure of the President 
shall be known concerning her, military coercion be 
employed to arrest and prevent her progress. 

The Secretary of State dissents from this opinion. 

TH. JEFFERSON.1 

Information having also been received that part 
of the crew of the Sarah are citizens of the United 
States, as can be testified by Charles Biddle of this 
city, the above-mentioned heads of departments 
agree that this information shall be communicated 
to the attorney of the district, in order that, pursuant 
to his former instructions, he may take measures for 
apprehending and bringing them to trial. 

1 Jefferson rendered a dissenting opinion the same day. The above 
opinion, in which both Hamilton and Knox agreed, was drawn by the 
former. 

Cabinet Opinion 5 

CABINET OPINION — HAMILTON AND KNOX 

JulyS, 1793. 

Reasons for the Opinion of the Secretary of the Treasury, 
and the Secretary at War, respecting the Brigantine 

I. — Because there can be no doubt, either upon 
principle or authority, that the permitting or suffer 
ing, or what is equivalent, the not taking effectual 
measures to prevent, when known, the fitting out 
of privateers in our ports by one of the belligerent 
powers to cruise against any of the others, is an 
unequivocal breach of neutrality. 

II. — Because the President, in conformity with a 
unanimous opinion of the heads of the departments, 
and the Attorney-General, founded upon the above 
principle, has caused his disapprobation of the prac 
tice to be signified to the Ministers both of Great 
Britain and France, accompanied with an express 
assurance to the former, that effectual measures 
would be taken to prevent a repetition of the practice. 

III. — Because consequently not to take such 
measures in the present instance would be to depart 
from the declaration of neutrality, and to contravene 

1 Genet had equipped various privateers despite the remonstrances 
of the government. Finally he undertook to fit out and man a vessel 
under their very eyes at Philadelphia. This vessel was the Little Sarah. 
Hamilton got information in regard to her. Washington was absent 
and the Cabinet sent to Governor Mifflin, who ordered out the militia. 
Jefferson in alarm went to Genet, who raged and lied, and finally Jeffer 
son had the troops withdrawn. Hamilton and Knox then advised 
erecting a battery on Mud Island and sinking the Little Sarah if she 
tried to pass, and these are their reasons. Jefferson resisted success 
fully. The Little Sarah was allowed to drop down to Chester, and 
soon after, despite Genet's promises, she went to sea. 

6 Alexander Hamilton 

the positive assurance given to the Minister of Great 
Britain; an omission as dishonorable as it must be 
dangerous to the government, implying either a 
want of ability, or a want of consistency and good 
faith. And as it will indubitably furnish a just cause 
for complaint against the United States, so it is 
natural to expect that it may involve them in war. 
It becomes the more serious in consequence of 
the non-surrender of the prizes which were brought 
into our ports by the privateers "Sans Culottes" and 
"Citizen Genet/' fitted out at Charleston. 

IV. — Because the fitting out of this privateer is a 
transaction involving on the part of the agents of 
France a gross outrage upon, and undisguised con 
tempt of, the government of the United States. It 
is aggravated by the circumstances of having been 
done under the immediate eye of the government, 
after an explicit and serious communication of its 
disapprobation — and after an expectation given that 
no similar attempt would be repeated. The Secre 
tary of State reported to the President as the result 
of a conversation with the French Minister, on the 
subject of the two privateers before mentioned, what 
was equivalent to an apology for having done it, and 
to at least a tacit promise to forbear a repetition. 
Yet it is still done, and is even attempted to be 
justified. 

V. — Because it is impossible to interpret such con 
duct into any thing else than a regular plan to force 
the United States into the war. Its tendency to 
produce that effect cannot be misunderstood by 
the agents of France. The direct advantage of the 

Cabinet Opinion 7 

measure to her is obviously too inconsiderable to 
induce the persisting in it contrary to the remon 
strances of the government, if it were not with a 
view to the more important end just mentioned; a 
conduct the more exceptionable, because it is accom 
panied with the fallacious disavowal of an intention 
to engage us in the war. 

VI. — Because there is every evidence of a regular 
system in the pursuit of that object, to endeavor to 
control the government itself by creating, if possi 
ble, a schism between it and the people, and en 
listing them on the side of France in opposition 
to their own constitutional authorities. This is de- 
ducible not only from a great variety of collateral 
incidents, but from direct written and verbal de 
clarations of the French Minister. 

The memorial lately presented by him to the 
Secretary of State, the most offensive paper perhaps 
that was ever offered by a foreign minister to a 
friendly power with which he resided, announces un 
equivocally the system which is alleged to exist. 

Besides the exorbitant pretensions which that 
paper advances, of a right in defiance of the declared 
sense of the government to fit out armed vessels 
from the ports of the United States, and even to 
enlist our citizens in their own territories in the 
service of France; to hold courts within their juris 
diction for the condemnation of prizes unsanctioned 
by compact, contrary to the rights of neutrality, 
contrary even to the spirit of the regulations of 
France for her own consulate establishment, besides 
the loose and unfounded charges of breach of treaty 

8 Alexander Hamilton 

rudely urged; — that paper more than insinuates the 
imputation on the President of ill will to France 
under the instigation of foreign influence, of having 
gone beyond his duty and his authority by the 
decision of matters not within his province, and 
sufficiently implies an appeal from him to Congress, 
if not to the people, whose disposition is at least in 
delicately put in contrast with his. Language of 
this sort, if even better founded than it is in the 
present instance, can never be used by a diplomatic 
character without a culpable violation of decorum. 
He has nothing to do but with the constitutional 
organ of the government. In his official communi 
cation he ought never to look beyond him — nor can 
he do it without disrespect to the government and 
to the nation. 

The declaration of the Minister of France to Mr. 
Dallas, Secretary of the Commonwealth of Penn 
sylvania, as related by him to the Governor of that 
Commonwealth and to the Secretary of State, is 
a further confirmation of the same system. That 
declaration, among other exceptionable things, ex 
pressed, "That he, the French Minister, would ap 
peal from the President to the people." 

It would be a fatal blindness not to perceive the 
spirit which inspires such language, and ill-omened 
passiveness not to resolve to withstand it with 
energy. 

VII. — Because to refuse an assurance that the 
privateer should remain in port, till the President 
could arrive to decide upon her situation, was an 
additional high-handed contempt of the government; 

Cabinet Opinion 9 

which was in no shape palliated by the ambiguous 
intimations of a probability that she would not 
be ready to depart before his return, — intimations 
which, from experience in other cases, can in no 
degree be relied upon. 

VIII. — Because not to act with decision under 
such circumstances will be to prostrate the govern 
ment, to sacrifice the dignity and essential interests 
of the nation. Indecision in such a case must neces 
sarily tend to destroy at home and abroad a due 
respect for the government, to weaken its arm, to 
embolden the enterprises of an intriguing and daring 
foreign agent, to encourage and multiply those who 
are disposed to adhere factiously to him, and altern 
ately to put the country in a condition of being 
dictated to by that foreign agent, and at war with all 
the enemies of the nation he represents. It is a 
truth the best founded and of the last importance, 
that nothing is so dangerous to a government as to 
be wanting either in self-confidence or self-respect. 

IX. — Because decision may even tend to preserve 
peace with France herself. If the enterprises of her 
Minister are not checked in their present stage, it 
may clearly be inferred from his character that they 
are likely to be carried to a length which will render 
a rupture between the two countries inevitable, 
should they not previously produce one with the 
powers who are opposed to France. 

X. — Because the measure which is recommended, 
is but a consequence of the instruction given to the 
different governors on the 24th of May last, ad 
dressed to them in their military capacity, expressly 

io Alexander Hamilton 

to be executed by the agency of the militia, and it 
included necessarily the use of military coercion when 
that should be found requisite to the end to be ac 
complished. It is, therefore, not to adopt a new 
principle, but to second the execution of an order 
already given by the President, founded upon 
mature deliberation and the unanimous opinion of 
the heads of departments, with the Attorney-General. 
It is therefore due to the known and declared pleasure 
of the President. A Governor who could not have 
recourse to the advice now asked, would fail in his 
duty not to employ in a similar case the means 
recommended, without ftirther sanction. 

The Governor of Pennsylvania might justifiably 
do so in the existing instance; but the case having 
been previously drawn into consultation between 
him and the heads of departments, he has thought 
fit to ask their advice, and in giving it, conformably 
with the true spirit of the President's instruction, 
they would only faithfully execute the trust reposed 
in them by him. 

XI. — Because the measure proposed is only pro 
visional, and can have no other effect than to evince 
the determination of the government, unless the 
vessel attempts to depart contrary to the intimation 
of the Minister, as understood by the Secretary of 
State. In such an event the necessity will be at 
tested by the occasion. 

XII. — If there be delicacy on one side, there is 
still greater delicacy on the other. France would 
have justly nothing to complain of in reference to an 
act which was merely a vindication of our own sover- 

Cabinet Opinion u 

eignty in our own territory, against a manifest, de 
liberate, and outrageous violation of it by her agent. 

If she be at all reasonable or equitable, she will 
disavow the proceedings and the agent, and take no 
offence. An appeal to her justice and friendship 
ought for this purpose to follow a resistance to the 
encroachment. But if actual measures be not taken, 
the other powers will have just cause of complaint, 
not only upon principle, but upon the strength of 
positive assurance. If war is to be hazarded, 't is 
certainly our duty to hazard it with that power 
which by injury and insult forces us to choose 
between opposite hazards, rather than with those 
powers who do not place us in so disagreeable a 
dilemma. 

A proceeding like that proposed cannot colorably 
be considered by any nation as an act of hostility. 
If attempts are made in neutral ports to equip armed 
vessels without permission of the neutral sovereign, 
they are clandestine : if they are detected and sup 
pressed, it is regarded, as a matter of course, a penal 
ty of which the adventurers are to take the chance. 
It would be a disgrace to the sovereign to whom 
they belong, and an offence to the neutral nation, 
even to make it a subject of complaint. 

To adopt as a rule of conduct, that, if we are to 
be involved in the war, it must be at any rate against 
the powers who are opposed to France, and that we 
ought rather to give them cause for attacking us, 
by suffering ourselves to be made an instrument of 
the hostilities of France, than to risk a quarrel with 
hex* by a vigorous opposition to her encroachments, 

12 Alexander Hamilton 

would be a policy as unjust and profligate as it would 
be likely to prove pernicious and disgraceful. 

A. HAMILTON, 
H. KNOX. 

WASHINGTON TO JOHN JAY, CHIEF-JUSTICE, AND JAMES 
WILSON, JAMES IREDELL, AND WILLIAM PATTERSON, 
ASSOCIATE-JUSTICES, OF THE SUPREME COURT OF 
THE UNITED STATES 

PHILADELPHIA, July 23, 1793. 

GENTLEMEN: 

The circumstances, which had induced me to ask 
your counsel on certain legal questions interesting to 
the public, exist now as they did then; but I by no 
means press a decision whereon you wish the advice 
and participation of your absent brethren. When 
ever, therefore, their presence shall enable you to 
give it with more satisfaction to yourselves, I shall 
accept it with pleasure. 

With sentiments of high respect, I am, etc. 

QUESTIONS PROPOSED TO BE SUBMITTED TO THE 

JUDGES OF THE SUPREME COURT OF THE 

UNITED STATES 

Draft by Hamilton. 

July, 1793. 

I. — Do the treaties between the United States 
and France give to France or her citizens a right, 
when at war with a Power with whom the United 
States are at peace, to fit out originally in and from 
the ports of the United States, vessels armed for war, 
with or without commissions? 

Legal Questions 13 

II. — If they give such a right, does it extend to all 
manner of armed vessels, or to particular kinds only? 
If the latter, to what kinds does it extend? 

III. — Do they give to France or her citizens, in the 
case supposed, a right to refit, or arm anew, vessels 
which, before their coming within any port of the 
United States, were armed for war, with or without 
commissions ? 

IV. — If they give such a right, does it extend to all 
manner of armed vessels, or to particular kinds only ? 
If the latter, to what kinds does it extend? Does it 
include an augmentation of force, or does it only 
extend to replacing the vessel in stain quo f 

V. — Does the 22d Article of the Treaty of Com 
merce, in the case supposed, extend to vessels armed 
for war, on account of the government of a Power 
at war with France, or to merchant armed vessels 
belonging to the subjects or citizens of that Power, 
(viz. :) of the description of those which by the Eng 
lish are called letter-of -marque ships — by the French 
"batiments armes en marchandise et en guerre"? 

VI. — Do the treaties aforesaid prohibit the United 
States from permitting, in the case aforesaid, the 
armed vessels belonging to a Power at war with 
France, or to the citizens or subjects of such Power, 
to come within the ports of the United States, there 
to remain as long as they may think fit, except in the 
case of their coming in with prizes made of the sub 
jects or property of France? 

VII. — Do they prohibit the United States from 
permitting, in the case supposed, vessels armed, on 
account of the government of a Power at war with 

14 Alexander Hamilton 

France, or vessels armed for merchandise and war, 
with or without commission, on account of the sub 
jects or citizens of such Power, or any vessels other 
than those commonly called privateers, to sell freely 
whatsoever they may bring into the ports of the 
United States, and freely to purchase in and carry 
from the ports of the United States, goods, merchan 
dise, and commodities, except as excepted in the 
last question. 

VIIL— Do they oblige the United States to per 
mit France, in the case supposed, to sell in their 
ports the prizes which she or her citizens may have 
made of any Power at war with her, or of the citizens 
or subjects of such Power; or exempt from the pay 
ment of the usual duties on ships and merchandise, 
the prizes so made, in the case of their being to be 
sold within the ports of the United States? 

IX. — Do those treaties, particularly the Consular 
Convention, authorize France, as of right, to erect 
courts within the jurisdiction of the United States 
for the trial and condemnation of prizes made by 
armed vessels in her service? 

X. — Do the laws and usages of nations authorize 
her, as of right, to erect such courts for such pur 
poses ? 

XI. — Do the laws of neutrality, considered rela 
tively to the treaties of the United States with foreign 
Powers, or independently of those treaties, permit 
the United States, in the case supposed, to allow 
to France or her citizens the privilege of fitting out 
originally in and from the ports of the United States, 
vessels armed and commissioned for war, either on 

Legal Questions 15 

account of the government or of private persons, or 
both? 

XII. — Do those laws permit the United States to 
extend the like privilege to a Power at war with 
France ? 

XIII. — Do the laws of neutrality, considered as 
aforesaid, permit the United States, in the case sup 
posed, to allow to France or her citizens the privilege 
of refitting or arming anew vessels which, before 
their coming within the United States, were armed 
and commissioned for war? May such privilege in 
clude an augmentation of the force of such vessels? 

XIV. — Do those laws permit the United States 
to extend the like privilege to a Power at war with 

XV. — Do those laws, in the case supposed, per 
mit merchant vessels of either of the Powers at war, 
to arm in the ports of the United States, without 
being commissioned? May this privilege be right 
fully refused? 

XVI. — Does it make any difference, in point of 
principle, whether a vessel be armed for war, or the 
force of an armed vessel be augmented, in the ports of 
the United States, with means procured in the United 
States, or with means brought into them by the party 
who shall so arm or augment the force of such ves 
sel? If the first be unlawful, is the second lawful? 

XVII. — Do the laws of neutrality, considered as 
aforesaid, authorize the United States to permit to 
France, her subjects, or citizens, the sale within her 
ports of prizes made of the subjects or property of a 
Power at war with France, before they have been 

1 6 Alexander Hamilton 

carried into some port of France and there con 
demned, refusing the like privilege to her enemy? 

XVIII. — Do those laws authorize the United 
States to permit to France the erection of courts 
within their territory and jurisdiction, for the trial 
and condemnation of prizes — refusing that privilege 
to a Power at war with France? 

XIX. — If any armed vessel of a Power at war 
with another with whom the United States are at 
peace, shall make prize of the subjects or property of 
its enemy within the territory or jurisdiction of the 
United States, have not the United States a right to 
cause restitution of such prize? Are they bound or 
not by the principles of neutrality so to do, if such 
prize shall be within their power? 

XX. — To what distance, by the laws and usages of 
nations, may the United States exercise the right of 
prohibiting the hostilities of foreign Powers at war 
with each other within rivers, bays, and arms of the 
sea, and upon the sea along the coasts of the United 
States? 

XXI. — Have vessels armed for war, under com 
mission from a foreign Power, a right, without the 
consent of the United States, to engage within their 
jurisdiction seamen and soldiers, for the service of 
such vessels, being citizens of that Power, or of an 
other foreign Power, or citizens of the United States? 

XXII. — Is it lawful for the citizens of such Power, 
or citizens of the United States, so to engage, being 
within the jurisdiction of the United States? * 

1 Hamilton objected to a reference to the judges on the ground that 
the matter was not within the province of the judiciary. Washington, 

No Jacobin 17 

WASHINGTON TO THE HEADS OF DEPARTMENTS AND 

THE ATTORNEY-GENERAL 

Draft by Hamilton. 

PHILADELPHIA, July 29, 1793. 

GENTLEMEN : 

It will not be amiss, I conceive, at the meeting you 
are about to have to-day, to consider the expediency 
of directing the custom-house officers to be attentive 
to the arming or equipping vessels, either for offen 
sive or defensive war, in the several ports to which 
they belong, and make report thereof to the gov 
ernor or some other proper officer. 

Unless this or some other effectual mode is adopted 
to check this evil in the first stage of its growth, the 
Executive of the United States will be incessantly 
harassed with complaints on this head, and probably 
when it may be difficult to afford a remedy. 
I am, etc. 

NO JACOBIN1 
IFrom the Daily Advertiser.] 

I. 

August, 1793. 

It is publicly rumored in this city that the minis 
ter of the French republic has threatened to appeal 
from the President of the United States to the people. 

however, in deference to the wishes of Jefferson, decided to make the 
reference, and so Hamilton framed the series of questions given above. 
The judges declined to answer, alleging that these were questions of 
national policy and international relations which could not properly 
come before them except in the course of the administration of justice. 
1 Genet, going from bad to worse, finally undertook to appeal to the 
people against the government. It was at this juncture that Hamilton 
again took up his pen and addressed the public in the "No Jacobin" 
papers. The government handled Genet with great dignity and ability, 

1 8 Alexander Hamilton 

Various publications which have recently appeared 
in the papers, particularly that under the signature 
of "Juba," in the National Gazette of the loth in 
stant, and that under the signature of " A Jacobin," 
in the General Advertiser of Friday last, seem to have 
begun the appeal. 

Several traits in the latter carry conjectures of the 
writer to the source of the threatened appeal. The 
idiom of it is evidently foreign, and it abounds in 
terms and phrases which are said by those who have 
access to him to be frequently in the mouth of the 
supposed author. That the idiom is foreign, will 
appear to a competent judge of the English lan 
guage, from the structure of every sentence; but 
there are particular expressions which will prove it 
even to those who have no very accurate knowledge 
of it. Witness these extracts: "I cannot be con 
vinced that a plan of this kind should be approved 
by Congress or the people of the United States, "- 
" through a desire of giving a proof of the loyalty and 
confidence which ought to exist between the agents 
of free nations. " The word " loyalty ' ' in the English 
language is only used to denote fidelity to a prince, 
to a lover, or to a mistress. In the French it is a 
familiar expression of good faith, candor, sincere 
dealing, etc. 

and when he made his last false step they demanded his recall. The 
course of the government and the arguments of Hamilton slowly 
but surely brought public opinion round to the administration, and 
when the demand for Genet's recall came (August 23, 1793) the ad 
ministration were masters of the situation. The " No Jacobin " papers 
appeared in the Daily Advertiser, and the first number was reprinted 
in Fenno's Gazette of the United States, August 31, 1793. The suc 
ceeding numbers followed at short intervals. 

No Jacobin 19 

That it probably proceeds from the source of the 
threatened appeal, is to be inferred from the positive 
assertion of things which, if true, can only be known 
to the principal officers of the general government, 
and to the public agents of France. It is said that 
orders were given to the military to take possession 
of a French vessel without previous complaint, ex 
planation, or communication with the agents of the 
French republic. Again, it is said, the minister of 
France caused the Grange x to be returned upon a 
simple request of the American government. De 
clarations like these could only with propriety be 
made with so much peremptoriness by parties to the 
transaction. 

Indeed, they seem intended to dismiss even the 
appearance of concealment. Let us now see in what 
manner the heavy charges of breach of treaty, which 
are brought against the executive of the general 
government, are supported. 

The first is the detention of French vessels armed in 
the ports of the United States; which is said to be 
contrary to the 226. Article of the Treaty of Com 
merce between the United States and France. 

The words of the French original upon which this 
construction is put, are as follows : " II ne sera permis 
a aucun corsaire etranger non appartenant a quelque 
sujet de sa majeste tres chretienne ou a aucun 
citoyen des dits Etats Unis, lequel aura un commis 
sion de la part d'un prince ou d'une puissance en 
guerre avec Tune des deux nations, d'armer leurs 

1 An English vessel captured by one of Genet's privateers within the 
capes of the Delaware. 

2O Alexander Hamilton 

vaissaux dans les ports de Tune des deux parties, ni 
d'y vendre les prizes qu'il aura faites, etc." 

The true translation of these words is : It shall not 
be permitted to any foreign privateer not belonging to 
subjects of His Most Christian Majesty or to citizens 
of the United States, which shall have commissions 
from a prince or power at war with one of the two 
nations, to arm their vessels in the ports of the one 
or the other of the two parties, nor there to sell the 
prizes which they shall have made, etc. 

The plain and evident meaning of this translation 
is, that neither of the contracting parties shall be at 
liberty to permit the privateers of a power at war with 
the other, to fit or arm in its ports, or sell their prizes 
there, etc. 

But this stipulation not to permit the privateers of 
powers at war with either of the parties, to fit or 
arm in the ports of the other, can by no rule of con 
struction be turned into an agreement to permit the 
privateers of one party, when engaged in war with a 
third power with whom the other party is at peace, 
to fit or arm in the ports of the party at peace. This 
would be to convert a prohibition against doing one 
thing into a contract to do another. 

Nor is there a syllable in the whole sentence that 
even implies such a contract. The attempt seems to 
be to deduce it from the words "not belonging to 
subjects of His Most Christian Majesty or to citizens 
of the United States," as if these words were intro 
duced by way of exception to the generality of the 
terms "foreign privateers, ' to imply that the priva 
teers of the subjects or citizens of the parties might 

No Jacobin 21 

be permitted to fit or arm in the ports of each other. 

But these words "not belonging/' etc., must be 
taken merely as words of additional description, 
more clearly to express what is intended by the terms 
"foreign privateers." Nor are they useless to this 
end. The sense of the terms " foreign privateers, " 
is not sufficiently precise or clear without them, for 
the privateers of either party would be foreign with 
respect to the other, but the intention being to 
designate privateers foreign to both parties. To 
render this intention unequivocal, the words "not 
belonging to the subjects of His Most Christian 
Majesty, or to the citizens of the United States/' are 
added, which fixes the true meaning. It is equiva 
lent to having said, it shall not be permitted to 
foreign privateers, that is to say, privateers "not 
belonging," etc. Unless, too, these words are under 
stood in this manner, they make nonsense of the 
whole clause. To perceive this, it is only necessary 
to remark, that the foreign privateers intended to be 
prohibited from the privilege of arming, etc., are ex 
pressly those which have commissions from a power 
at war with one of the parties. 

Then, if the words "not belonging, " etc., are to be 
used as words of exception, the natural reading of 
the clause would be as follows. " It shall not be per 
mitted to foreign privateers which have commissions 
from a prince or state at war with one of the two 
nations, to fit or arm in the ports of the other, unless 
those privateers so commissioned belong to the sub 
jects or citizens of the one or the other of the con 
tracting parties." 

22 Alexander Hamilton 

This exception would then operate to produce one 
of these two effects, both equally absurd. Either to 
authorize one of the contracting parties to permit 
privateers belonging to their own citizens, under 
commission from a power at war with the other, to 
fit or arm in its ports ; thus allowing its subjects or 
citizens with impunity, and even countenance, to 
partake in the war against the other of the contract 
ing parties; or to authorize one of the parties to 
permit privateers belonging to the subjects or citi 
zens of the other, under commission from a power 
at war with such other party, to fit or arm in the 
ports of the first-mentioned party ; thus enabling one 
party to give aid and countenance to the subjects of 
the other, when carrying on war against their own 
nation or sovereign, and consequently in the situa 
tion of rebels or pirates. 

No sense more rational can be given to the words 
in question, when understood as words of exception, 
having regard to the due and natural connection and 
import of the terms which immediately precede and 
succeed. It follows that they cannot be understood 
as words of exception, but merely as words of de 
scription, and that the inference attempted to be 
drawn from them is forced and unwarrantable. In 
deed, neither as words of exception, nor as words of 
description, do they give the least color to that in 
ference. 

If the printed copies of the treaty are accurate, the 
punctuation is a further illustration that the words 
"not belonging," etc., are merely words of additional 
description. In the French original, they are not 

No Jacobin 23 

divided even by a comma from the words "corsaire 
etranger" — " foreign privateer," — which they im 
mediately follow, forming with them the first member 
of the sentence and connected with the next member 
of it by the pronoun "lequel," or " which": il ne 
sera permis a aucun corsaire Stranger non apparte- 
nant a quelque sujet de sa majest<§ tres chretienne 
ou a un citoyen des dits Etats Unis, lequel etc. 

The words in question cannot, without making 
the clause nonsense, be understood as words of ex 
ception in another view. The words ''foreign priva 
teers/' are naturally to be understood as privateers 
foreign to both parties. If the words "not belong 
ing," etc., are not taken as words of additional de 
scription, but of exception — that is to say, if they 
are to be understood as equivalent to saying " except 
privateers belonging to the subjects of and commis 
sioned by one of the parties," it leads to a contradic 
tion of terms; it would be equivalent to saying, "it 
shall not be permitted to foreign privateers, not 
foreign," etc., for privateers belonging to the sub 
jects of and commissioned by one of the parties, 
would not be foreign to both the parties. 

But if it were possible, consistently with the con 
text, to give the words "non appartenant, " or "not 
belonging," the effect of an exception favoring the 
construction which is contended for, it could not at 
any rate go further than to authorize vessels pre 
viously fitted out and commissioned in the ports of 
France, and coming into our ports in the capacity of 
privateers, there to fit or arm; it could not possi 
bly extend to the original fitting out, arming, and 

24 Alexander Hamilton 

commissioning of privateers by one party in the 
ports of another; the expressions of every part of 
the clause presuppose that the vessels intended are 
already privateers, having commissions, etc., when 
they come into the ports of the respective parties. 

And it is well known that the detention complained 
of applies entirely to vessels which have been made 
privateers in our own port. 

If any confirmation were requisite, in so plain a 
case, of the construction which appears to have been 
adopted by the Executive of the general govern 
ment, it might be found in the regulations of France 
herself at the time our treaty with her was made. 
Those regulations show that it was the policy of 
France to restrict to her own ports the fitting out of 
privateers, with a variety of precautions to secure 
their good behavior, their accountability, and the 
rights and interests of all concerned; from which it 
is to be inferred that the clause in question was not 
intended to establish a right on either side to fit out 
privateers in the ports of the other, such a right being 
incompatible with the then existing policy of France. 

Indeed, such a right would be incompatible with 
the preservation of peace by either party, when the 
other was engaged at war, for as it would make one 
auxiliary to the other in this vexatious and irritating 
mode of hostility to an indefinite extent, it would be 
stronger than the case of a definite succor stipulated 
on a defensive alliance, and could not fail to involve 
the party permitting it in the war. 

It is not presumable that a mere incidental regu 
lation in a treaty of commerce could have been in- 

No Jacobin 25 

tended to include a consequence so important; and 
it could only have been admitted upon the strength 
of terms explicit and unequivocal. 

All advantages relating to war, which are stipu 
lated in favor of one nation, so as to be incommun 
icable to another, include more or less of hazard. 
They are apt to produce irritations, which produce 
war. In every case of doubt, therefore, upon the con 
struction of treaties, the rule is against the concession 
of such advantages. The principles of interpreta 
tion favor no thing that tends to put the peace of a 
nation in jeopardy. It is incumbent on a power at 
war, claiming of a neutral nation, on the ground of 
treaty, particular privileges of a military nature, to 
rest his pretensions upon clear and definite, not upon 
doubtful or obscure, expressions. When founded 
upon expressions of the latter kind, this claim is 
always to be rejected. 

Hence, consequently, the pretension to fit or arm 
in our ports privateers antecedently commissioned in 
the ports of France, beyond the mere point of repara 
tion, is inadmissible. It is not necessary to admit it 
for the sake of finding a useful object for the clause 
in question. That clause will have a very natural 
and a very useful application, when it is understood 
as merely a prohibition to prevent a power at war 
with the other to fit or arm privateers in the ports of 
the party at peace. For without it each party would 
have been at liberty to grant by treaty such a right 
to other powers, which is now prevented. 

An argument against every construction of this 
kind, may be drawn from the seventeenth article of 

26 Alexander Hamilton 

the treaty of commerce. This article grants affirma 
tively to the armed vessels of each party, certain 
privileges in the ports of the other. T is there we 
should naturally look for a privilege so important as 
the one claimed; not in an article, the general object 
of which plainly is to exclude other powers from 
privileges in the ports of the contracting parties. 
The omission of the privilege claimed in the clause 
where it would naturally be included, is a reason 
against admitting it upon a forced construction of a 
clause where it would not naturally be expected. 

Upon the whole, there is no plausible ground for 
the pretension set up. The natural construction of 
the clause of the treaty which has been quoted, ob 
viously excludes it, and the United States cannot, ex 
gratia, accede to it without departing from neutrality, 
and encountering the mischiefs of a war with which 
they have nothing to do. 

The result is, that a pretension to fit out privateers 
in our ports against our will, is an insult to our under 
standings, and a glaring infraction of our rights. 

The residue of the Jacobin's charges will be here 
after examined. 

No JACOBIN. 

ii 

The next charge of breach of treaty exhibited 
by the Jacobin against the Executive of the United 
States is, to use his own language, "the seizure of 
prizes made known to the agents of the French 
republic at the moment those prizes were held up for 

No Jacobin 27 

sale. " The orders given to the military to take pos 
session of a French vessel, without previous com 
plaint, explanation, or communication with the 
agents of the French republic, said to be contraven 
tions of the i yth Article of the Treaty of Commerce, 
by which it is provided "that it shall be lawful for 
the ships of war and privateers of either party, freely 
to carry whithersoever they please, the ships and 
goods taken from their enemies, without being 
obliged to pay any duty to the officers of the ad 
miralty or any other judges, and without those prizes 
entering into the ports of the one party or the other, 
being liable to be arrested or seized, nor can the 
officers of the places take cognizance of the validity 
of the said prizes, which may go out and be conducted 
freely and in all liberty to the places expressed in 
their commissions, which the commanders of the said 
vessels shall be obliged to show," etc. 

It is presumed, that the facts complained of are 
more particularly applicable to the case of the ship 
William, arrested in this port; though it is under 
stood that the same proceedings, with some small 
difference of circumstances, took place in the case of 
another vessel in New York. 

To judge of the propriety of the complaint in each 
case, it is necessary to attend to the following par 
ticulars. According to the general laws and usage of 
nations, the jurisdiction of every country extends a 
certain distance into the sea along the whole extent 
of its coast. What this distance is remains a matter 
of some uncertainty, though it is an agreed principle 
that it at least extends to the utmost range of cannon 

28 Alexander Hamilton 

shot, that is, not less than four miles. But most 
nations claim and exercise jurisdiction to a greater 
extent. Three leagues, or nine miles, seem to accord 
with the most approved rule, and would appear from 
Martin, a French author, to be that adopted by 
France, though Valin, another French author, states 
it at only two leagues, or six miles. 

Within this distance of the coast of a neutral 
country, all captures made by a power at war upon 
its enemy are illegal and null, on the principle of its 
being a violation of the jurisdiction and protection of 
the neutral country. This principle, founded on the 
most evident reason, is asserted by all writers, and 
practised upon by all nations. 

Every nation has a right to prevent a violation of 
its jurisdiction, and consequently to prevent the 
making of captures within that jurisdiction. A 
right to redress if such captures be made is a neces 
sary consequence. A neutral nation is bound to pre 
vent injuries within its jurisdiction to a power with 
which it is at peace, by any other power. In other 
words, it owes fair guard and protection to the citi 
zens and subjects of every power with which it is at 
peace. It is therefore bound to exert itself to pre 
vent captures within the limits of its protection of 
the subjects or property of one power by another 
power, and if such capture happens to avail itself of 
its own right of redress, against the power making 
it, for the purpose of effecting a restitution of the 
person or thing captured. 

This is too plain to be denied ; but it is pretended 
that the redress of the injury is to be sought through 

No Jacobin 29 

the channel of negotiation only, and not by the im 
mediate exertion of the authority of the neutral 
nation, to cause restitution to be made in the first 
instance, either by means of courts of justice, or by 
the use of the public force. 

It may boldly be affirmed that this position is 
founded neither on principle nor the opinion of 
writers, nor on the practice of nations; not on prin 
ciple, because it is unreasonable to suppose that a 
nation ought to postpone the opportunity of redress 
ing itself and of doing justice to another, upon the 
uncertain issue of a negotiation of which it cannot 
foresee the success. When the object is out of its 
reach, the way of negotiation ought to be pursued; 
for the alternative then is to negotiate or go to war, 
and a due moderation requires that a preference 
should be given to the milder course; but if the 
object to which the injury relates is within its power, 
the most prudent as well as the most dignified and 
efficacious course is to embrace the opportunity of 
rectifying what has been done amiss, for this seems 
to terminate the affair, and avoid the controversies 
and heats too often incident to negotiation. 

The position in question is not founded on the 
opinion of writers, for these establish a contrary doc 
trine — as may be seen in Bynkershoek's Qu&stiones 
Publici Juris, Book I., Chap. 8; Vatel, Book II., Sec. 
84, 101, 102, and 289; 2 R. Inst., 587-589; Leoline 
Jenkins's Life and Papers, vol. i, xcv. ; vol. 2, pages 

727> 733» 75r» 752, 754, 755» 7^o; Woodeson's 
Lectures, page 443; Douglass' Rep., 595; Lee on 
Captures, Cap. 9, — nor on the practice of nations, for 

30 Alexander Hamilton 

this is in favor of summary prevention and redress, as 
may be seen by one example which those writers 
quote, and is within experience of individuals among 
ourselves. A neutral fortress never scruples to fire 
upon the vessels of any power which attempts to com 
mit a hostility against another power within reach of 
its cannon, nor a neutral sovereign or magistrate to 
prevent or restore captures made within his jurisdic 
tion.1 

The foregoing observations will lead to a right 
judgment of the merits of the complaint which is 
made. 

Each of the vessels in question is understood to 
have been taken within a distance short of the least 
of the two distances which has been mentioned as 
forming the rule observed by France, one of them 
seems less than three miles, the other within less 
than five miles. 

It may, therefore, be affirmed that both these 
captures were made within the limits of the protec 
tion of the United States, and in violation of their 
jurisdiction. And it will follow, from the principles 
which have been maintained, that the United States 

1 Indeed our treaties with several powers oblige us to this conduct. 
In the 5th article of that with Holland, the 2d of that with Sweden, 
the yth of that with Prussia, the United States in affirmance of the 
general doctrine of the laws of nations "bind themselves by all means 
in their power to endeavor to protect all vessels and other effects be 
longing to the subjects and inhabitants of those powers respectively, 
in their ports, roads, havens, internal seas, passes, rivers, and as far 
as their jurisdiction extends at sea, and to recover and cause to be 
restored to the true proprietors, all such vessels and effects which shall 
be taken under their [protection] jurisdiction," which is a plain indi 
cation that our then negotiators and government never dreamt of the 
newly invented construction of that treaty. 

No Jacobin 31 

have a right and are bound to cause restitution of 
those prizes. 

To this conclusion is opposed that provision of the 
article which declares that the local officers cannot 
take cognizance of the validity of the prizes which 
are carried by one party into the harbors or ports of 
the other. 

But there is no established rule of interpretation 
with regard either to laws or treaties than that gen 
eral expressions shall never be so understood as to 
involve unreasonableness or absurdity. According 
to this rule the general expression " the local officers ' ' 
(les officiers des lieux) "cannot take cognizance of 
the validity of the prizes," must naturally be under 
stood with reference to prizes made on the high seas 
without the jurisdiction of the party into whose 
harbors or ports they are brought, not with reference 
to prizes taken within the protection and jurisdiction 
of such party. The following qualification is from the 
nature of things implied in the general terms, to wit : 
provided the prizes have not been taken within the 
jurisdiction of the party in whose ports they shall be. 
An interpretation so extensive as to embrace prizes 
made within the jurisdiction of such party would lead 
to a consequence not less absurd than this. A vessel 
of the United States might be taken by a French pri 
vateer in the port of Philadelphia, and there would be 
no power to question the validity of the prize or en 
force restitution. Such a consequence is too violent 
to be admissible, and a position which includes it re 
futes itself. It can never be imagined that any na 
tion could mean to tie up her hands to such an extent. 

32 Alexander Hamilton 

If, then, prizes of vessels belonging to the United 
States or their citizens shall be excepted, it will fol 
low that the clause cannot in this respect be taken 
in a literal sense ; and if it is to be taken in a rational, 
not a literal, sense, it will admit the exceptions of 
all prizes taken within the jurisdiction or protection 
of the party within whose territories they are found, 
being at peace with the nation of whom or of whose 
citizens it is made, for a state owes protection not 
only to its own citizens but to the citizens of every 
other nation with which it is at peace, coming 
within its jurisdiction for commerce or any other law 
ful cause. Nor can it even be supposed, upon the 
strength of mere general expressions, that it has 
meant to exchange the right of affording protection 
and security by its own power and authority, for 
that of negotiating with another nation the repara 
tion which may be due to a violation of its juris 
diction. So essential an alienation of jurisdiction 
could only be deduced from precise and specific as 
well as express terms. 

Besides, such an inference is broader even than the 
letter of the clause. T is only to the "officiers des 
lieux," the local officers, or officers of the harbors, 
ports, or places to which the prizes are brought, that 
the cognizance of their validity is forbidden; 'tis 
not to the general judiciary tribunals or general 
executive authority of the country that such cog 
nizance is denied. The expressions, "officiers des 
lieux," are not of a nature to comprehend them. 
They are, therefore, under no prohibition by the 
treaty, and consequently, as far as consists with the 

No Jacobin 33 

jus gentium, or law of nations, are at liberty to 
interpose. 

And the rule of the law of nations is this, that a 
neutral nation shall not interpose to examine the 
validity of prizes made by a power at war, from its 
enemies, at any place except one which is within the 
jurisdiction of such neutral nation. It is of the 
essence of jurisdiction to redress all wrongs which 
happen within its sphere. Powers at war have no 
right in derogation from the peculiar jurisdiction of 
a neutral nation. That jurisdiction, therefore, is in 
the same force against them as against powers at 
peace. What would be a marine trespass in the one 
case, is so in the other. A capture within the pro 
tection or jurisdiction of a neutral state is not a 
lawful act of war, but a mere trespass, of course 
within the competency of the neutral state to re 
dress it.1 

It may be asked why, if this was the rule of the 
law of nations, there should have been a particular 
article of treaty concerning it? The answer is, ist. 
That it is a common practice to introduce into 
treaties stipulations recognizing the rules of the law 
of nations, in order to avoid controversy about them, 
of which there are several examples in our treaties. 
2d. That the article secures to France something 

1 The rights of war only take place in the countries of the powers at 
war, or on the high seas which are common to both. If acts of hos 
tility are committed within a neutral territory, they do not partake 
of the rights of war, they cannot be judged of by the laws of war, nor 
have any of the rules of war the smallest relation to them. As tres 
passes they are liable to be redressed in the ordinary course of justice, 
as infringements of territorial rights they claim redress and punish 
ment from the executive authority of the injured country. 

VOL. V.— 3. 

34 Alexander Hamilton 

more than the usage of several nations admits, 
namely, a right to continue in our ports an indefinite 
time, and the benefit of an exclusion of the privateers 
of her enemies, having made prizes of the subjects, 
people, or property of France, from the degree of 
asylum to which they would otherwise be entitled. 
These are sufficient objects for the article without 
giving to it an extension subversive of the just and 
necessary jurisdiction of the country. 

It is clearly demonstrated by what has been said 
that the government of the United States has an 
undoubted right to interpose authority, not by mere 
negotiation, to effect the restoration of the ships in 
question to their original owners, and that the doing 
so, either by a direct exertion of the public force, or 
by means of judicial process, is consistent both with 
the laws of nations, and with the true meaning of our 
treaty with France. It therefore gives no handle to 
the complaint of breach of treaty. To what depart 
ment of the government it most regularly belongs 
to effect the requisite redress — whether to the Ex 
ecutive or to the Judiciary, or to both indiscrimin 
ately, is not yet settled in this country, nor is it 
material to any foreign nation. It is a mere question 
between the departments of our own government. 
So long as nothing is done which is contrary to the 
laws of nations or to treaty, a foreign power can 
have no ground of complaint. 

As to the point of previous application to the 
agents of the foreign nation concerned, this belongs 
to a mere question of civility, not of right; there 
being in every such case a direct responsibility on the 

No Jacobin 35 

part of the neutral nation to the power whose citizens 
or property may have been captured. The power 
making the capture cannot justly be dissatisfied if 
the surest method of performing its duty is adopted 
by the neutral nation. This is to take the prize in 
the first instance into custody, till a fair and full ex 
amination can be had into the fact with regard to 
the place of capture, as was done in the instances in 
question. 

This course, too, would naturally obtain till some 
arrangement should have been concerted between 
the government and the agents of the powers at war, 
and is the only one which can be observed in places 
where there are no such agents. And it would seem, 
from what took place in the case of the William, 
immediately after her seizure, that such an arrange 
ment had been subsequently agreed upon; which is 
a proof that the course pursued was not the effect of 
unkindly disposition. But if there had been a dis 
position to proceed with strictness and rigor, it will 
be shown in the sequel that it was fully warranted 
by the very disrespectful treatment we have ex 
perienced from the agents of France, who have 
acted towards us from the beginning more like a 
dependent colony than an independent nation, — a 
state of degradation, to which I trust that the free 
dom of the American mind will never deign to 
submit. 

No JACOBIN. 

36 Alexander Hamilton 

in 

I793- 

Another accusation against the Executive of the 
United States preferred by the Jacobin, is derived 
from this circumstance: that while by the treaty 
between the United States and France the goods 
of her enemies on board our ships are exempt from 
capture, the goods of France on board our ships are 
subject to the depredations of her enemies, without 
any steps being taken by the Executive to cause 
French property to be returned, and to prevent 
similar hardships being in future imposed. 

This has, if possible, still less color than any of the 
others. 

By the general law of nations as laid down by 
writers, and practised upon by nations, previous to 
the late war between the United States and Great 
Britain, this rule was clearly and fully established. 

That the goods of an enemy in the ships of a friend 
(that is, of a neutral power) are lawful prizes, and 
that the goods of a friend in the ships of an enemy 
(those called contraband excepted) are not lawful 
prizes. This rule is founded upon the principle that 
one enemy may lawfully take the goods of another 
wheresoever he finds them, except within the juris 
diction or dominion of a neutral state. Of course he 
may take them upon the high seas, where no nation 
can have jurisdiction or dominion. Vatel, Book III., 
S. 115, 116; Bynkershoek, Qucss. Jur. Pub., Lib. I., 
Cap. 13, 14. 

It necessarily follows that French property taken 
by the enemies of France in American vessels is by 

No Jacobin 37 

the law of nations lawful prize, and that American 
property (not of the contraband kind) taken by 
Frenchmen in the ships of their enemies is not ac 
cording to the same law lawful prize. To the form 
ing a right judgment, then, on this part of the 
Jacobin's charges, and to determine whether France 
is not benefited rather than injured by the alterations 
which have taken place, the following observations 
may perhaps be useful. 

During the war between the United States and 
Great Britain, certain powers who associated under 
the denomination of the armed neutrality, asserted a 
rule the reverse of that which had before prevailed 
and which has been stated. But this association, 
made with a view to the then existing war, term 
inated with it. The United States never acceded to 
that association. They contented themselves with 
introducing its principle into their treaties with such 
powers with whom they formed treaties. Accord 
ingly, it is to be found in our treaties with France, 
Holland, Sweden, and Prussia. 

Great Britain, on her part, has never acceded to 
the new principle as a general rule; and there are 
other powers of Europe who did not originally unite 
in the attempt to introduce it, and who are not 
known to have since done any act amounting to an 
adoption of it. 

An established rule of the law of nations can only 
be altered by agreements between all the civilized 
powers, or a new usage generally adopted and sanc 
tioned by time. 

Neither having happened in the present case, the 

38 Alexander Hamilton 

old principle must be considered as still forming the 
basis of the general law of nations, liable only to 
the exceptions resulting from particular treaties. 

With France, Holland, Sweden, and Prussia, four 
of the belligerent parties, we have treaties containing 
the new principle ; but with Russia, England, Spain, 
Portugal, Austria, Savoy, we have no such treaties. 
Against the former powers, therefore, we have a right 
to claim the new principle, as they would against us, 
were we in a state of war and they at peace. Be 
tween us and the latter powers the old rule must 
govern until a departure from it can be regulated by 
mutual consent. 

As we cannot of right assert the new principle 
against those powers with whom we have not estab 
lished it by treaty, so neither can we even in prudence 
or good policy insist upon it, unless we are prepared 
to support it by arms. 

There is not a doubt that all the powers who are at 
liberty to pursue the old rule will do it. In a war of 
opinion and passion like the present, concessions to 
ill-founded or doubtful pretensions are not to be ex 
pected. Nor are the United States in a condition to 
attempt to enforce such claims. 

But it seems that the not having hitherto mani 
fested a disposition toward this species of knight- 
errantry, is an injury and offence to France. The 
Jacobin deems it a breach of our treaty with her, 
that we do not quarrel with other nations for an 
object which we can claim of them neither by the 
law of nations nor by treaty. 

It appears that the Jacobin is ready enough to 

No Jacobin 39 

insist upon and even to enlarge constructively all the 
peculiar advantages which our treaty with France 
gives to her; but any circumstance of supposed in 
convenience to her is, in his eyes, a sore grievance, 
while he seems insensible to those which operate 
against us. This very reasonable gentleman ought 
to remember that if the property of the enemies of 
France in our ships is protected by our treaty with 
her, the property of our citizens in the ships of these 
enemies loses by that treaty the immunity or security 
to which it would otherwise be entitled, and that this 
important sacrifice on our part was agreed to, that 
we might have the advantage of being the carriers 
during European wars. 

His silence on this head can only be accounted for 
on the supposition that if he really belongs to this 
country, he is blinded to her interests by foreign 
influence. He ought to remember that the citizens 
of France have already enjoyed the sweets of this 
departure by treaty from the law of nations at the 
expense of our citizens. This happened in the case 
of the brig Little Sarah, on board of which was a 
quantity of flour belonging to citizens of Philadel 
phia. This flour was considered and treated as a 
lawful prize. 

He ought also to remember that it is at best pro 
blematical whether the citizens of the United States 
have not more property afloat in the bottoms of the 
powers at war with France than the citizens of 
France have afloat in bottoms of the United States, 
and consequently whether the balance is not in favor 
of France. 

40 Alexander Hamilton 

What is there in our history that can authorize our 
being degraded with the supposition that we are 
ignorant both of our duties and our rights? 

The result of what has been shown evidently is 
that the Jacobin's charge has no better foundation 
than that the Executive of the United States has 
not quarrelled with the enemies of France, for doing 
what by the law of nations they have a right to do. 

No JACOBIN. 

IV 

1793- 

I have, I believe, sufficiently answered charges 
which the Jacobin has brought against the Executive 
of the United States. 

In doing this, it has been shown that the claim 
of a right on the part of France to fit out privateers 
in the ports of the United States, as derived from 
treaty, is without foundation. As this is the basis 
on which it has been rested, and indeed it is the only 
one upon which it could rest if at all to be supported, 
it is not necessary, by way of answer to the Jacobin, 
to discuss how the claim of such a right would stand 
independent of treaty. But a few remarks on this 
point, for the information of those who may not be 
familiar with subjects of the kind, may not be with 
out use. 

It is a plain dictate of reason and an established 
principle of the law of nations that a neutral state 
in any matter relating to war (not specially promised 
by some treaty made prior to the commencement of 
the war and without reference to it) cannot lawfully 

No Jacobin 41 

succor, aid, countenance, or support either of the 
parties at war with each other; cannot make itself, 
or suffer itself to be made, with its own consent, per 
mission, or connivance, an instrument of the hostility 
of one party against the other, and as a consequence 
of these general principles cannot allow one party to 
prepare within its territories the means of annoying 
the other, or to carry on from thence against the 
other, with means prepared there, military expedi 
tions of any sort by land or water. 

To allow such practices is manifestly to associate 
with one party against the other. The state which 
does it, ceases thereby to be a neutral state, becomes 
an enemy, and may be justly treated as such. In 
common life it is readily understood that whoever 
knowingly assists my enemy to injure me becomes 
himself, by doing so, my enemy also ; and the reason 
being the same, the case cannot be different between 
nations. 

Could it be necessary to enforce principles so 
clearly founded on common sense by authorities and 
precedents, it might be done by an appeal to writers 
and to the general practice of nations. The follow 
ing are a few of these that might be adduced : Vatel, 
Book III., Sec. 104; Bynkershoek, Qu&s. Jur. Pub., 
Lib. I. Cap. 4, particularly pages 69-70 of Latin 
edition; Idem, Cap. 8, particularly page 65 of the 
same edition; Leoline Jenkins, 26. vol., 728, 756; 
Valin, Lib. III., Tit. IX., Art. XIV., p. 272. 

Some of these establish only the general principles, 
others of them go directly to the point of carrying 
on military expeditions from the territories of the 

42 Alexander Hamilton 

neutral state, and even to that of fitting out privateers 
in the ports of such state ; pronouncing the neutral 
state to be answerable for the consequences, and giv 
ing the party injured a right to reparation. This 
reparation may either be in damages, to be paid by 
the neutral state, or by reprisals, at the option of the 
party injured. 

It appears from them, moreover, that on the 
ground of the laws of neutrality, some nations (if it 
be not a general usage) go so far as to exclude from 
remaining in their ports more than twenty-four hours 
(if not detained by tempest), armed vessels of one 
belligerent party coming within its ports with prizes 
made of another. It was an article of the marine 
ordinances of France under the former government 
(and it is not known to have been changed), that " no 
vessel taken by a captain having a foreign commis 
sion, can remain more than twenty-four hours in the 
ports or harbors of France, if not detained there by 
tempest, or if the prize has not been made of the 
enemies of France." 

And Valin, advocate and procurator for the king 
at the seat of the admiralty of Rochelle, has this 
comment upon that article: " Plenary asylum is due 
only to those with whom we are not at war. To 
enemies we owe no more than the safety of their 
lives; to others we owe hospitality and good treat 
ment, with liberty to go away when they judge 
proper. 

" Nevertheless, as neutrality with two powers at 
war permits not to succor one to the prejudice of the 
other, to conciliate this consideration with the right 

No Jacobin 43 

of asylum, nations have tacitly agreed, and usage 
has made it a common law, that asylum shall be 
granted to foreign armed vessels with their prizes; 
that is to say, if entered into a port through tempest, 
as long as the bad weather shall not permit them to 
put to sea, and for four-and-twenty hours only, if 
they shall have put in from any other cause. 

"Thus, except the case of tempest, vessels being 
in a condition to make sail, there is an obligation to 
make them depart and return to sea after twenty- 
four hours, whatever danger there may be of re 
capture by their enemies; otherwise it would be to 
violate the laws of neutrality." 

(See the authorities before referred to.) 

The same idea which is to be found in this author 
appears in the writings of Leoline Jenkins, also above 
referred to, who was judge of the High Court of 
Admiralty of England, in the reign of James II. 
This serves to show the extreme nicety of nations on 
the point of neutrality. But how much stronger the 
case of fitting out armed vessels in a neutral port to 
make prizes, than that of simply coming into and 
staying in it with prizes that have been made! 

Another reflection occurs in relation to this point, 
which is this: that the government of the United 
States, in a matter at least of doubtful propriety, has 
given to France a doubtful privilege to which she was 
not entitled by treaty, that of selling the prizes made 
by her armed vessels in their ports ; the treaty stipu 
lated nothing more than a free access and egress. 
Let it be judged from this how far a disposition to 
deny France the privileges which she may claim by 

44 Alexander Hamilton 

treaty has governed. It is true, and in that the 
United States must seek their justification with 
other powers, that writers are not agreed as to this 
rule with regard to prizes; some considering it as 
lawful to sell them in neutral ports, as may be seen, 
Vatel, Book III., Cap. 7, Sec. 232. But still it ap 
pears that the government, in a doubtful case, has 
followed the course which favors France. And it is 
questionable whether the examples of national regu 
lations, and the opinion of a judge and a lawyer 
versed in the practice of courts of admiralty and 
more drawn to attend critically to the point of usage, 
ought not to have more weight than those of writers 
who were in a situation to have been guided more by 
general theory. It appears likewise that the Regent 
of Sweden, who, like us, has pursued the path of 
neutrality in the present war, has made the point of 
fitting out privateers a particular article of prohibi 
tion ; an example in practice which has great weight 
in the question. The governments of Europe know 
by long experience the usages of war, and without 
consulting the authorities or precedents, are able 
to pronounce with facility on what is lawful, what 
unlawful. 

The example, then, of Sweden, is a respectable 
confirmation of what is the usage of nations on the 
point in question. 

It is easy too to discern that the United States 
would become one of the most mischievous enemies 
which the maritime powers opposed to France could 
have, if from their territories armed vessels could be 
fitted out to an indefinite extent, with the full use of 

No Jacobin 45 

the means to cruise against the trade of those powers ; 
if the prizes made by such armed vessels could be 
brought into their ports and sold; and if their pro 
fessed neutrality could give asylum and security to 
these vessels and the fruits of their depredations. 
The inference is, that such a state of things could 
not possibly be long tolerated by those powers, but 
would lead inevitably to involving the United States 
in the war. 

A consequence, no doubt, well understood, and 
unquestionably intended by the agents of France, 
who, with delusive professions of not desiring to em 
bark this country in the war, are industriously em 
ploying every expedient that can tend to produce 
the event. 

No JACOBIN. 

v 

August 1 6, 1793. 

The observations hitherto made have been de 
signed to vindicate the Executive of the United 
States from the aspersions cast upon it by the 
Jacobin. Let us now examine what has been the 
conduct of the agents of France. 

Mr. Genet, charged with the commission of Min 
ister Plenipotentiary from the French Republic to 
the United States, arrived first at Charleston, South 
Carolina. Instead of coming immediately on to the 
seat of government, as in propriety he ought to have 
done, he continued at that place and on the road so 
long as to excite no small degree of observation and 
surprise. Here, at once, the system of electrifying 

46 Alexander Hamilton 

the people (to use a favorite phrase of the agents of 
France) began to be put in execution. Discerning 
men saw, from this first opening of the scene, what 
was to be the progress of the drama. They per 
ceived that negotiation with the constitutional or 
gans of the nation was not the only means to be 
relied upon for carrying the points with which the 
representative of France was charged — that popular 
intrigue was at least to second, if not to enforce, the 
efforts of negotiation. 

During the stay of Mr. Genet at Charleston, with 
out a possibility of sounding or knowing the dis 
position of our government on the point, he causes 
to be fitted out two privateers, under French colors, 
and commissions to cruise from our ports against 
the enemies of France. Citizens of the United 
States are engaged to serve on board these privateers, 
contrary to the natural duties of humanity between 
nations at peace, and contrary to the positive stipu 
lations of our treaties with some of the powers at 
war with France. One of these privateers makes a 
prize of an English vessel, brings her into the port of 
Charleston, where a Consul of France proceeds to 
try, condemn, and sell her; unwarranted by usage, 
by treaty, by precedent, by permission. It is im 
possible for a conduct less friendly or less respectful 
than this to have been observed. To direct viola 
tions of our sovereignty, amounting to a serious 
aggression, was added a dangerous commitment of 
our peace, without even the ceremony of previously 
feeling the pulse of our government. The incidents 
that attended Mr. Genet's arrival here, previous 

No Jacobin 47 

to his reception, though justly subject to criticism, 
shall be passed over in silence. Breaches of decorum 
lose their importance when mingled with injuries 
and outrages. 

This offensive commencement of his career was 
not made an objection to his reception; though it 
would probably have been so in any other country 
in the world. It has not been alleged either, that 
there was any want of cordiality in that reception. 
We shall see what return was made for this mani 
festation of moderation and friendship. Knowing, 
as we do, the opposition of the government to the 
practice of fitting out privateers in our ports, it 
cannot be doubted that an early opportunity was 
taken to make known its disapprobation to the 
French Minister; nor is it possible that the Ex 
ecutive of the United States can have neglected to 
remonstrate against so improper an exercise of con 
sular jurisdiction as that which has been mentioned; 
yet we have seen that the practice of fitting out pri 
vateers has been openly persisted in. Their num 
ber has so increased, and their depredations have 
been so multiplied, as to give just cause of alarm for 
the consequences to the peace of this country. It 
is also matter of notoriety that the consuls of France 
have gone on with the condemnation of prizes; that 
one of them has had the audacity, by a formal pro 
test to the District Court of New York, not only to 
deny its jurisdiction, but to arrogate to himself a 
complete and exclusive jurisdiction over the case. 

The aggravating circumstances which attended the 
fitting out the Little Democrat at this port, under the 

48 Alexander Hamilton 

very nose of the government; the means which were 
used to obtain a suspension of her progress until the 
return of the President to the seat of government; 
the refusal which those overtures met with; the 
intemperate and menacing declarations which they 
produced on the part of the French Minister — have 
been the subject of general conversation. 

How much more there is in the case ; what further 
contempt of the government may have succeeded 
the return of the President, can only be matter 
of conjecture. We know, however, that the Little 
Democrat proceeded to sea, and we conclude, from 
the known consistency of our Chief Magistrate, that 
this could not have been with his consent. 

Prosecutions have been instituted and carried on, 
against some of our citizens for entering into the 
service of France. It is known that Mr. Genet has 
publicly espoused and patronized the practice, even, 
as it is asserted without contradiction, to the feeing 
of counsel for carrying on the defence of the guilty; 
and we see, but a few days since, an advertisement 
from the consul of France at Philadelphia, inviting 
to enter into her service, not only her own citizens, 
but all friends to liberty, including of course the 
citizens of the United States. 

We read of cases in which one nation has raised 
men for military service in the dominions of another, 
with the consent of the nation in whose territories 
they were raised; but the raising of men, not only 
without the consent but against the will of the gov 
ernment of the country in which they are raised, is 
a novelty reserved for the present day, to display the 

Instructions 49 

height of arrogance on one side and the depth of 
humiliation on the other. This is but a part of the 
picture.1 

No JACOBIN. 

INSTRUCTIONS TO THE COLLECTORS OF THE CUSTOMS a 

PHILADELPHIA, August 4, 1793. 

SIR: — It appearing that repeated contraventions 
of our neutrality have taken place in the ports of 
the United States, without having been discovered in 
time for prevention or remedy, I have it in command 
from the President, to address to the collectors of the 
respective districts a particular instruction on the 
subject. 

It is expected that the officers of the customs in 
each district will, in the course of their official func 
tions, have a vigilant eye upon whatever may be 
passing within the ports, creeks, inlets, and waters of 
such district, of a nature to contravene the laws of 
neutrality, and upon discovery of any thing of the 
kind, will give immediate notice to the Governor of 
the State, and to the attorney of the judicial district, 
comprehending the district of the customs within 
which any such contravention may happen. 

To assist the judgment of the officers on this head, 
I transmit herewith a schedule of rules, concerning 
sundry particulars which have been adopted by the 
President, as deductions from the laws of neutrality, 

1 Hamilton being ill with the yellow fever, these essays were not 
continued. — J. C. H. 

2 These instructions were called forth by the antics of Genet, the 
continual seizure of British ships by his privateers, and the illegal acts 
of the French consuls sitting as prize courts. 

VOL. V. — 4. 

50 Alexander Hamilton 

established and received among nations. Whatever 
shall be contrary to these rules will, of course, be to 
be notified as above mentioned. 

There are some other points which, pursuant to 
our treaties, and the determination of the Executive, 
I ought to notice to you. 

If any vessel of either of the powers at war with 
France should bring or send within your district a 
prize, made of the subjects, people, or property of 
France, it is immediately to be notified to the Gov 
ernor of the State, in order that measures may be 
taken, pursuant to the i;th article of our treaty with 
France, to oblige such vessel and her prize, or such 
prize, when sent in without the capturing vessel, to 
depart. 

No privateer of any of the powers at war with 
France, coming within a district of the United States, 
can, by the 226. article of our treaty with France, 
enjoy any other privilege than that of purchasing 
such victuals as shall be necessary for her going to the 
next port of the prince or state from which she has 
her commission. It she should do any thing beside 
this, it is immediately to be reported to the Governor 
and the attorney of the district. You will observe 
by the rules transmitted, that the term privateer is 
understood not to extend to vessels armed for mer 
chandise and war, commonly called with us letters 
of marque, nor, of course, to vessels of war in the 
immediate service of the government of either of 
the powers at war. 

No armed vessel which has been or shall be origi 
nally fitted out in any port of the United States by 

Instructions 5 1 

either of the parties at war, is henceforth to have 
asylum in any district of the United States. If any 
such armed vessel shall appear within your district, 
she is immediately to be notified to the Governor and 
attorney of the district, which is also to be done in 
respect to any prize that such armed vessel shall 
bring or send in. At foot is a list of such armed 
vessels of the above description, as have hitherto 
come to the knowledge of the Executive. 

The purchasing within and exporting from the 
United States, by way of merchandise, articles com 
monly called contraband, being generally warlike 
instruments and military stores, is free to all the 
parties at war, and is not to be interfered with. If 
our own citizens undertake to carry them to any 
of those parties, they will be abandoned to the penal 
ties which the laws of war authorize. You will be 
particularly careful to observe and to notify, as 
directed in other instances, the case of any citizen of 
the United States who shall be found in the service 
of either of the parties at war. 

In case any vessel shall be found in the act of 
contravening any of the rules or principles which are 
the ground of this instruction, she is to be refused a 
clearance until she shall have complied with what the 
Governor shall have decided in reference to her. 
Care, however, is to be taken in this, not unneces 
sarily or unreasonably to embarrass trade or to vex 
any of the parties concerned. 

In order that contraventions may be the better 
ascertained, it is desired that the officer who shall 
first go on board any vessel arriving within your 

52 Alexander Hamilton 

district, shall make an accurate survey of her then 
condition as to military equipment, to be forthwith 
reported to you; and that, prior to her clearance, a 
like survey be made, that any transgression of the 
rules laid down may be ascertained. 

But as the propriety of any such inspection of a 
vessel of war in the immediate service of the government 
of a foreign nation, is not without question in refer 
ence to the usage of nations, no attempt is to be 
made to inspect any such vessel, till further order on 
the point. 

The President desires me to signify to you his 
most particular expectation, that the instructions 
contained in this letter will be executed with the 
greatest vigilance, care, activity, and impartiality. 
Omissions will tend to expose the government to 
injurious imputations and suspicions, and propor- 
tionably to commit the good faith and peace of the 
country — objects of too much importance not to 
engage every proper exertion of your zeal. 

With consideration, I am, Sir, etc., 
ALEXANDER HAMILTON. 

1 i. The original arming and equipping of vessels 
in the ports of the United States, by any of the 
belligerent parties, for military service, offensive or 
defensive, is deemed unlawful. 

2. Equipments of merchant vessels, by either of 
the belligerent parties, in the ports of the United 
States, purely for the accommodation of them as 
such, are deemed lawful. 

1 These are the rules referred to in the circular letter. 

Instructions 53 

3. Equipments in the ports of the United States, 
of vessels of war in the immediate service of the 
government of any of the belligerent parties, which, 
if done to other vessels, would be of a doubtful 
nature, as being applicable either to commerce or 
war, are deemed lawful, except those which shall 
have made prize of the subjects, people, or property 
of France, coming with their prizes into the ports of 
the United States, pursuant to the iyth article of 
our treaty of amity and commerce with France. 

4. Equipments in the ports of the United States, 
by any of the parties at war with France, of vessels 
fitted for merchandise and war, whether with or with 
out commissions, which are doubtful in their nature, 
as being applicable either to commerce or war, are 
deemed lawful, except those which shall have made 
prize, etc. 

5. Equipments of any of the vessels of France, in 
the ports of the United States, which are doubtful in 
their nature, as being applicable to commerce or war, 
are deemed lawful. 

6. Equipments of every kind, in the ports of the 
United States, of privateers of the powers at war 
with France, are deemed unlawful. 

7. Equipments of vessels in the ports of the United 
States, which are of a nature solely adapted to war, 
are deemed unlawful, except those stranded or 
wrecked, as mentioned in the i8th article of our 
treaty with France, the i6th of our treaty with the 
United Netherlands, the 9th of our treaty with 
Prussia, and, except those mentioned in the iQth 
article of our treaty with France, the i;th of our 

54 Alexander Hamilton 

treaty with the United Netherlands, the i8th of our 
treaty with Prussia. 

8. Vessels of either of the parties, not armed, or 
armed previous to their coming into the ports of the 
United States, which shall not have infringed any of 
the foregoing rules, may lawfully engage or enlist 
therein their own subjects or citizens, not being in 
habitants of the United States ; except privateers of 
the powers at war with France, and except those 
vessels which shall have made prize, etc. 

CABINET OPINION. — HAMILTON TO WASHINGTON1 

PHILADELPHIA, August 5, 1793. 

I doubt the expediency of specially convening the 
Congress at this time, for the following reasons: 

The Constitution requires that an extraordinary 
occasion should exist as the basis of the exercise 
of the power of the President to convene the Legis 
lature. 

It is not perceived that any circumstance now 
exists which did not exist months ago, of sufficient 
force to constitute an extraordinary occasion. 

The war in Europe existed then, as it does now. 
Indian affairs are not understood to be at this time 
in a worse, if in so bad a posture as they have been 
for a considerable time past. 

1 This matter of calling Congress together was in reality purely 
political, and was of course discussed by the Cabinet as if it had 
nothing to do with politics. The foreign policy of Washington and 
Hamilton had prevailed. Public opinion was coming over to them, 
and Jefferson saw no way to revive the flagging French excitement 
except by getting Congress together, and thus stirring up a general 
debate and disturbance, — an ingenious plan resisted by Hamilton. 

Cabinet Opinion 55 

Some additional incidents have indeed fallen out 
— the decision with regard to Mr. Genet's recall, the 
verdict of the jury in the case of Henfield, the sup 
posed decree of the National Convention affecting 
our treaty of commerce with France. 

But, with regard to the first, it would be only a 
reason for the measure as far as the circumstance 
may be supposed likely to produce a war with 
France. According to ordinary calculations, such 
a consequence ought not to be looked for; and the 
prudence is very questionable of manifesting by any 
public act that the Executive did look for it. 

The second is a matter which, under the circum 
stances, seems not of sufficient weight. The judges 
who tried the case were united in their opinion of the 
law. The jury are universally believed in this city 
to have been selected for the purpose of acquittal, so 
as to take off much the force of the example, and to 
afford no evidence that other juries would pursue 
the same course. 

The supposed decree of the National Convention is 
an important consideration; but its authenticity is 
not yet out of question, and it could hardly be acted 
upon till that was ascertained. And, indeed, it will 
deserve examination, whether the Executive would 
not itself be competent to whatever it would be pru 
dent to do in the case. 

The objections to the measure at this time are, 
that unless there are reasons of sufficient force now 
for adopting it, which did not exist before, the taking 
the step now would impeach the omitting of it hither 
to, and would expose the Executive to much criticism 

56 Alexander Hamilton 

and animadversion; that the meeting of Congress 
could scarcely be accelerated for more than a month, 
allowing, as ought to be done, due time for the 
knowledge of the call to diffuse itself throughout the 
United States, for the members to prepare for com 
ing, and for the distant ones to perform the journey. 
Sufficient time ought to be given for a full house. A 
month is so short a period as not to form a material 
object, and as consequently to bring into greater 
question the propriety of acting upon grounds not 
much if any thing stronger than existed when a call 
would have produced a considerable acceleration. 
In proportion to the shortness of the period gained 
would be the public anxiety and alarm at the 
measure. It would be construed into an indication 
that something very extraordinary and urgent had 
occurred, and abroad as well as at home much specu 
lation would be excited. This consideration, which 
was always a weighty objection to anticipating the 
meeting of Congress by a special call, has now a great 
additional force for the reason just assigned. 

NOTES BY HAMILTON, TO FRAME LETTER OF SECRETARY 
OF STATE TO GOUVERNEUR MORRIS, MINISTER AT 
PARIS 

(Cabinet Paper.) 

1793- 

I. — Explanation of fitting out privateers in Charles 
ton, put on footing of there being no law. 
II. — Letter persisting in objection to it. 
III. — Reclaims Gideon Henfield. 

Notes 57 

IV. — Very moderate answer, that courts will do 
right. 

V. — Concerning sloop Republican. 

1. Issuing commissions a mere consular act. 

2. Insists on right of arming for defence. 

3. Speaks of treaty permitting to enter. 

4. Armed to equip themselves. 

5. France always in practice of issuing commis 

sions. 

6. Will give orders to consuls to take precau 

tions to respect our territory — political 
opinions of President. 

7. Insists on right of arming vessels — abandon 

ment unworthy its friends. 
In waiting until representatives of sovereign had 
resolved to adopt or reject. 

VI. — Complaint of proceedings of District Court 
against the William — persons labor secretly to have 
misunderstood. 

VII. — Letter concerning debt — accomplish inter 
nal system — since the federal government without 
consulting Congress. 

VIII. — Awkwardness — Governor avails himself of 
political opinions. 

IX. — Letter — opinions, private and public, of 
President — on s'est empresse je ne scais sous quelle 
influence, des impressions etrang&res — complains of 
obstruction to consular jurisdiction. 

X. — Letter concerning sloop William requiring 
relinquishment . 

XI. — Letter concerning another vessel in same 
situation. 

58 Alexander Hamilton 

XII. — Letter concerning Little Democrat — letter on 
account of the state to augment the marine of France 
— commission, etc. 

I. — Blamed in a conversation the judicial proceed 
ings of the consul — ought only to have made a min 
isterial inquiry. 

i. Case of the Swallow.1 

CABINET OPINION 
(Draft by Hamilton.) 

August 31, 1793. 

At a meeting of the Heads of Departments and 
Attorney-General, at the President's, on the 3ist 
day of Aug., 1793, a letter from Mr. Gore to Mr. 
Lear, dated Boston, Aug. 24th, was read, stating 
that the Roland, a privateer fitted out at Boston, 
and furnished with a commission under the govern 
ment of France, had sent a prize into that port, 
which, being arrested by the marshal of the district 
by process from a court of justice, was rescued from 
his possession by Mr. Du Plaine, Consul of France, 
with an armed force from one of the ships of his na 
tion. It is the opinion, that the attorney of the 
district be instructed to institute such prosecution 
as the laws will authorize against the said Du 
Plaine, and to furnish to the Government of the 
United States authentic evidence of the facts be 
fore mentioned, thereon; if it shall appear that the 
rescue was made by the said Du Plaine, or his order, 

1 The Swallow and other vessels here mentioned were Genet's 
privateers or their prizes. 

Cabinet Opinion 59 

it is the opinion that his Exequatur should be re 
voked; also, that the attorney of the district be 
desired to furnish copies of his applications or other 
correspondence with the Governor of Massachusetts 
relative to the several privateers and prizes which 
have been the subject of his letters to Mr. Lear. 

A letter from Mr. Maury, Consul of the United 
States at Liverpool, dated July 4, 1793, was read, 
covering an authenticated copy of certain additional 
instructions from the Court of St. James to the com 
manders of their ships of war, dated June 8, 1793, 
permitting them to stop the vessels of neutral na 
tions laden with corn, flour, or meal, and bound to 
any port of France, and to send them into British 
ports; from thence they are not to be permitted to 
proceed to the port of any country not in amity with 
Great Britain. Thereupon, it is the opinion that 
Mr. Pinckney be provisionally instructed to make 
representations to the British Ministry on the said 
instruction as contrary to the rights of neutral na 
tions, and to urge a revocation of the same, and full 
indemnification to any individuals, citizens of these 
States, who may in the meantime suffer loss in 
consequence of the said instruction. Also, that ex 
planations be desired by Mr. Pinckney of the rea 
sons of the distinction made in the 26. article of the 
said instructions between the vessels of Denmark 
and Sweden and those of the United States attempt 
ing to enter blockaded ports. 

Information having been also received through the 
public papers of a decree, passed by the National 
Assembly of France, revoking the principle of free 

60 Alexander Hamilton 

ships making free goods, and enemy ships making 
enemy goods, and making it lawful to seize neutral 
vessels bound with provisions to any other country, 
and carry them into the ports of France, there to be 
landed and paid for; and also of another decree ex 
cepting the vessels of the United States, from the 
operation of the preceding decrees, it is the opinion 
that Mr. Morris be provisionally instructed, in case 
the first mentioned decrees have passed and not the 
exceptions, to make representations thereon to the 
French Government, as contrary to the treaty ex 
isting between the two countries, and the decree 
relative to provisions, contrary also to the law of na 
tions; and to require a revocation thereof and full 
indemnification to any citizens of these States who 
may, in the meantime, have suffered loss therefrom, 
and also in case the said decrees and the exceptions 
were both passed, that then a like indemnification 
be made for losses intervening between the dates of 
the said decrees and exceptions. 

A letter from the Governor of Georgia, of the 
1 3th instant, covering the proceedings of a Council 
of War, relatively to an expedition against certain 
towns of the Creek Nation, was communicated for 
consideration. 

It is the opinion that the Governor of Georgia be 
informed that the President disapproves the measure 
as unauthorized by law, as contrary to the present 
state of affairs and to the instructions heretofore 
given, and expects that it will not be proceeded in; 
that, requiring the previous consideration of Con 
gress, it will be submitted to them at their ensuing 

Hamilton to Washington 61 

session, if circumstances shall not then render it tin- 
necessary or improper; that the Governor of South 
Carolina be also informed that the co-operation de 
sired of him by the Governor of Georgia is not to be 
afforded; and that the agent for procuring supplies 
of provisions for the service of the United States in 
Georgia, be instructed that no provisions are to be 
furnished on their account for the purpose of the 
said expedition. 

THOMAS JEFFERSON, 
ALEXANDER HAMILTON, 
H. KNOX, 
EDM. RANDOLPH. 

HAMILTON TO WASHINGTON 

November 23, 1793. 

The Secretary of the Treasury presents his re 
spects to the President. He regrets extremely that 
the state of his health does not permit him to attend 
the President to-day. He has the honor to inclose 
a report on two of the letters to Mr. Genet, and would 
have embraced the third, respecting the protested 
bills, if it had been in his power. But no incon 
venience can in this case ensue, as the supposed 
mistake with regard to the funds already promised 
has been adjusted, and the inclosed report embraces 
and answers the question of advance upon a future 
fund. The report would have been more full and 
precise, if my situation had permitted ; but my frame 
is so disordered as almost to unfit me for business. 

62 Alexander Hamilton 


(Cabinet Paper.) 
TREASURY DEPARTMENT, November 23, 1793. 

The Secretary of the Treasury, upon two letters 
from the Minister Plenipotentiary of France to the 
Secretary of State, severally bearing date the nth 
and 1 4th of November inst., respectfully reports to 
the President of the United States as follows: 

The object of these letters is, to procure an en 
gagement that the bills which the minister may 
draw upon the sums which, according to the terms 
of the contracts respecting the French debt, would 
fall due in the years 1794 and 1795, shall be accepted 
on the part of the United States, payable at the 
periods stipulated for the payment of those sums 
respectively. 

The following considerations are submitted, as 
militating against the proposed arrangement: 

1. According to the view entertained at the 
Treasury of the situation of the account between 
France and the United States, adjusting equitably 
the question of depreciation, there have already been 
anticipated payments to France, equal or nearly 
equal to the sums falling due in the course of the 
year 1794. 

2. The provision by law for discharging the prin 
cipal of the French debt, contemplates only loans. 
Of those which have been hitherto made, the sum 
unexpended is not more than commensurate with a 
payment which is to be made on the ist of June 
next, upon account of the capital of the Dutch debt. 
It is possible that a fund for this payment may be 

Hamilton to Washington 63 

derived from another loan; but it is known to the 
President that, from advices recently received, full 
reliance cannot be placed on this resource, owing to 
the influence of the present state of European affairs 
upon the measures of the United States for borrow 
ing. It need not be observed, that a failure in mak 
ing the payment referred to would be ruinous to the 
credit of the United States. 

The acceptance of the bills of the Minister of 
France would virtually pledge the only fund of 
which there is, at present, a certainty for accom 
plishing that payment; and as this is a matter of 
strict obligation directly affecting the public credit, 
it would not appear advisable to engage that fund 
for a different object, which, if the ideas of the 
Treasury are right with regard to the state of our 
account with France, does not stand upon a similar 
footing. 

It would be manifestly unsafe to presume upon 
contingencies, or to enter into engagements to be 
executed at distant periods, when the means of exe 
cution are uncertain. 

But, as there appears to be a difference of opinion 
between the Minister of France and the Treasury, 
with regard to the state of the account between the 
two countries, it is necessary that something on this 
head should be ascertained. With this view, the 
Secretary of the Treasury will proceed, without 
delay, to make arrangements for the adjustment of 
the account. 

ALEXANDER HAMILTON, 

Secretary of the Treasury. 

64 Alexander Hamilton 

HAMILTON TO WASHINGTON 

(Cabinet Paper.) 
TREASURY DEPARTMENT, January 4, 1794. 

The Secretary of the Treasury, to whom was re 
ferred, by the President of the United States, a letter 
from the Minister of the French Republic to the 
Secretary of State, dated the 2ist of December last, 
respectfully makes the following 

Report. 

The Minister observes, that it results from the 
report of the Secretary of the Treasury that upon 
an accidental error the interests of the French Re 
public and the character of its representative were 
compromised by a refusal to accept drafts delivered 
to the agents by whom they were supplied, for sums 
due to the republic; adding to this observation the 
further one, that it seems to him that a like measure 
merited the most serious attention, and that he 
knows not by what name to call the negligence which 
was committed in this respect. 

This asperity of remark might, it would seem, 
have been prevented by a due attention to circum 
stances and facts. It was stated in the report to 
which the Minister refers, that the error in question 
was the mere mistake of the clerk charged with 
registering his drafts as they were presented at the 
Treasury. It will not be alleged that this was not 
the proper business of a clerk; and all that could be 
expected from the Head of the Department, or the 
officer having in his place the principal direction, is, 
that there should have been due care in selecting the 

Hamilton to Washington 65 

person to whose immediate agency the duty was in 
trusted. To this point there was no want of atten 
tion. The clerk selected had been long tried in 
public business, and has a well-established reputa 
tion for fidelity and accuracy. This officer is himself 
persuaded that in the instance which occasioned the 
demur no error was committed, and firmly believes 
that the convenience of parties had produced an 
alteration in the bill after it was noted by him ; but 
this surmise of his has been rejected, and it has been 
taken for granted and admitted that there was a mis 
take on his part, though, as no mark was set upon 
any bill presented and noted, that admission was 
founded on considerations in which candor and 
delicacy governed. No palliation of the mistake will 
be attempted to be drawn from topics connected with 
any derangement of the course of business resulting 
from the late calamitous condition of the city of 
Philadelphia, nor from the absence of the Secretary 
of the Treasury from the seat of government, for the 
recovery of his health, when the incident deemed so 
exceptionable took place. 

The hesitation about the registering of the bills 
which appeared to have been overdrawn, was a mere 
consequence of the first mistake. 

The main object of the registry of the bills was to 
ascertain, for the satisfaction of holders, that there 
were funds in the Treasury subject to the payment 
of them; and to secure to those holders a priority, 
in the event of there being an overdrawing. It was, 
therefore, a matter of course that the registry should 
cease as soon as itself showed that the amount of the 

VOL. V.— 5. 

66 Alexander Hamilton 

bills presented equalled the amount of the fund 
destined for satisfying them. Being the proper and 
regular guide to the officers of the Treasury, they 
could not but be expected to follow it. 

All that could be asked (if a mistake happened) 
was, that the consequences of it should be corrected 
as soon as the mistake was discovered ; and this was 
in fact done. Nor did more than a week elapse be 
fore the drafts, which had been suspended on ac 
count of the mistake, were recognized and admitted. 

But it is suggested by the Minister, that though the 
error was rectified, the injury which it occasioned has 
not been cured. That event, it is asserted, has fur 
nished to the ill-disposed, and to the enemies of the 
French Republic, a powerful means of hurting its 
cause, by alarming the merchants and ruining the 
credit of its agents. If this assertion were better 
founded than it is, it would only afford room to re 
gret the consequence of an involuntary error. But, 
whatever injury the credit of France in this country, 
or of her agents, may have sustained, it is to be 
traced to other sources; more adequate causes can 
be assigned for it. The assertion which has been 
made calls for a specification of those causes. 

The first of them was, the disappointment of our 
citizens in not receiving payment of bills to a large 
amount, furnished to them by the administration of 
St. Domingo, with assurances of being paid here by 
the agents of France; at the same time that it was 
known that these agents had obtained from the Gov 
ernment of the United States funds adequate to such 
payment, which had been applied to other objects. 

Hamilton to Washington 67 

In mentioning this circumstance, it is only intended 
to note the fact and its effects, not to question the 
propriety of the application which was made of the 
funds. 

Another and a far more powerful cause was, the 
refusal of the present Minister to pay certain bills, 
which had had the positive sanction of his prede 
cessor; diverting from that destination funds which 
were understood to have been appropriated to it— 
and this, too, in contravention of his own arrange 
ment with the Treasury. 

These bills had, like those first mentioned, been 
drawn by the administration of St. Domingo. But 
they had in addition been virtually accepted by 
the late Consul of France, in concert with its then 
Minister, and in conformity with an understanding 
between the latter and this government. 

The arrival of the present Minister devolved upon 
him the disposal of the unfurnished residue of the 
fund which had been promised to his predecessor. 
An early opportunity was taken to intimate to him 
the reliance of the government, that the bills ac 
cepted as above and unpaid, would be satisfied by 
him out of that residue. He gave, without hesita 
tion, a correspondent assurance, and on the third of 
June last addressed to the Secretary of the Treasury, 
a letter in the following terms, viz. : "I pray you to 
put hereafter in the disposition of Citizen Bournon- 
ville, Secretary of Legation of the Republic, the 
funds destined to the acquittal of the drafts of the 
colony of St. Domingo, according to the order of 
payment settled between you and my predecessor." 

68 Alexander Hamilton 

A part of these funds was accordingly put into the 
hands of Mr. Bournonville, in expectation that they 
would be applied as had been agreed. And upon the 
inquiries of some of the holders of the bills at the 
Treasury, in whom apprehensions had been ex 
cited, they were assured that they need not entertain 
any, as it was the known intention of the present 
Minister to fulfil the engagements of his predecessor ; 
and that funds had been furnished to him for taking 
up the bills which were falling due. 

The Minister afterwards deemed it necessary to 
change the destination of these funds, as he an 
nounced in his letter of the i8th of June to the 
Secretary of State, and in fact refused payment of 
the bills. 

This measure, of a nature destructive to credit, had 
the effect which was to have been anticipated. 

The very expedient of registering at the Treasury 
the drafts of the Minister, was rendered necessary by 
a pre-existing bad state of credit. It engaged the 
Treasury to nothing more than to secure to those 
who presented bills a preference against others to 
whom subsequent drafts might be given, overrun 
ning the fund for payment; and was devised to 
facilitate to the Minister an auxiliary means of credit 
of which he stood in need. 

These unquestionable truths demonstrate that 
there is no room to impute to the consequences of 
the mistake which was committed, any deficiency 
of credit which may have embarrassed the operations 
of the Minister. 

But it is a further truth, that if his credit has 

Hamilton to Washington 69 

suffered by the refusal of the Treasury to admit his 
drafts, it is chiefly to be referred to the draft for 
20,000 dollars predicated upon the fund to be at 
the disposal of France in January, which was finally 
refused, because not authorized by any previous 
arrangement between the government and the 
Minister. 

The temporary demur about other bills speedily 
abandoned and explained, could not have had an 
influence bearing any proportion to that of the 
ultimate refusal of the above-mentioned bill. 

As far as this refusal may have had a prejudicial 
operation, it is imputable wholly to the irregularity 
of having drawn the bill, not only without the con 
sent of the government, but even contrary to an in 
timation from it; in a case, too, in which it was free 
to refuse. 

That it was with the consent of the government, 
will not be pretended. The letter from the Secre 
tary of the Treasury to the Minister, of the 24th of 
July, accompanying his former report on the sub 
ject, excludes all plea of constructive or implied 
consent. 

That it was contrary to an intimation from the 
government, results from the following facts: 

The Minister, by a letter of the i4th June to the 
Secretary of State, communicates the intention of 
giving to those who should furnish him with sup- 
lies, " delegations " or assignments of the debt to 
France in payment; desiring as a prerequisite to 
this operation, that the Treasury should be in 
structed to come to a speedy adjustment with him, 

7° Alexander Hamilton 

of the account of the debt from the United States to 
France. 

To this suggestion the Secretary of State, by a 
letter of the iQth of June (after assuring him that 
instructions would be given for the settlement of the 
account), replied as follows: "In the meantime, 
what is further to be done will doubtless be the sub 
ject of further reflection and inquiry with you, and 
particularly the operation proposed in your letter 
will be viewed under all its aspects. Among these 
we think it will present itself as a measure too 
questionable both in principle and practicability, too 
deeply interesting to the credit of the United States, 
and too unpromising in its result to France to be 
found eligible to yourself. Finally, we rest secure 
that what is of mutual concern will not be done but with 
mutual concert." 

Without mutual concert, without even an inter 
vening consultation for that purpose, the Minister 
thought proper to issue his "delegations" or drafts 
upon a fund not embraced by any previous arrange 
ment; and he now makes it matter of complaint 
that these "delegations" were not registered. Was 
it to have been expected that the Treasury should 
become the passive instrument of a measure so ir 
regular — so unwarrantable? 

But the Minister, in justification of the step, makes 
two observations: 

i . That as the 300,000 livres due the ist of January 
are the interest of the loan of 600,000 made by France 
to the United States in 1783, the reimbursements of 
which are not to commence till 1797, he can see no 

Hamilton to Washington 71 

motive that could arrest the payment of the interest 
of that sum at the epoch stipulated, as long as there 
was due to France an equivalent. 

2. That supposing the payments, which have been 
made by the Treasury, to exceed the amount of 
the sums due, he has always been firmly convinced 
that these advances (to which the urgent wants of 
France had forced a recourse) would be applied to 
the extinction of the debt taken in totality; a 
measure perfectly agreeing with the clause inserted 
in the different contracts which expresses that the 
United States might, if they judged proper, liberate 
themselves sooner than the epoch fixed by those 
contracts. 

These observations admit of obvious answers. It 
is affirmed on our part, and the Minister seems him 
self to be sensible of its truth, that our payments 
hitherto exceeded the sums demandable by the 
terms of our contracts. It may be taken for granted, 
that this is the case beyond the amount of the in 
terest of the 600,000 accruing in January. The 
United States are at liberty to consider the excess as 
an anticipation of the capital of the loans; but they 
are not bound to do so. They have an option to do 
that, or to set it off against the interest accruing 
on the unpaid residue of the debt. The universal 
course of business will justify them in the latter, and 
their contracts say nothing to the contrary. Not 
having declared a different option, they were free to 
pursue that alternative, and consequently, as has 
been said, to refuse the drafts of the Minister, predi 
cated upon the January interest. 

72 Alexander Hamilton 

The circumstance which he notices, of the reim 
bursements of the 600,000 loan not commencing till 
1797, cannot affect this conclusion. These reim 
bursements so postponed, relate to the capital of the 
debt; and that postponement of course cannot bring 
into question the propriety of setting off against the 
interest annually payable, sums advanced beyond 
those which were antecedently due. 

The conviction of the Minister, that the advances 
which might have been made would be deferred 
toward the final extinction of the debt, could be no 
rule to the Treasury, as long as it had not been 
authorized by any assurance from the government, 
or when it was recollected, that the propriety of a 
mutual previous concert, about whatever was not a 
matter of course, was indicated to him, not only 
by the reason of the thing, but by unequivocal 
declarations. 

In fact, whether the course on which he declares 
himself to have relied, could have been pursued or 
not, depended on circumstances; that is, on the 
means which should exist of making intermedi 
ate payments, and postponing the advances to an 
ulterior arrangement; a point at this moment un 
ascertained, from causes which have heretofore been 
disclosed. 

But the Minister not only hazarded his credit, by 
drawing, without a previous arrangement, the bill for 
20,000 dollars, payable out of the January interest; 
he hazarded it likewise by actually overdrawing the 
funds placed at his disposal in September and No 
vember last; so that if no mistake had occurred at 

Hamilton to Washington 73 

the Treasury, he might have been exposed by his 
own conduct to consequences which, in that respect, 
happened by accident. 

The Secretary now proceeds to the demands con 
tained in the memorial of the Minister. These are: 

1. That the state of the account of the United 
States with France be presented with the least pos 
sible delay. 

2. That the sums, which may have been advanced 
to France, beyond those which were demandable on 
the terms of the contracts, be applied to the extinc 
tion of the debt taken in totality. 

3. That, provisionally, and until the state of the 
account can be determined, the Secretary of the 
Treasury be authorized to register the " delegations" 
or drafts which the minister shall have occasion to 
issue, to the extent of five millions turnois. 

With regard to the first point, the account is now 
in a course of adjustment between the Comptroller, 
on the part of the Treasury, and Mr. Bournonville 
on the part of the Minister. There are some points 
which require a mutual adjustment before they can 
be fixed definitively. A correct view of the account 
cannot be presented till these points are settled. 
This done, it shall be immediately laid before the 
President. 

With regard to the second point, the Secretary is 
of opinion that a determination concerning it cannot 
now be made. The adoption of the Minister's pro 
position would amount to an agreement to pay the 
accruing instalments at the periods stipulated in the 
contracts, though the advances which have been 

74 Alexander Hamilton 

made should exceed them. But such an agree 
ment cannot safely be entered into, because it is now 
problematical whether the Executive will be pos 
sessed in time of funds which can be applied to that 
purpose, without neglecting objects of positive obliga 
tion and essential to our credit, as has been already 
explained and communicated. 

With regard to the third point, the answer to the 
second is an answer to this also. If rightly under 
stood, this proposition depends upon the second. It 
appears necessary, first, to ascertain what is to be 
paid, and when it is to be paid, before any sanction 
can safely be given to the proposed " delegations" or 
drafts. This presupposes a settlement of accounts, 
and a further view of our pecuniary prospects. 

All of which is humbly submitted. 

AMERICANUS 
(From the American Daily Advertiser,) 

I 

February i, 1794. 

The two following papers were prepared some time 
since, but from particular circumstances have been post 
poned. The fresh appearances of a covert design to 
embark the United States in the war, induce their 
publication at this time.1 

An examination into the question how far regard 
to the cause of Liberty ought to induce the United 

1 These papers were published at the moment when Madison's 
resolutions, founded on Jefferson's commercial report, were before 
the House, and when every effort was making to draw the lines be 
tween a French and an English party, such as the opposition strove to 
construct. Americanus appeared originally in the Daily A dvertiser. The 
date is that of their reprint by Fenno in the Gazette of the United States. 

Americanus 75 

States to take part with France in the present war, 
is rendered necessary by the efforts which are making 
to establish an opinion that it ought to have that 
effect. In order to a right judgment on the point, 
it is requisite to consider the question under two 
aspects. 

I. — Whether the cause of France be truly the 
cause of Liberty, pursued with justice and humanity, 
and in a manner likely to crown it with honorable 
success. 

II. — Whether the degree of service we could render, 
by participating in the conflict, was likely to com 
pensate, by its utility to the cause, the evils which 
would probably flow from it to ourselves. 

If either of these questions can be answered in the 
negative, it will result that the consideration which 
has been stated ought not to embark us in the war. 

A discussion of the first point will not be entered 
upon. It would involve an examination too com 
plicated for the compass of these papers ; and, after 
all, the subject gives so great scope to opinion, to 
imagination, to feeling, that little could be expected 
from argument. The great leading facts are before 
the public ; and by this time most men have drawn 
their conclusions so firmly, that the issue alone can 
adjust their differences of opinion. There was a 
time when all men in this country entertained the 
same favorable view of the French Revolution. At 
the present time, they all still unite in the wish that 
the troubles of France may terminate in the establish 
ment of a free and good government ; and dispassion 
ate, well-informed men must equally unite in the 

76 Alexander Hamilton 

doubt whether this be likely to take place under the 
auspices of those who now govern the affairs of that 
country. But, agreeing in these two points, there is 
a great and serious diversity of opinion as to the real 
merits and probable issue of the French Revolution. 
None can deny that the cause of France has been 
stained by excesses and extravagances, for which it 
is not easy, if possible, to find a parallel in the history 
of human affairs, and from which reason and hu 
manity recoil. Yet many find apologies and ex 
tenuations with which they satisfy themselves; they 
still see in the cause of France the cause of liberty; 
they are still sanguine in the hope that it will be 
crowned with success; that the French nation will 
establish for themselves not only a free but a repub 
lican government, capable of promoting solidly their 
happiness. Others, on the contrary, discern no ade 
quate apology for the horrid and disgusting scenes 
which have been, and continue to be, acted. They 
conceive that the excesses which have been com 
mitted, transcend greatly the measure of those 
which, with every due allowance for circumstances, 
were reasonably to have been expected. They per 
ceive in them proofs of atrocious depravity in the 
most influential leaders of the revolution. They ob 
serve that among these, a MARAT I and a ROBES 
PIERRE, assassins still reeking with the blood of their 
fellow-citizens, monsters who outdo the fabled enor 
mities of a Busiris and a Procrustes, are predominant 

1 This man has lately met a fate which, though the essential interests 
of society will not permit us to approve, loses its odium in the con 
templation of the character. 

Americanus 77 

in influence as well as iniquity. They find every 
where marks of an unexampled dissolution of all 
the social and moral ties. They see nowhere any 
thing but principles and opinions so wild, so ex 
treme, passions so turbulent, so tempestuous, as 
almost to forbid the hope of agreement in any ra 
tional or well-organized system of government. They 
conclude that a state of things like this is calculated 
to extend disgust and disaffection throughout the 
nation, to nourish more and more a spirit of insur 
rection and mutiny, facilitating the progress of the 
invading armies, and exciting in the bowels of France 
commotions, of which it is impossible to compute the 
mischief, the duration, or the end; that if by the 
energy of the national character, and the intrinsic 
difficulty of the enterprise, the enemies of France 
shall be compelled to leave her to herself, this era 
may only prove the commencement of greater mis 
fortunes; that after wading through seas of blood, 
in a furious and sanguinary civil war, France may 
find herself at length the slave of some victorious 
Sylla, or Marius, or Caesar: and they draw this 
afflicting inference from the whole view of the sub 
ject, that there is more reason to fear that the CAUSE 
OF TRUE LIBERTY has received a deep wound in the 
mismanagements of it, by those who, unfortunately 
for the French nation, have for a considerable time 
past maintained an ascendant in its affairs, than to 
regard the revolution of France in the form it has 
lately worn, as entitled to the honors due to that 
sacred and all-important cause, or as a safe bark 
in which to freight the fortunes, the liberties, and 

78 Alexander Hamilton 

the reputation of this now respectable and happy 
land. 

Without undertaking to determine which of these 
opposite opinions rests most firmly on the basis of 
facts, I shall content myself with observing, that if 
the latter is conceived to have but a tolerable founda 
tion, it is conclusive against the propriety of our 
engaging in the war, merely through regard for the 
cause of Liberty. For when we resolve to put so 
vast a stake upon the chance of the die, we ought at 
least to be certain that the object for which we 
hazard is genuine, is substantial, is real. 

Let us then proceed to the discussion of the second 
question. To judge of the degree of aid which we 
could afford to France in her present struggle, it may 
be of use to take a brief view of the means with 
which we carried on the war, that accomplished our 
own revolution. 

Our supplies were derived from six sources: ist, 
paper money; 2d, domestic loans; 3d, foreign loans; 
4th, pecuniary taxes; 5th, taxes on specific articles; 
6th, military impress. 

The first of these resources, with a view to a future 
war, may be put out of the question. Past experience 
would forbid its being again successfully employed, 
and no friend to the morals, property, or industry of 
the people, to public or private credit, would desire 
to see it revived. 

The second would exist, but probably in a more 
limited extent. The circumstance of a depreciating 
paper, which the holders were glad, as they sup 
posed, to realize, was a considerable motive to the 

Americanus 79 

loans obtained during the late war. The magnitude 
of them, however, even then, formed a small propor 
tion to the aggregate expense. 

The third resource would be equally out of the 
question with the first. The principal lending pow 
ers would be our enemies, as they are now those of 
France. 

The three remaining items — pecuniary taxes, taxes 
on specific articles, military impress — could be em 
ployed again in a future war, and are the resources 
upon which we should have chiefly to rely; for the 
resource of domestic loans, though valuable, is not a 
very extensive one, in a community where capitals 
are so moderate as in ours. 

Though it is not to be doubted, that the people 
of the United States would hereafter, as heretofore, 
throw their whole property into a common stock for 
their common defence against internal invasion or an 
unprovoked attack, who is there sanguine enough to 
believe, that large contributions of any kind, could 
be extracted from them to carry on an external war, 
voluntarily undertaken for a foreign and speculative 
purpose ? 

The expectation were an illusion. Those who may 
entertain it ought to pause and reflect, whatever en 
thusiasm might have been infused into a part of 
the community would quickly yield to more just and 
sober ideas, inculcated by experience of the burthens 
and calamities of war. The circuitous logic by 
which it is attempted to be maintained, that a par 
ticipation in the war is necessary to the security of 
our own liberty, would then appear as it truly is, a 

8o Alexander Hamilton 

mere delusion, propagated by bribed incendiaries, 
or hare-brained enthusiasts; and the authors of 
the delusion would not fail to be execrated as the 
enemies of the public weal. 

The business would move on heavily in its pro 
gress, as it was in its origin impolitic, while the 
faculty of the government to obtain pecuniary sup 
plies, would, in the case supposed, be circumscribed 
within a narrow compass; levies of men would not 
be likely to be more successful. No one would think 
of detaching the militia for distant expeditions 
abroad ; and the experiences we have had in our In 
dian enterprises, do not authorize strong expecta 
tions of going far by voluntary enlistments, where 
the question is not, as it was during the last war, the 
defence of the fundamental rights and essential in 
terests of the whole community. The severe ex 
pedient of drafting from the militia, a principal 
reliance in that war, would put the authority of 
government in the case to a very critical test. 

This summary view of what would be our situa 
tion and prospects, is alone sufficient to demonstrate 
the general position, that our ability to promote the 
cause of France, by external exertions, could not be 
such as to be very material to the event. 

Let us, however, for more complete elucidation, 
inquire to what particular objects they could be 
directed. 

Fleets we have not, and could not have, in time, 
or to an extent, to be of use in the contest. 

Shall we raise an army and send it to France? She 
does not want soldiers. Her own population can 

Americanus 81 

amply furnish her armies. The number we could 
send, if we could get them there at all, would be of no 
weight in the scale. 

The true wants of France are of system, order, 
money, provisions, arms, military stores. 

System and order we could not give her by engag 
ing in the war. The supply of money in that event 
would be out of our power. At present we can pay 
our debt to her in proportion as it becomes due — 
then we could not do this. Provisions and other 
supplies, as far as we are in condition to furnish 
them, could not be furnished at all. The conveyance 
of them would become more difficult, and the forces 
we should be obliged ourselves to raise would con 
sume our surplus. 

Abandoning, then, as of necessity we must, the 
idea of aiding France in Europe, shall we turn our 
attention to the succor of her islands? Alas! we 
should probably have here only to combat their own 
internal disorders — to aid Frenchmen against French 
men, whites against blacks, or blacks against whites! 
If we may judge from the past conduct of the pow 
ers at war with France, their effort is immediately 
against herself; her islands are not, in the first in 
stance, a serious object. But grant, as it is not un 
likely, that they become so, is it evident that we can 
co-operate efficaciously to their preservation; or if 
we can, what will this have to do with the preserva 
tion of French liberty? The dangers to this arise 
from the invasion of foreign armies, carried into the 
bosom of France — from the still more formidable 
assault of civil dissension and the spirit of anarchy. 

82 Alexander Hamilton 

Shall we attack the islands of the powers opposed 
to France? 

How shall we without a competent fleet carry on 
the necessary expeditions for the purpose? Where 
is such a fleet? How shall we maintain our con 
quests after they are made? What influence could 
the capture of an island or two have upon the general 
issue of the contest? These questions answer them 
selves — or shall we endeavor to make a diversion 
in favor of France, by attacking Canada on the one 
side and Florida on the other ? This certainly would 
be the most, indeed the only eligible mode of aiding 
France in war since these enterprises may be con 
sidered as within the compass of our means. 

But while this is admitted, it ought not to be re 
garded as a very easy task. The reduction of the 
countries in question ought not to be undertaken 
without considerable forces, for reinforcements could 
be brought to both those countries from the West- 
India possessions of their respective sovereigns; 
relying on their naval superiority, they could spare 
from the islands all the troops which were not 
necessary for the preservation of their internal 
tranquillity. 

These armies are then to be raised and equipped, 
and to be provided with all the requisite apparatus 
for operation. Proportionate magazines are to be 
formed for their accommodation and supply. 

Some men, whose fate it is to think loosely, may 
imagine that a more summary substitute could be 
found in the militia. But the militia, an excellent 
auxiliary for internal defence, could not be ad van- 

Americanus 83 

tageously employed in distant expeditions, requiring 
time and perseverance. For these, men regularly 
engaged for a competent period are indispensable. 
The conquest of Canada, at least, may with reason 
be regarded as out of the reach of a militia operation. 

If war was resolved upon, the very preparation of 
the means for the enterprises which have been men 
tioned would demand not less than a year; before 
this period was elapsed, the fate of France, as far as 
foreign invasion is concerned, would be decided. It 
would be manifest, either that she could or could not 
be subjugated by force of external coercion. Our 
interposition would be too late to benefit her. It 
appears morally certain, that the war against France 
cannot be of much duration. The exertions are too 
mighty to be long protracted. 

The only way in which the enterprises in question 
could serve the cause of France, would be by making 
a diversion of a part of those forces which would 
otherwise be directed against her. But this con 
sequence could not be counted upon. It would be 
known, that we could not be very early ready to at 
tack with effect, and it would be an obvious policy 
to risk secondary objects rather than be diverted 
from the efficacious pursuit of the main one. It 
would be natural in such case to rely for indemnifica 
tion on the successful result of the war in Europe. 
The governments concerned imagine that they have 
too much at stake upon that result, not to hazard 
considerably elsewhere, in order to secure the fairest 
chance of its being favorable to their wishes. 

It would not probably render the matter better, to 

84 Alexander Hamilton 

precipitate our measures for the sake of a more 
speedy impulse. The parties ought in such case to 
count upon the abortion of our attempts from their 
immaturity, and to rely the more confidently upon 
the means of resistance already on the spot. Indeed, 
that very precipitation would leave no other option. 

We could not therefore flatter ourselves that the ex 
pedient last proposed — that of attacking the posses 
sions of Great Britain and Spain in our neighborhood, 
would be materially serviceable to the cause of France. 

But to give the argument its fairest course, I shall 
take notice of two particulars in respect to which our 
interference would be more sensibly felt. These are 
the depredations which our privateers might make 
upon the commerce of the maritime enemies of 
France, and what is of far greater consequence, the 
direct injury which would accrue to that of Great 
Britain from the interruption of intercourse between 
the two countries. Considering the shock lately 
sustained by mercantile credit in that country — the 
real importance to it of our imports from thence, and 
our exports thither — the large sums which are due, 
and in a continual course of remittance from our mer 
chants — a war between the United States and Great 
Britain could not fail to be seriously distressing to her. 

Yet it would be weak to calculate upon a very de 
cisive influence of these circumstances. The public 
credit of Great Britain has still energy sufficient to 
enable her to struggle with much partial derange 
ment. Her private credit, manifestly disordered by 
temporary causes, and propped as it has been by 
the public purse, seems to have recovered, in a great 

Americanus 85 

degree, its impaired tone. Her commerce, too, sud 
denly interrupted by the breaking out of the war, 
may be presumed to have resumed its wonted chan 
nels, in proportion as the progress of her naval pre 
parations has tended to give it protection, and though 
the being at war with us would be very far from a 
matter of indifference either to her commerce or to 
her credit, yet it is not likely that it would arrest her 
career, or overrule those paramount considerations 
which brought her into her present situation. 

When we recollect how she maintained herself 
under a privation of our commerce, through a seven- 
years' war with us, united for certain periods of it 
with France, Spain, and Holland, though we perceive 
a material difference between her present and her 
then situation, arising from that very effort, yet we 
cannot reasonably doubt that she would be able, 
notwithstanding a similar privation, to continue a 
war, which in fact does not call for an equal exertion 
on her part, as long as the other powers with which 
she is associated shall be in condition to prosecute it 
with a hope of success ; nor is it probable, whatever 
may be the form or manner of the engagement, that 
Great Britain could, if disposed to peace, honorably 
make a separate retreat. It is the interest of all 
parties, in such cases, to assure to each other a co 
operation; and it is presumable that this has taken 
place in some shape or other between the powers at 
« present combined against France.1 

1 The treaties between Great Britain, Spain, Russia, and Prussia, 
whiqh since writing the above have made their appearance, confirm 
what is here conjectured. 

86 Alexander Hamilton 

The conclusion from the several considerations 
which have been presented, carefully and dispassion 
ately weighed, is this, that there is no probable pro 
spect of this country rendering material service to the 
cause of France, by engaging with her in the war. 

It has been very truly observed in the course of 
the publications on the subject, that if France is not in 
some way or other wanting to herself, she will not stand 
in need of our assistance; and if she is, our assistance 
cannot save her. AMERICANUS. 

n. 

February 8, 1794. 

Let us now turn to the other side of the medal ; to 
be struck with it, it is not necessary to exaggerate. 

All who are not wilfully blind must see and ac 
knowledge, that this country at present enjoys an 
unexampled state of prosperity. That war would 
interrupt it need not be affirmed. We should then 
by war lose the advantage of that astonishing pro 
gress in strength, wealth, and improvement, which 
we are now making, and which, if continued for a 
few years, will place our national rights and interests 
upon immovable foundations. This loss alone would 
be of infinite moment ; it is such a one as no prudent 
or good man would encounter but for some clear 
necessity or some positive duty. If, while Europe 
is exhausting herself in a destructive war, this country 
can maintain its peace, the issue will open to us a 
wide field of advantages, which even imagination 
can with difficulty compass. 

Americanus 87 

But a check to the progress of our prosperity is 
not the greatest evil to be anticipated. Considering 
the naval superiority of the enemies of France, we 
cannot doubt that our commerce would in a very 
great degree be annihilated by a war. Our agri 
culture would of course with our commerce receive 
a deep wound. The exportations which now continue 
to animate it could not fail to be essentially dimin 
ished. Our mechanics would experience their full 
share of the common calamity. That lively and 
profitable industry, which now spreads a smile over 
all of our cities and towns, would feel an instantaneous 
and rapid decay. 

Nine tenths of our present revenues are derived 
from commercial duties. Their declension must of 
course keep pace with that of the trade. A sub 
stitute cannot be found in other sources of taxation, 
without imposing heavy burthens on the people. To 
support public credit and carry on the war would 
suppose exactions really grievous. To abandon public 
credit would be to renounce an important means of 
carrying on the war ; besides the sacrifice of the public 
creditors and the disgrace of a national bankruptcy. 

We will not call in the aid of savage butcheries and 
depredations to heighten the picture. T is enough 
to say, that a general Indian war, excited by the 
united influence of Britain and Spain, would not fail 
to spread desolation throughout our frontier. 

To a people who have so recently and so severely 
felt the evils of war, little more is necessary than to 
appeal to their own recollection for their magnitude 
and extent. 

88 Alexander Hamilton 

The warwhich now rages is, and for obvious reasons 
is likely to continue to be, carried on with unusual 
animosity and rancor. It is highly probable that 
the resentment of the combined powers against us, 
if we should take part in it, would be, if possible, still 
more violent than it is against France. Our inter 
ference would be regarded as altogether officious and 
wanton. How far this idea might lead to the ag 
gravation of the ordinary calamities of war, would 
deserve serious reflection. 

The certain evils of our joining France in the 
war are sufficient dissuasives from so intemperate a 
measure. The possible ones are of a nature to call 
for all our caution, all our prudence. 

To defend its own rights, to vindicate its own 
honor, there are occasions when a nation ought to 
hazard even its existence. Should such an occasion 
occur, I trust those who are most averse to commit 
the peace of the country, will not be the last to face 
the danger, nor the first to turn their backs upon it. 

But let us at least have the consolation of not 
having rashly courted misfortune. Let us have to 
act under the animating reflection of being engaged 
in repelling wrongs, which we neither sought nor 
merited; in vindicating our rights, invaded with 
out provocation; in defending our honor, violated 
without cause. Let us not have to reproach 
ourselves with having voluntarily bartered blessings 
for calamities. 

But we are told that our own liberty is at stake 
upon the event of the war against France — that if 
she falls, we shall be the next victim. The com- 

Americanus 89 

bined powers, it is said, will never forgive in us the 
origination of those principles which were the germs 
of the French Revolution. They will endeavor to 
eradicate them from the world. 

If this suggestion were ever so well founded, it 
would perhaps be a sufficient answer to it to say, 
that our interference is not likely to alter the case; 
that it would only serve prematurely to exhaust our 
strength. 

But other answers more conclusive present them 
selves. 

The war against France requires, on the part of 
her enemies, efforts unusually violent. They are 
obliged to strain every nerve, to exert every resource. 
However it may terminate, they must find them 
selves spent in an extreme degree; a situation not 
very favorable to the undertaking anew, and even 
to Europe combined, an immense enterprise. 

To subvert by force republican liberty in this 
country, nothing short of entire conquest would 
suffice. This conquest, with our present increased 
population, greatly distant as we are from Europe, 
would either be impracticable, or would demand 
such exertions as, following immediately upon those 
which will have been requisite to the subversion of 
the French Revolution, would be absolutely ruinous 
to the undertakers. 

It is against all probability that an undertaking, 
pernicious as this would be, even in the event of 
success, would be attempted against an unoffending 
nation, by its geographical position little connected 
with the political concerns of Europe. 

90 Alexander Hamilton 

But impediments would arise from more special 
causes. Suppose France subdued, and a restoration 
of the monarchy in its ancient form, or a partition 
effected — to uphold either state of things, after the 
general impulse in favor of liberty which has been 
given to the minds of twenty-four millions of people, 
would in one way or another find occupation for a 
considerable part of the forces which had brought it 
about. 

In the event of an unqualified restoration of the 
monarchy, if the future monarch did not stand in 
need of foreign legions for the support of his au 
thority, still the powers which had been concerned 
in the restoration could not sufficiently rely upon 
the solidity of the order of things re-established by 
them, not to keep themselves in a posture to be pre 
pared against the disturbance of it, till there had 
been time to compose the discordant interests and 
passions produced by the revolution, and bring back 
the nation to ancient habits of subordination. In 
the event of a partition of France, it would of course 
give occupation to the forces of the conquerors to 
secure the submission of the dismembered parts. 

The new dismemberment of Poland will be another 
obstacle to the detaching of troops from Europe for 
a crusade against this country — the fruits of that 
transaction can only be secured to Russia and Prussia 
by the agency of large bodies of forces, kept on foot 
for the purpose, within the dismembered territories. 

Of the powers combined against France, there are 
only three whose interests have any material refer 
ence to this country — England, Spain, Holland. As 

Americanus 91 

to Holland, it will be readily conceded that she can 
have no interest or feeling to induce her to embark 
in so mad and wicked a project. Let us see how the 
matter will stand with regard to Spain and England. 

The object of the enterprise against us must be, 
either the establishment in this country of a royal in 
place of our present republican government, the sub 
jugation of the country to the dominion of one of the 
parties, or its division among them. 

The establishment of an independent monarchy in 
this country would be so manifestly against the in 
terests of both those nations, in the ordinary accepta 
tion of this term in politics, that neither of them is 
at all likely to desire it. 

It may be adopted as an axiom in our political cal 
culations, that no foreign power which has valuable 
colonies in America, will be propitious to our remain 
ing one people under a vigorous government. 

No man, I believe, but will think it probable, how 
ever disadvantageous the change in other respects, 
that a monarchical government, from its superior 
force, would ensure more effectually than our present 
form our permanent unity as a nation. This at least 
would be the indubitable conclusion of European cal 
culators; from which may be confidently inferred a 
disinclination in England and Spain to our under 
going a change of that kind. 

The only thing that can be imagined capable of 
reconciling either of those powers to it would be the 
giving us for monarch a member of its own royal 
family, and forming something like a family compact. 

But here would arise a direct collision of interests 

92 Alexander Hamilton 

between them. Which of them would agree that a 
prince of the family of the other should, by reigning 
over this country, give to that other a decided pre- 
ponderancy in the scale of American affairs? 

The subjugation of the United States to the domin 
ion of those powers would fall more strongly under 
a like consideration. 'T is impossible that either of 
them should consent that the other should become 
master of this country, and neither of them without 
madness could desire a mastery, which would cost 
more than 't was worth to maintain it, and which, 
from an irresistible course of things, could be but of 
very short duration. 

The third, namely, the division of it between them, 
is the most colorable of the three suppositions. But 
even this would be the excess of folly in both. The 
dominion of neither of them could be of any per 
manency, and while it lasted, would cost more than it 
was worth. Spain on her part could scarcely fail to 
be sensible that, from obvious causes, her dominion 
over the part which was allotted to her would be 
altogether transient. 

The first collision between Britain and Spain 
would indubitably have one of two effects, either 
a temporary reunion of the whole country under 
Great Britain, or a dismission of the yoke of both. 

The latter, by far the most probable and eventually 
certain, would discover to both the extreme absurd 
ity of the project. If the first step was a reunion 
under Great Britain, the second, and one not long 
deferred, would be a rejection of her authority. 

The United States, rooted as are now the ideas of 

Americanus 93 

independence, are happily too remote from Europe 
to be governed by her; dominion over any part of 
them would be a real misfortune to any nation of 
that quarter of the globe. 

To Great Britain, the enterprise supposed would 
threaten serious consequences in more ways than 
one. It may safely be affirmed, that she would run 
by it greater risks of bankruptcy and revolution 
than we of subjugation. A chief proportion of the 
burthen would unavoidably fall upon her as the 
monied and principal maritime power, and it may 
emphatically be said, that she would make war upon 
her own commerce and credit. There is the strongest 
ground to believe that the nation would disrelish and 
oppose the project. The certainty of great evils at 
tending it, the dread of much greater, experience of 
the disasters of the last war, would operate upon all ; 
many, not improbably a majority, would see in the 
enterprise a malignant and wanton hostility against 
liberty, of which they might themselves expect to be 
the next victim. Their judgments and their feelings 
would easily distinguish this case from either that of 
their former contest with us or their present contest 
with France. In the former they had pretensions 
to support which were plausible enough to mislead 
their pride and their interest. In the latter there 
were strong circumstances to rouse their passions, 
alarm their fears, and induce an acquiescence in the 
course which was pursued. 

But a future attack upon us, as is apprehended, 
would be so absolutely pretextless, as not to be 
understood. Our conduct will have been such as 

94 Alexander Hamilton 

to entitle us to the reverse of unfriendly or hostile 
dispositions, while powerful motives of self-interest 
would advocate with them our cause. 

But Britain, Spain, Austria, Prussia, and perhaps 
even Russia, will have more need and a stronger de 
sire of peace and repose, to restore and recruit their 
wasted strength and exhausted treasures, to reinvigor- 
ate the interior order and industry of their respec 
tive kingdoms, relaxed and depressed by war, than 
either means or inclination to undertake so extrava 
gant an enterprise against the liberty of this country. 

If there can be any danger to us, it must arise from 
our voluntarily thrusting ourselves into the war. 
Once embarked, nations sometimes prosecute enter 
prises of which they would not otherwise have 
dreamt. The most violent resentment, as before 
intimated, would no doubt in such a case be kindled 
against us, for what would be called a wanton and 
presumptuous intermeddling on our part; what this 
might produce, it is not easy to calculate. 

There are two great errors in our reasoning upon 
this subject: one, that the combined powers will 
certainly attribute to us the same principles which 
they deem so exceptionable in France; the other, 
that our principles are in fact the same. 

If left to themselves they will all, except one, 
naturally see in us a people who originally resorted 
to a revolution in government, as a refuge from 
encroachments on rights and privileges antecedently 
enjoyed, not as a people who from choice sought a 
radical and entire change in the established govern 
ment, in pursuit of new privileges and rights carried 

Americanus 95 

to an extreme, irreconcilable perhaps with any form 
of regular government. They will see in us a people 
who have a due respect for property and personal 
security; who, in the midst of our revolution, 
abstained with exemplary moderation from every 
thing violent or sanguinary, instituting governments 
adequate to the protection of persons and property; 
who, since the completion of our revolution, have 
in a very short period, from mere reasoning and re 
flection, without tumult or bloodshed, adopted a form 
of general government calculated, as well as the 
nature of things would permit, to remedy antecedent 
defects, to give strength and security to the nation, 
to rest the foundations of liberty on the basis of 
justice, order, and law; who have at all times been 
content to govern themselves without intermeddling 
with the affairs or governments of other nations ; in 
fine, they will see in us sincere republicans, but de 
cided enemies to licentiousness and anarchy ; sincere 
republicans, but decided friends to the freedom of 
opinion, to the order and tranquillity of all mankind. 
They will not see in us a people whose best passions 
have been misled, and whose best qualities have been 
perverted from their true direction by headlong, 
fanatical, or designing leaders, to the perpetration 
of acts from which humanity shrinks, to the com 
mission of outrages over which the eye of reason 
weeps, to the profession and practice of principles 
which tend to shake the foundations of morality, to 
dissolve the social bands, to disturb the peace of 
mankind, to substitute confusion to order, anarchy 
to government. 

96 Alexander Hamilton 

Such at least is the light in which the reason or the 
passions of the powers confederated against France 
lead them to view her principles and conduct. And 
it is to be lamented, that so much cause has been 
given for their opinions. If, on our part, we give 
no incitement to their passions, facts too prominent 
and too decisive to be combated will forbid their 
reason to bestow the same character upon us. 

It is therefore matter of real regret, that there 
should be an effort on our part to level the distinct 
ions which discriminate our case from that of France, 
to confound the two cases in the view of foreign 
powers, and to pervert or hazard our own principles 
by persuading ourselves of a similitude which does 
not exist. 

Let us content ourselves with lamenting the 
errors into which a great, a gallant, an amiable, a 
respectable nation has been betrayed, with uniting 
our wishes and our prayers that the Supreme Ruler 
of the world will bring them back from those errors 
to a more sober and more just way of thinking and 
acting, and will overrule the complicated calamities 
which surround them, to the establishment of a gov 
ernment under which they may be free, secure, and 
happy. But let us not corrupt ourselves by false 
comparisons or glosses, nor shut our eyes to the true 
nature of transactions which ought to grieve and 
warn us, nor rashly mingle our destiny in the con 
sequences of the errors and extravagances of another 
nation. 

AMERICANUS. 

Hamilton to Washington 97 

HAMILTON TO WASHINGTON 

(Cabinet Paper.) 

PHILADELPHIA, April 14, 1794. 

SIR: — The present is beyond question a great, a 
difficult, and a perilous crisis in the affairs of this 
country. * * * In such a crisis it is the duty of 
every man, according to situation, to contribute all 
in his power towards preventing evil and producing 
good. This consideration will, I trust, be a suf 
ficient apology for the liberty I am about to take of 
submitting, without an official call, the ideas which 
occupy my mind concerning the actual posture of 
our public affairs. It cannot but be of great im 
portance that the Chief Magistrate should be in 
formed of the real state of things, and it is not easy 
for him to have this information but through those 
principal officers who have most frequent access to 
him. Hence an obligation on their part to com 
municate information on occasions like the present. 

A course of accurate observation has impressed 
on my mind a full conviction, that there exists 
in our councils three considerable parties, — one, de 
cided for preserving peace by every effort which 
shall any way consist with the ultimate maintenance 
of the national honor and rights, and disposed to 
cultivate with all nations a friendly understanding; 
another, decided for war, and resolved to bring it 
about by every expedient which shall not too directly 
violate the public opinion; a third, not absolutely 
desirous of war, but solicitous at all events to excite 
and keep alive irritation and ill-humor between the 
United States and Great Britain, and not unwilling 

98 Alexander Hamilton 

in the pursuit of this object to expose the peace of 
the country to imminent hazards. 

The views of the first party, in respect to the 
questions between Great Britain and us, favor the 
following course of conduct: to take effectual meas 
ures of military preparation, creating, in earnest, 
force and revenue; to vest the President with im 
portant powers respecting navigation and commerce 
for ulterior contingencies — to endeavor by another 
effort of negotiation, confided to hands able to man 
age it, and friendly to the object, to obtain reparation 
for the wrongs we suffer, and a demarkation of a line 
of conduct to govern in future ; to avoid till the issue 
of that experiment all measures of a nature to oc 
casion a conflict between the motives which might 
dispose the British Government to do us the justice 
to which we are entitled and the sense of its own 
dignity. If that experiment fails, then and not till 
then to resort to reprisals and war.1 

The views of the second party, in respect to the 
same questions, favor the following course of con 
duct : to say and to do every thing which can have a 
tendency to stir up the passions of the people and 
beget a disposition favorable to war ; to make use of 
the inflammation which is excited in the community 
for the purpose of carrying through measures cal 
culated to disgust Great Britain, and to render an 
accommodation impracticable without humiliation 
to her, which they do not believe will be submitted 

1 No better statement of the Federalist policy at this time can be 
found than is given in this paragraph. No further defence of the 
wisdom and strength of Washington's position need be offered than 
Hamilton's few and terse sentences. 

Hamilton to Washington 99 

to ; in fine, to provoke and bring on war by indirect 
means, without declaring it or even avowing the 
intention, because they know the public mind is not 
yet prepared for such an extremity, and they fear 
to encounter the direct responsibility of being the 
authors of a war. 

The views of the third party lead them to favor 
the measures of the second — but without a perfect 
coincidence in the result. They weakly hope that 
they may hector and vapor with success — that the 
pride of Great Britain will yield to her interest, and 
that they may accomplish the object of perpetuating 
animosity between the two countries without in 
volving war. There are some characters, not numer 
ous, who do not belong to either of these classes, 
but who fluctuate between them as, in the conflict 
between Reason and Passion, the one or the other 
prevails. 

It may seem difficult to admit, in the situation of 
this country, that there are parties of the description 
of the two last; men who can either systematically 
meditate war or can be willing to risk it otherwise 
than by the use of means which they deem necessary 
to insure reparation for the injuries we experience. 

But a due attention to the course of the human 
passions, as recorded in history, and exemplified by 
daily occurrences, is sufficient to obviate all difficulty 
on this head. 

Wars oftener proceed from angry and perverse 
passions, than from cool calculations of interest. 
This position is admitted without difficulty when 
we are judging of the hostile appearances in the 

ioo Alexander Hamilton 

measures of Great Britain toward this country. What 
reason can there be why it should not be as good a 
test of similar appearances on our part? As men it 
is equally applicable to us, — and the symptoms are 
strong of our being readily enough worked up into a 
degree of rage and frenzy, which goes very far toward 
silencing the voice of reason and interest. 

Those who compose the parties whose measures 
have a war aspect, are under the influence of some 
of the strongest passions that can actuate human 
conduct. They unite from habitual feeling in an 
implacable hatred to Great Britain and a warm at 
tachment to France. Their animosity against the 
former is inflamed by the most violent resentment 
for recent and unprovoked injuries — in many in 
stances by personal loss and suffering of intimate 
friends and connections. Their sympathy with the 
latter is increased by the idea of her being engaged 
in defending the cause of liberty against a combina 
tion of despots, who meditate nothing less than the 
destruction of it throughout the world. In hostility 
with Britain, they seek the gratification of revenge 
upon a detested enemy with that of serving a favor 
ite friend, and in this the cause of liberty. They 
anticipate, also, what is, in their estimation, a great 
political good, a more complete and permanent 
alienation from Great Britain, and a more close ap 
proximation to France. Those even of them who 
do not wish the extremity of war consider it as a less 
evil than a thorough and sincere accommodation 
with Great Britain, and are willing to risk the former 
rather than lose an opportunity so favorable as the 

Hamilton to Washington 101 

present to extend and rivet the springs of ill-will 
against that nation. 

However necessary it is to veil this policy in public, 
in private there are not much pains taken to disguise 
it. Some gentlemen do not scruple to say that 
pacification is and ought to be out of the question. 

What has been heretofore said relates only to per 
sons in public character. If we extend our view from 
these to the community at large, we shall there also 
find a considerable diversity of opinion — partisans 
of patience, negotiation, and peace, if possible, and 
partisans of war. There is no doubt much of irrita 
tion now afloat ; many advocates for measures tend 
ing to produce war. But it would be a great mistake 
to infer from these appearances that the prevailing 
sentiment of the country is for war — or that there 
would be either a willing acquiescence or a zealous 
co-operation in it if the proceedings of the govern 
ment should not be such as to render it manifest, 
beyond question, that war was inevitable, but by an 
absolute sacrifice of the rights and interests of the 
nation — that the race of prudence was completely 
run, and that nothing was done to invite hostility, 
or left undone to avoid it. 

It is to my mind unequivocal that the great mass 
of opinion in the Eastern States and in the State of 
New York is against war, if it can be avoided without 
absolute dishonor or the ultimate sacrifice of essen 
tial rights and interests ; and I verily believe that the 
same sentiment is the radical one throughout the 
United States, some of the towns, perhaps, excepted; 
where even it is much to be doubted whether there 

IO2 Alexander Hamilton 

would not be a minority for the affirmative, if the 
naked question was presented of war, or of measures 
which should be acknowledged to have a tendency 
to promote or produce it. 

The natural inference from such a state of the pub 
lic mind is, that if measures are adopted with the 
disapprobation and dissent of a large and enlight 
ened minority of Congress, which in the event should 
appear to have been obstacles to a peaceable adjust 
ment of our differences with Great Britain, there 
would be, under the pressure of the evils produced 
by them, a deep and extensive dissatisfaction with 
the conduct of the government — a loss of confidence 
in it, and an impatience under the measures which 
war would render unavoidable. 

Prosperous as is truly the situation of the country ; 
great as would be the evils of war to it, it would 
hardly seem to admit of a doubt, that no chance for 
preserving peace ought to be lost or diminished, in 
compliance either with resentment, or the speculative 
ideas which are the arguments for a hostile course 
of conduct. 

At no moment were the indications of a plan on 
the part of Great Britain to go to war with us suf 
ficiently decisive to preclude the hope of averting it 
by a negotiation conducted with prudent energy, 
and seconded by such military preparations as 
should be demonstrative of a resolution eventually 
to vindicate our rights. The revocation of the in 
structions * of the 6th of November, even with the 

1 These were the instructions to seize provisions, grain, etc., con 
veyed in neutral bottoms to France. 

Hamilton to Washington 103 

relaxation of some pretensions which Great Britain 
has in former wars maintained against neutral pow 
ers, is full evidence that if the system was before for 
war, it was then changed. The events which have 
taken place in Europe are of a nature to render it 
probable that such a system will not be revived, and 
that by prudent management we may still escape a 
calamity which we have the strongest motives, in 
ternal, as well as external, to shun. 

I express myself thus, because it is certainly not 
an idle apprehension, that the example of France 
(whose excesses are with too many an object of 
apology, if not of justification) may be found to have 
unhinged the orderly principles of the people of this 
country ; and that war, by putting in motion all the 
turbulent passions, and promoting a further assimila 
tion of our principles with those of France, may prove 
to be the threshold of disorganization and anarchy. 

The late successes of France have produced in this 
country conclusions much too sanguine with regard 
to the event of the contest. They no doubt afford 
a high probability of her being able, eventually, to 
defend herself, especially under a form of adminis 
tration of such unexampled vigor as that by which 
she has of late managed her affairs. 

But there will be nothing wonderful in a total 
reverse of fortune during the ensuing campaign. 
Human nature must be an absolutely different thing 
in France from what it has hitherto shown itself to 
be throughout the globe, and in all ages, if there do 
not exist, in a large proportion of the French nation, 
germs of the profoundest discontent, ready to burst 

104 Alexander Hamilton 

into vegetation the moment there should appear an 
efficacious prospect of protection and shade from the 
progress of the invading armies. And if having pos 
sessed themselves of some of the keys of France, the 
principle of the commencing campaign should be 
different from that of the past, active field operations 
succeeding to the wasteful and dilatory process of 
sieges, who can say that victory may not so far crown 
the enterprises of the coalesced powers, as to open 
the way to an internal explosion which may prove 
fatal to the republic ? 'T is now evident that another 
vigorous campaign will be essayed by the allies. The 
result is, and must be, incalculable. 

To you, sir, it is unnecessary to urge the extreme 
precariousness of the events of war. The inference 
to be drawn is too manifest to escape your penetra 
tion. This country ought not to set itself afloat upon 
an ocean so fluctuating, so dangerous, and so un 
certain, but in a case of absolute necessity. 

That necessity is certainly not yet apparent. The 
circumstances which have been noticed with regard 
to the recent change of conduct on the part of Great 
Britain, authorize a strong hope that a negotiation, 
conducted with ability and moderation, and supported 
at home by demonstrations of vigor and seriousness, 
would obviate those causes of collision which are the 
most urgent — might even terminate others, which 
have so long fostered dissatisfaction and enmity. 
There is room to suppose that the moment is pecu 
liarly favorable to such an attempt. On this point 
there are symptoms of a common sentiment between 
the advocates and the opposers of an unembarrassed 

Hamilton to Washington 105 

attempt to negotiate : the former desiring it from the 
confidence they have in its probable success; the 
latter, from the same cause, endeavoring either to pre 
vent its going on under right auspices, or to clog it with 
impediments which will frustrate its effect. 

All ostensibly agree, that one more experiment of 
negotiation ought to precede actual war; but there is 
this serious difference in the practice. The sincere 
friends of peace and accommodation are for leaving 
things in a state which will enable Great Britain, 
without abandoning self-respect, to do us the jus 
tice we seek. The others are for placing things upon 
a footing which would involve the disgrace or dis 
repute of having receded through intimidation. 

This last scheme indubitably ends in war. The 
folly is too great to be seriously entertained by the 
discerning part of those who affect to believe the 
position — that Great Britain, fortified by the alli 
ances of the greatest part of Europe, will submit to 
our demands, urged with the face of coercion, and 
preceded by acts of reprisal. She cannot do it with 
out renouncing her pride and her dignity, without 
losing her consequence and weight in the scale of 
nations; and, consequently, it is morally certain 
that she will not do it. A proper estimate of the 
operation of the human passions, must satisfy us 
that she would be less disposed to receive the law 
from us than from any other nation — a people re 
cently become a nation, not long since one of her 
dependencies, and as yet, if a Hercules, a Hercules in 
the cradle. 

When one nation inflicts injuries upon another, 

io6 Alexander Hamilton 

which are causes of war, if this other means to ne 
gotiate before it goes to war, the usual and received 
course is to prepare for war, and proceed to nego 
tiation, avoiding reprisals till the issue of the negotia 
tion. This course is recommended by all enlightened 
writers on the laws of nations, as the course of mod 
eration, propriety, and wisdom ; and it is that com 
monly pursued, except where there is a disposition 
to go to war, or a commanding superiority of power. 

Preparation for war, in such cases, contains in it 
nothing offensive. It is a mere precaution for self- 
defence, under circumstances which endanger the 
breaking out of war. It gives rise to no point of 
honor which can be a bar to equitable and amicable 
negotiation. But acts of reprisal speak a contrary 
effect — they change negotiation into peremptory de 
mand, and they brandish a rod over the party on 
whom the demand is made. He must be humble 
indeed, if he comply with the demand to avoid the 
stripe. 

Such are the propositions which have lately ap 
peared in the House of Representatives, for the se 
questration or arrestation of British debts — for the 
cutting off all intercourse with Great Britain, till she 
shall do certain specific things. If such propositions 
pass, they can only be regarded as provocatives to a 
declaration of war by Great Britain. 

The sequestration of debts is treated by all writers 
as one of the highest species of reprisal. It is, more 
over, contrary to the most approved practice of the 
present century ; to what may be safely pronounced 
to be the modern rule of the law of nations; to what 

Hamilton to Washington 107 

is so plainly dictated by original principles of justice 
and good faith, that nothing but the barbarism of 
times in which war was the principal business of man 
could ever have tolerated an opposite practice; to 
the manifest interest of a people situated like that of 
the United States, which, having a vast fund of ma 
terials for improvement in various ways, ought to 
invite into the channels of their industry the capital 
of Europe, by giving to it inviolable security, — 
which, giving little facility to extensive revenue 
from taxation, ought, for its own safety in war, to 
cherish its credit by a religious observance of the 
rules of credit in all their branches. 

The proposition for cutting off all intercourse with 
Great Britain has not yet sufficiently developed it 
self to enable us to pronounce what it truly is. It 
may be so extensive in its provisions as even to in 
clude in fact, though not in form, sequestration, by 
rendering remittances penal or impracticable. In 
deed, it can scarcely avoid so far interfering with 
the payment of debts already contracted, as in a 
great degree to amount to a virtual sequestration. 
But, however this may be, being adopted for the 
express purpose of retaliating or punishing injuries, 
to continue until those injuries are redressed, it is in 
the spirit of a reprisal. Its principle is avowedly 
coercion — a principle directly opposite to that of ne 
gotiation, which supposes an appeal to the reason 
and justice of the party. Caustic and stimulant in 
the highest degree, it cannot fail to have a corre 
spondent effect upon the minds of those against 
whom it is directed. It cannot fail to be viewed as 

io8 Alexander Hamilton 

originating in motives of the most hostile and over 
bearing kind; to stir up all the feelings of pride and 
resentment in the nation as well as in the Cabinet; 
and, consequently, to render negotiations abortive. 

It will be wonderful if the immediate effect of 
either of these measures be not either war or the 
seizure of our vessels wherever they are found, on 
the ground of keeping them as hostages for the debts 
due to the British merchants, and on the additional 
ground of the measures themselves being either acts 
of hostility or evidence of a disposition to hostility. 

The interpretation will naturally be that our views, 
originally pacific, have changed with the change 
in the affairs of France, and are now bent towards 
war. 

The measures in question, besides the objection to 
them resulting from their tendency to produce war, 
are condemned by a comprehensive and enlightened 
view of their operation in other respects. They can 
not but have a malignant influence upon our public 
and mercantile credit. They will be regarded abroad 
as violent and precipitate. It will be said, there is 
no reliance to be placed on the steadiness or solidity 
of concerns with this people. Every gust that arises 
on the political sky is the signal for measures tending 
to destroy their ability to pay or to obstruct the 
course of payment. Instead of a people pacific, for 
bearing, moderate, and of rigid probity, we see in 
them a people turbulent, hasty, intemperate, and 
loose, sporting with their individual obligations, and 
disturbing the general course of their affairs with 
levity and inconsiderateness. 

Hamilton to Washington 109 

Such will indubitably be the comment upon our 
conduct. The favorable impressions now enter 
tained of the character of our government and na 
tion will infallibly be reversed. 

The cutting off of intercourse with Great Britain, 
to distress her seriously, must extend to the pro 
hibition of all her commodities, indirectly as well as 
directly; else it will have no other operation than to 
transfer the trade between the two countries to the 
hands of foreigners, to our disadvantage more than 
to that of Great Britain. 

If it extends to the total prohibition of her com 
modities, however brought, it deprives us of a supply, 
for which no substitute can be found elsewhere — a 
supply necessary to us in peace, and more necessary 
to us if we are to go to war. It gives a sudden and 
violent blow to our revenue, which cannot easily, if 
at all, be repaired from other resources. It will give 
so great an interruption to commerce as may very 
possibly interfere with the payment of the duties 
which have heretofore accrued, and bring the Treas 
ury to an absolute stoppage of payment — an event 
which would cut up credit by the roots. 

The consequences of so great and so sudden a dis 
turbance of our trade, which must affect our exports 
as well as our imports, cannot be calculated. An 
excessive rise in the price of foreign commodities — 
a proportionable decrease of price and demand of 
our own commodities — the derangement of our re 
venue and credit, — these circumstances united may 
occasion the most dangerous dissatisfactions and 
disorders in the community, and may drive the 

no Alexander Hamilton 

government to a disgraceful retreat, independent of 
foreign causes. 

To adopt the measure in terrorem, and postpone its 
operation, will be scarcely a mitigation of the evil. 
The expectation of it will, as to our imports, have the 
effect of the reality, since we must obtain what we 
want chiefly upon credit. Our supply and our re 
venue, therefore, will suffer nearly as much as if there 
was an immediate interruption. 

The effect with regard to our peace will be the 
same. The principle being menace and coercion, 
will equally recommend resistance to the policy as 
well as the pride of the other party. 'T is only to 
consult our own hearts to be convinced that nations, 
like individuals, revolt at the idea of being guided 
by external compulsion. They will, at least, only 
yield to that idea after resistance has been fruit 
lessly tried in all its forms. 

'T is as great an error for a nation to overrate us 
as to underrate itself. Presumption is as great a 
fault as timidity. 'T is our error to overrate our 
selves and underrate Great Britain; we forget how 
little we can annoy, how much we may be annoyed. 

'T is enough for us, situated as we are, to be re 
solved to vindicate our honor and rights in the last 
extremity. To precipitate a great conflict of any 
sort is utterly unsuited to our condition, to our 
strength, or to our resources. This is a truth to be 
well weighed by every wise and dispassionate man, 
as the rule of public action. 

There are two ideas of immense consequence to 
us in the event of war: the disunion of our enemies; 

Hamilton to Washington in 

the perfect union of our own citizens. Justice and 
moderation, united with firmness, are the means to 
secure both these advantages ; injustice or intemper 
ance will lose both. 

Unanimity among ourselves, which is the most 
important of the two ideas, can only be secured by 
its being manifest, if war ensues, that it was inevita 
ble by another course of conduct. This cannot and 
will not be the case, if measures so intemperate as 
those which are meditated take place. The infer 
ence will be, that the war was brought on by the 
design of some and the rashness of others. This in 
ference will be universal in the Northern States ; and 
to you, sir, I need not urge the importance of those 
States in war. 

Want of unanimity will naturally tend to render 
the operations of war feeble and heavy, to destroy 
both effort and perseverance. War, undertaken 
under such auspices, can scarcely end in any thing 
better than an inglorious and disadvantageous 
peace. What worse it may produce is beyond the 
reach of human foresight. 

The foregoing observations are designed to convey 
to the mind of the President information of the true 
state of things at the present juncture, and to pre 
sent to his consideration the general reasons which 
have occurred to me against the course of proceeding 
which appears to be favored by a majority of the 
House of Representatives. 

My solicitude for the public interest, according 
to the view I have of it, and my real respect and 
regard for him to whom I address myself, lead me 

ii2 Alexander Hamilton 

to subjoin some reflections of a more delicate 
nature. 

The crisis is such a one as involves the highest 
responsibility on the part of every one who may 
have to act a part in it. It is one in which every 
man will be understood to be bound to act according 
to his judgment without concession to the ideas 
of others. The President, who has by the Constitu 
tion a right to object to laws which he deems con 
trary to the public interest, will be considered as 
under an indispensable obligation to exercise that 
right against any measure, relating to so vast a 
point as that of the peace of the country, which 
shall not accord with his opinion. The considera 
tion of its having been adopted by both Houses of 
Congress, and of respect for their opinions, will have 
no weight in such a case as a reason for forbearing 
to exercise the right of objection. The consequence 
is, that the not objecting will be deemed conclusive 
evidence of approbation, and will implicate the 
President in all the consequences of the measure. 

In such a position of things, it is therefore of the 
utmost importance to him, as well as to the com 
munity, that he should trace out in his own mind 
such a plan as he thinks it would be eligible to pur 
sue, and should endeavor, by proper and constitu 
tional means, to give the deliberations of Congress a 
direction towards that plan. 

Else he runs the risk of being reduced to the 
dilemma either of assenting to measures which he 
may not approve, with a full responsibility for con 
sequences, or of objecting to measures which have 

Hamilton to Washington 113 

already received the sanction of the two Houses 
of Congress, with the responsibility of having re 
sisted and probably prevented what they meditated. 
Neither of these alternatives is a desirable one. 

It seems advisable, then, that the President should 
come to a conclusion whether the plan ought to be 
preparation for war, and negotiation unincumbered 
by measures which forbid the expectation of success, 
or immediate measures of a coercive tendency, to be 
accompanied with the ceremony of a demand of re 
dress. For I believe there is no middle plan between 
those two courses. 

If the former appears to him to be the true policy 
of the country, I submit it as my conviction, that it is 
urgent for him to demonstrate that opinion as a pre 
ventive of wrong measures and future embarrassment. 

The mode of doing it which occurs is this : to nomi 
nate a person who will have the confidence of those 
who think peace still within our reach, and who may 
be thought qualified for the mission as Envoy Ex 
traordinary to Great Britain; to announce this to 
the one as well as the other House of Congress, with 
an observation that it is done with an intention to 
make a solemn appeal to the justice and good sense 
of the British Government, to avoid if possible an 
ulterior rupture, and adjust the causes of misunder 
standing between the two countries, and with an 
earnest recommendation that vigorous and effectual 
measures may be adopted to be prepared for war, 
should it become inevitable, abstaining for the present 
from measures which may be contrary to the spirit of 
an attempt to adjust existing differences by negotiation. 

VOL. V.— 8. 

ii4 Alexander Hamilton 

Knowing as I do, sir, that I am among the persons 
who have been in your contemplation to be em 
ployed in the capacity I have mentioned, I should 
not have taken the present step, had I not been re 
solved at the same time to advise you with decision 
to drop me from the consideration, and to fix upon 
another character. I am not unapprised of what has 
been the bias of your opinion on the subject. I am 
well aware of all the collateral obstacles which exist ; 
and I assure you in the utmost sincerity that I shall 
be completely and entirely satisfied with the election 
of another. 

I beg leave to add, that of the persons whom you 
would deem free from any constitutional objections, 
Mr. Jay is the only man in whose qualifications for 
success there would be thorough confidence, and him 
whom alone it would be advisable to send. I think 
the business would have the best chance possible in 
his hands, and I flatter myself that his mission would 
issue in a manner that would produce the most im 
portant good to the nation. 

Let me add, sir, that those whom I call the sober- 
minded men of the country look up to you with 
solicitude upon the present occasion. If happily 
you should be the instrument of still rescuing the 
country from the dangers and calamities of war, 
there is no part of your life, sir, which will produce 
to you more real satisfaction or true glory than that 
which shall be distinguished by this very important 
service. 

In any event, I cannot doubt, sir, that you will do 
justice to the motives which impel me, and that you 

Hamilton to Washington 1 15 

will see in this proceeding another proof of my 
sincere wishes for your honor and happiness, and 
anxiety for the public weal. 

With the truest respect and attachment, 

I have the honor to be, etc.1 

HAMILTON TO WASHINGTON 

(Cabinet Paper.) 

April 23, 1794. 

Mr. Hamilton presents his respects to the Presi 
dent. In compliance with the desire expressed by 
him, Mr. H. has made a memorandum of certain 
points for consideration, in preparing instructions 
for Mr. Jay, which are herewith sent. 

Points to be Considered in the Instructions to Mr. Jay, 
Envoy Extraordinary to Great Britain 

I. — Indemnification for the depredations upon our 
commerce, according to a rule to be settled. 

The desirable rule is that which theoretical writers 
lay down as the rule of the law of nations — to wit: 
that none but articles by general usage deemed con 
traband shall be liable to confiscation, and that the 
carrying of such articles shall not infect other parts 
of a cargo, nor even a vessel carrying them, where 
there are no appearances of a design to conceal. 

Our treaties contain a good guide as to contraband 

1 This is one of the most important letters ever penned by Hamilton. 
Washington followed his advice to the letter, and Hamilton's with 
drawal of his own name as a candidate for a mission he desired was 
an act of unselfish patriotism which cannot be too highly praised. 

n6 Alexander Hamilton 

articles, which fall under general denomination of 
instrumenta belli — instruments of war. 

But if it should be found impracticable to establish 
this rule, the following qualifications of it occur for 
consideration : 

i st. Whether provisions (defining what shall be 
such) may not be excepted, so far as to render them 
liable, when going to an enemy's port not blockaded, 
to be carried into the port of the other enemy, and 
converted to his use, paying the full value. A good 
rule for estimating this value would be the costs and 
charges at the place of exportation, with the addition 
of per cent. 

2d. Whether colony produce, going directly from 
the colony to the mother country, may not be added 
to the list of contraband articles? 

Or, in the last resort, whether the rule in this par 
ticular, resulting from the instructions of the 8th of 
January last, may not be admitted — to wit: that 
colony produce, going directly from the colony to 
any port in Europe, may be confiscated. 

This is a principle which, it is understood, has been 
long adhered to by Great Britain, and finds a sanc 
tion in precedents under the ancient government of 
France and other maritime powers. 

The indemnification for prizes made by proscribed 
vessels, of which an expectation has been given by 
the President, may be confirmed by convention. 

II. — Arrangement with regard to the future: 

The basis to be the rule already quoted of the gen 
eral law of nations. 

But it is probable that the same exceptions which 

Hamilton to Washington 117 

may be insisted upon as to indemnification for the 
past, will also be insisted upon as to the future. 

The idea of a place blockaded or besieged by con 
struction, which is not actually so, ought to be ex 
cluded in either case. 

A stipulation against the sale of prizes in our ports 
will probably be insisted upon; and it is just that it 
should be made. 

A stipulation that, in case of war with any Indian 
tribe, the other party shall furnish no supplies what 
ever to that tribe, except such, and in such quantity 
only, as it was accustomed to furnish previous to 
the war; and the party at war to have a right to 
keep an agent or agents at the posts or settlements 
of the other party nearest to such Indians, to ascer 
tain the faithful execution of this stipulation. 

Grounds of adjustment with regard to the late 
treaty of peace. 

On the Part of the British 

i st. Indemnification for our negroes carried away. 
2d. Surrender of our posts. 

On the Part of the United States 

i st. Indemnification for the obstructions to the 
recovery of debts not exceeding - - sterling. 

It may be desired, and would it not be our interest 
to agree, that neither party shall in time of peace keep 
up any armed force upon the lakes, nor any fortified 
places nearer than miles to the lakes, except 

n8 Alexander Hamilton 

small posts for small guards (the number to be de 
fined) stationed for the security of trading houses? 

Would it not be also our interest to agree to an 
arrangement by which each party shall permit to 
the other, under due precaution and regulations, a 
free trade with the Indian tribes inhabiting within 
the limits of the other? 

Treaty of Commerce 

The statu quo may be taken with the following ex 
ceptions : 

A privilege to carry to the West India Islands in 
our vessels of certain burthens (say not less than 
sixty tons, nor more than eighty tons) all such arti 
cles as may now be carried thither from the United 
States in British bottoms ; and to bring from thence 
directly to the United States all such articles as may 
now be brought from thence to the United States in 
British bottoms. The privilege of carrying to Great 
Britain and Ireland, manufactures of the United 
States similar to those which now are or hereafter 
may be allowed to be carried thither by other nations 
who stand on the footing of the most favored nation, 
and upon terms of admission equally good. 

As Equivalents 

The extra tonnage and duties on British vessels 
and goods imported in British vessels to be done 
away, and, if desired, a stipulation to be entered into, 
that the commodities and manufactures of Great 
Britain and Ireland may be imported into the United 

Hamilton to Randolph 119 

States upon terms equally good with the like com 
modities and manufactures of any other nation ; and 
that the duties upon such of them as now pay ten 
per cent, ad valorem and upwards, shall not be in 
creased; and that the duties upon such of them as 
now pay under ten per cent, ad valorem, shall not 
be increased beyond ten per cent. 

A treaty on these terms to be made for any term 
not exceeding years. 

But if such a treaty cannot be made, it deserves 
consideration, whether a treaty on this basis of the 
statu quo for a short term (say five years) may not 
be advisable as an expedient for preserving peace 
between the two countries. 

HAMILTON TO RANDOLPH J 

April 27, 1794. 

DEAR SIR: — I did not receive the draft of your 
reply to Mr. Hammond, on the subject of the in 
structions of the 8th of June, till bedtime, last night, 
nor could I, without a much more considerable de 
lay than seems to comport with your plan, pretend 
to enter into an accurate sifting scrutiny of this 
paper. 

I must therefore confine myself to a very few 
remarks. 

If my memory serves me right: 

I. — Your position, that the United States alone 
suffer from the operation of the above-mentioned 

1 'Randolph was now Secretary of State, Jefferson having retired at 
the beginning of New Year in a good deal of disgust to Monticello. 

i2o Alexander Hamilton 

instructions, is not accurate. I take it, that provi 
sions on board all neutral vessels going to any port 
of France are liable to the same treatment, except in 
the single case of their going to a place blockaded or 
besieged, when the rigor of the law of nations is en 
forced against us by a confiscation in the first in 
stance; whereas, in respect to Sweden and Denmark, 
it is mitigated by the circumstance of admonition 
first, and confiscation afterwards. But even in this 
particular, the other neutral powers (Sweden and 
Denmark excepted) were left in the same predica 
ment with us. I do not understand, either, that in 
fact any ports of France have been deemed blockaded, 
so as to produce confiscation, except those actually 
so. But not having the instructions before me, I 
cannot speak with precision. 

II. — You seem to take the position too strictly — 
that none but such articles as are peculiar to war 
are deemed contraband. Other articles besides these 
are usually deemed contraband (as naval stores, 
which are the general instrument of commerce in 
time of peace, as well as a means of war). 

III. — You appeal strongly to the conduct of Great 
Britain for a century past, as to the question of 
provisions being treated as contraband or otherwise 
interdicted from being carried to an enemy's country. 
I fear examples may be cited upon you which will 
include the point, and more. Is there not a treaty 
between Holland and England within a century, 
which goes much further? And you may be, per 
haps, pressed by examples from other countries. I 
remember a declaration from France to the States- 

Instructions to John Jay 121 

General (in the time of Louis XIV., as I believe), 
which imposes much more extensive restrictions. 

IV. — There appears to me too much tartness in 
various parts of the reply. Energy, without as 
perity, seems best to comport with the dignity of 
national language. The force ought to be more in 
the idea, than in the expression or manner. The 
subject of the paper is the instructions of the 8th of 
June, not those of the 6th of November. I suspect 
from some later lights which I have received, that 
more of justification for the former can be found in 
the practice of nations than I was originally aware 
of; and the expression of our sensibility, and the 
energy of our resistance, ought to be proportioned 
to the nature of the case. 

On the whole, I submit whether it be not advisable 
to give no other reply than a general one, declaring 
that the doctrines advanced in support of the in 
structions of the 8th of June do not appear to us 
well-founded, but that being among the objects com 
mitted to Mr. Jay's negotiation, a particular reply is 
forborne. We are still in the path of negotiation; 
let us not plant it with thorns. 

PART OF INSTRUCTIONS TO JOHN JAY 

(Draft by Hamilton.) 

I794- 

This enumeration presents generally the objects 
which it is desirable to comprise in a commercial 
treaty; not that it is expected that one can be 

122 Alexander Hamilton 

effected with so great a latitude of advantages. If 
to the actual footing of our commerce and navi 
gation with British European dominions could be 
added the privilege of carrying directly from the 
United States to the British West India Islands, in 
our own bottoms generally, or of certain defined 
burthens, the articles which, by the act of the 28th 
of George III., chapter 6th, may be carried thither 
in British bottoms, and of bringing from those 
islands directly to the United States, in our bottoms 
of the like description, the articles which by the 
same act may be brought from those islands to the 
United States in British bottoms, — this would afford 
an acceptable basis of a treaty for a term not ex 
ceeding fifteen years; and it would be advisable to 
conclude a treaty upon that basis. 

But if a treaty cannot be formed upon a basis as 
liberal as this, it is conceived that it would not be 
expedient to do any thing more than to digest the 
articles of such a one as the British Government 
shall appear willing to accede to — referring it here 
for consideration and further instruction previous 
to a formal conclusion. 

There are other points which it would be interest 
ing to comprehend in a treaty, and which it is pre 
sumed would not be attended with difficulty. Among 
these is the admission of our commodities and manu 
factures generally, into the European dominions of 
Great Britain, upon a footing equally good with 
those of other foreign countries.1 

1 This is now the case, though a general impression to the contrary 
has prevailed. See Proclamation of 1792. 

Hamilton to Jay 123 

At present only certain enumerated articles are 
admitted. But though this enumeration embraces 
all the articles which it is of present material conse 
quence to us to export to those dominions, yet in 
process of time an extension of the objects may 
become of moment. The fixing of the privileges 
which we now enjoy by toleration of the Company's 
government in the British East Indies, if any 
arrangement could be made with the consent of 
the Company for that purpose, would also be a 
valuable ingredient. 

The foregoing is conformed to the ideas in which 
the Secretary of War and Attorney-General appeared 
to concur. 

It is my opinion, that if an indemnification for the 
depredations committed on our trade, and the execu 
tion of those points of the treaty of peace which re 
main unexecuted on the part of Great Britain, can 
be accomplished on satisfactory terms, and it should 
appear a necessary means to this end, to combine a 
treaty of commerce for a short term on the foot 
ing of the statu quo, the conclusion of such a treaty 
would be consistent with the interests of the United 

States. 

A. HAMILTON. 

HAMILTON TO JAY 

(Cabinet Paper.) 

PHILADELPHIA, May 6, 1794. 

MY DEAR SIR: 

I send you herewith sundry papers and documents 
which contain information that may not be useless 

124 Alexander Hamilton 

to you in your mission. I had wished to have found 
leisure to say many things to you, but my occupa 
tions permit me to offer only a few loose observations. 

We are both impressed equally strongly with the 
great importance of a right adjustment of all matters 
of past controversy and future good understanding 
with Great Britain. Yet, important as this object 
is, it will be better to do nothing, than to do any 
thing that will not stand the test of the severest 
scrutiny — and especially, which may be construed 
into the relinquishment of a substantial right or 
interest. 

The object of indemnification for the depredations 
committed on our trade, in consequence of the in 
structions of the 6th of November, is very near the 
hearts and feelings of the people of this country. 
The proceeding was an atrocious one. It would not 
answer in this particular to make any arrangement 
on the mere appearance of indemnification. If no 
thing substantial can be agreed upon, it will be 
best to content yourself with endeavoring to dispose 
the British Cabinet, of their own accord, to go as far 
as they think fit in reparation, leaving the United 
States at full liberty to act afterwards as they deem 
proper. I am, however, still of opinion that sub 
stantial indemnification, on the principles of the in 
struction of January 8th, may in the last resort be 
admissible. 

What I have said goes upon the idea of the affair 
of indemnification standing alone. If you can effect 
solid arrangements with regard to the points un 
executed of the treaty of peace, the question of in- 

Hamilton to Jay 125 

damnification may be managed with less rigor, and 
may be still more laxly dealt with, if a truly bene 
ficial treaty of commerce, embracing privileges in 
the West India Islands, can be established. It will 
be worth the while of the government of this country, 
in such case, to satisfy, itself, its own citizens who 
have suffered. 

The principle of Great Britain is that a neutral 
nation ought not to be permitted to carry on, in time 
of war, a commerce with a nation at war, which it 
could not carry on with that nation in time of peace. 
It is not without importance in this question, that 
the peace system of France allowed our vessels ac 
cess to her islands with a variety of our principal 
staples, and allowed us to take from thence some of 
their products ; and that, by frequent colonial regu 
lations, this privilege extended to almost all other 
articles. 

The great political and commercial considerations 
which ought to influence the conduct of Great Britain 
towards this country are familiar to you. They are 
strengthened by their increasing acquisitions in the 
West Indies, if these shall be ultimately confirmed, 
which seems to create an absolute dependence on us 
for supply. 

I see not how it can be disputed with you, that this 
country, in a commercial sense, is more important 
to Great Britain than any other. The articles she 
takes from us are certainly precious to her; import 
ant, perhaps essential, to the ordinary subsistence 
of her islands; not unimportant to her own sub 
sistence occasionally; always very important to her 

126 Alexander Hamilton 

manufactures, and of real consequence to her re 
venue. As a consumer, the paper will show that we 
stand unrivalled. We now consume of her exports 
from a million to a million and a half sterling more 
in value than any other foreign country; and while 
the consumption of other countries, from obvious 
causes, is likely to be stationary, that of this country 
is increasing, and for a long series of years will 
increase rapidly. Our manufactures are no doubt 
progressive. But our population and means progress 
so much faster, that our demand for manufactured 
supply far outgoes the progress of our faculty to 
manufacture. Nor can this cease to be the case for 
any calculable period of time. 

How unwise then in Great Britain, to stiff er such 
a state of affairs to remain exposed to the hazard of 
constant interruption and derangement, by not fix 
ing on the basis of a good treaty the principles on 
which it should continue. 

Among the considerations which ought to lead her 
to a treaty, is the obtaining a renunciation of all 
pretension of right to sequester or confiscate debts 
by way of reprisal, etc., though I have no doubt this 
is the modern law of nations. Yet the point of 
right cannot be considered so absolutely settled as 
not to make it interesting to fix it by treaty. 

There is a fact which has escaped observation in 
this country, and which, as there has existed too 
much disposition to convulse our trade, I have not 
thought it prudent to bring into view, which it is 
interesting you should be apprised of. An act of 
Parliament (27 Geo. III., chap. 27) allows foreign 

Hamilton to Jay 127 

European vessels, single decked and not exceeding 
seventy tons burthen, to carry to certain ports in 
the British West Indies, particular articles therein 
enumerated, and also to take from thence certain 

This consequently puts an end to the question of 
precedent, which is so strongly urged against a de 
parture from the British navigation act in our favor, 
since it gives the precedent of such a departure in 
favor of others, and to our exclusion — a circumstance 
worthy of particular notice. Our relative situation 
gives us a stronger plea for an exception in our favor, 
than any other nation can urge. In paper B the 
idea of a treaty of commerce on the footing of a 
statu quo, for a short period (say five years), is brought 
into view. I should understand this as admissible 
only in the event of a satisfactory arrangement with 
regard to the points unexecuted of the treaty of 
peace. 

But you will discover from your instructions, that 
the opinion which has prevailed is, that such a treaty 
of commerce ought not to be concluded without 
previous reference here for further instruction. It is 
desirable, however, to push the British ministry in 
this respect to a result, that the extent of their views 
may be ascertained. 

The navigation of the Mississippi is to us an object 
of immense consequence. Besides other considera 
tions connected with it, if the Government of the 
United States can procure and secure the enjoyment 
of it to our Western country, it will be an infinitely 
strong link of union between that country and the 

128 Alexander Hamilton 

Atlantic States. As its preservation will depend on 
the naval resources of the Atlantic States, the West 
ern country cannot but feel that this essential in 
terest depends on its remaining firmly united with 
them. 

If any thing could be done with Great Britain 
to increase our chances for the speedy enjoyment 
of this right, it would be, in my judgment, a very 
valuable ingredient in any arrangement you could 
make. Nor is Great Britain without a great interest 
in the question, if the arrangement shall give to her 
a participation in that navigation, and a treaty of 
commerce shall admit her advantageously into this 
large field of commercial adventure. 

May it not be possible to obtain a guaranty of our 
right in this particular from Great Britain, on the 
condition of mutual enjoyment and a trade on the 
same terms as to our Atlantic ports ? 

This is a delicate subject, not well matured in my 
mind. It is the more delicate, as there is at this 
moment a negotiation pending with Spain, in a 
position I believe not altogether unpromising, and 
ill use might be made of any overture or intima 
tion on the subject. Indeed, in such a posture of 
the thing, an eventual arrangement only could be 
proper. I throw out the subject merely that you 
may contemplate it. 

With the most fervent wishes for your health, 
comfort, and success, I remain, etc. 

Treaty Project 129 

TREATY PROJECT 

I794- 

An import duty, not exceeding 10 per cent, ad 
valorem at the place of exportation, may be laid 
on manufactures of flax, hemp, wool, cotton, silk, 
furs, or of mixtures of either, of gold, silver, copper, 
brass, iron, steel, tin, pewter, or of which either of 
these metals is the material or chief value; upon 
flour, salted beef, pork, and fish, and oils of every 
kind. Bar iron and bar lead, nails and spikes, steel 
unwrought, cables, cordage, yarn, twine, and pack 
thread, shall not be deemed to be included in the 
foregoing enumeration. 

An import duty, not exceeding 15 per cent, ad 
valorem at the place of exportation, may be laid 
upon porcelain or china wares, glass and all manu 
factures of glass, stone and earthen wares, and 
generally upon all manufactures of which stone or 
earth is the principal material. 

An import duty, not exceeding 50 per cent, ad 
valorem at the place of exportation, may be laid on 
all spirits distilled from fruits. (This is computed 
on a gallon of brandy costing 23. sterling.) 

An import duty, not exceeding 25 per cent, ad 
valorem at the place of exportation, may be laid on 
all wines. Grain of every kind, peas and other 
vegetables, live cattle, pitch, tar, and turpentine, 
unmanufactured wood, indigo, pot- and pearl-ash, 
flax, hemp, cotton, silk, wool, shall be free from 
duties both on exportation and importation. 

Neither party shall impose any duty on the 
exportation to the countries of the other of any 

vov. v.— 9. 

13° Alexander Hamilton 

raw material whatsoever. This prohibition shall be 
deemed to extend to molasses and tobacco. 

An export duty, not exceeding 5 per cent, ad 
valorem at the place of exportation, may be im 
posed on all brown and clayed sugars. All articles 
not specified or described in the foregoing clauses 
may be rated according to the discretion of each 
party, both as to exportation and importation ; but 
neither party shall lay any higher duty upon any 
production or manufacture of the other imported 
into any part of the dominions of such party, than 
shall be laid upon the like or a similar production 
or manufacture of any other nation imported into 
the same or any other part of the dominions of the 
said party. 

Neither party shall subject the vessels, cargoes, 
or merchants of the other to any greater charges or 
burdens within its own ports than its own vessels, 
cargoes, and merchants shall be subject to within 
the ports of the other, except as to duties by way 
of revenue to the government, which may be regu 
lated as either party pleases within the limits and 
in conformity to the principles established in this 
treaty. 

Neither party shall grant any bounties or pre 
miums upon its own ships, nor upon commodities 
imported in its own ships, which shall not extend to 
the ships nor to commodities imported in the ships 
of the other party ; nor upon any commodities what 
soever, with special reference, direct or indirect, to 
an exportation to the countries of the other. 

Neither party shall prohibit an importation into 

Hamilton to Washington 131 

its own dominions or the vent there of any of the 
productions or manufactures of the other. 

Neither party shall grant or allow, in conse 
quence of any former grant, any privilege or exemp 
tion in trade to another nation, which shall not be, 
ipso facto, communicated to the other party. Neither 
party shall grant to another nation the peculiar 
privileges and exemptions stipulated by this treaty, 
except for the peculiar considerations upon which 
they are herein stipulated. Peculiar privileges and 
exemptions and peculiar considerations shall be 
deemed to be those only which are contained in the 
stipulations of the articles. 

Neither party shall reduce any existing duties 
upon the ships, productions, or manufactures of 
other countries, except by virtue of a treaty founded 
on a reciprocation of equal privileges and exemp 
tions with those mutually stipulated in the present 

HAMILTON TO WASHINGTON 
(Cabinet Paper.) 

PHILADELPHIA, May 9, 1794. 

SIR: — The enclosed letter from Mr. Hammond, of 
the 6th instant, was transmitted to me by the Secre 
tary of State, with a request that after satisfying 
myself of the step proper to be taken, I would com 
municate it to you, and notify your determination 
to Mr. Hammond. 

The copy herewith sent of a letter from Mr. Rawle, 
exhibits the facts which appear in the case; and 

i32 Alexander Hamilton 

reasoning from them, the conclusion is, that the pro 
ceeding complained of is as wanton and unprovoked 
as it is illegal and disorderly. There is no doubt that 
justice to the parties concerned, the maintenance of 
the laws, and the discouragement of a practice which 
attempts a usurpation of the functions of govern 
ment and goes in subversion of all order, require 
that steps should be seriously taken to bring the 
offenders to justice. 

It is the opinion of the attorney of the district 
that the case is not of the cognizance of the Federal 
Judiciary. Hence it becomes necessary that it 
should be referred to the authority of the State. 
But it appears to be proper under the special cir 
cumstances, that a letter should be written on the 
part of the President to the Governor of Pennsyl 
vania, communicating the case and the complaint of 
the Minister, and calling upon him in earnest terms 
to cause the proper legal steps to be taken to bring 
the offenders to justice, and thereby give security to 
the parties and repress so exceptionable and dis 
orderly a spirit. 

With regard to the restoration of the vessel in the 
condition in which she was preceding the trespass, 
it is not perceived that the nature of the case re 
quires the extraordinary interposition of the govern 
ment for that purpose, and the precedent might be 
an embarrassing one. The vessel is one belonging to 
citizens of the United States, employed, indeed, as 
is now stated, by a British consul, but for the per 
sonal accommodation of certain subjects of Great 
Britain — that is, to convey them to their own 

Hamilton to Washington 133 

country, not for a purpose properly governmental. 
It is not perceived that this situation sufficiently dis 
tinguishes her case from the common one of a ves 
sel suffering injury by the trespass of unauthorized 
and lawless individuals, for the redress of which, in 
cluding indemnification, the ordinary course of law 
is competent. It is not understood that there exists 
any impediment to the repossession of the vessel by 
her commander. 

If these ideas are approved by the President, it 
will remain to direct the proper communications to 
the Governor and to the British Minister. 

With perfect respect, etc. 

P. S. — I will have the honor of waiting on the 
President between twelve and one o'clock, to know 
if he has any further commands on the subject. 



PHILADELPHIA, June 22, 1794. 

SIR: — The Secretary of State, on referring to you 
the question of the answer to be given to Mr. Ham 
mond concerning compensation for certain captured 
vessels, will, I presume, transmit to you the opinions 
of the other gentlemen, as well as his own. 

Besides the reasons hastily sketched in the memo 
randums given to the Secretary of State, there is one 
of a delicate nature, which I did not think fit to put 
on a paper which might become a public document 
but- which, I think, ought to be submitted to your 
consideration. 

134 Alexander Hamilton 

Though the form of only giving the opinion of the 
President that it was incumbent upon the United 
States to make compensation in the case has been 
used, yet between nation and nation this is equi 
valent to a virtual engagement that compensation 
will be made: and we were all sensible in advising 
the President to give that opinion (which advice was 
unanimous), that a non-compliance with it would 
be a serious commitment of the character of the na 
tion, the government, and the President. Indeed, 
if the Legislature should not do its part, under such 
circumstances, it would necessarily give birth to 
considerations very embarrassing to the delicacy of 
the President. 

In such a posture of things is it not advisable to 
narrow the obstacles to a right issue of the business ? 
If Mr. Jay is instructed to insert a formal stipulation 
in a general arrangement, the Senate only will have to 
concur. If provision is to be made by law, both 
Houses must concur. The difference is easily seen. 
And it is a case where the point of honor is too ma 
terially concerned not to dictate the expediency of 
leaving as little hazard as possible upon the issue. 
It is impossible that any question can arise about 
the propriety of giving this course to the business. 
When we are demanding compensation for our cap 
tured vessels and goods, it is the simplest thing in 
the world, to stipulate compensation for those of 
Great Britain, which we acknowledge to have been 
unlawfully made within our territory, or by the use 
of our means. It is also with me a material con 
sideration, that the coupling this with the other 

Hamilton to Randolph 135 

objects of Mr. Jay's negotiation, may tend to dis 
embarrass in future. If the compensation we seek 
fails, it may be a good answer to the claim on the 
other side, that they were endeavored without suc 
cess to be made a subject of reciprocal stipulation. 
I speak with reference to the individuals concerned. 

I may be, perhaps, too nice. But this is one of 
those questions in which ideas of sincerity, good faith, 
and honor, in a relation which must always engage 
my particular solicitude, press my judgment to a 
course of proceeding which is calculated to dispel 
all doubt. 


HAMILTON TO RANDOLPH 

(Cabinet Paper.) 

PHILADELPHIA, July 8, 1794. 

The Secretary of the Treasury presents his com 
pliments to the Secretary of State; begs leave to 
inform him that his opinion on the question lately 
proposed, respecting the instruction of Mr. Jay, 
eventually to establish by treaty a concert with 
Sweden and Denmark, is against the measure. The 
United States have peculiar advantages from situa 
tion, which would thereby be thrown into common 
stock without an equivalent. Denmark and Swe 
den are too weak and too remote to render a co 
operation useful ; and the entanglements of a treaty 
with them might be found very inconvenient. The 
United States had better stand upon their own 
ground. 

136 Alexander Hamilton 

If a war, on the question of neutral rights, should 
take place, common interest would be likely to se 
cure all the co-operation which is practicable, and 
occasional arrangements may be made. What has 
been already done in this respect appears, therefore, 
to be sufficient. 

The subject has varied in the impression enter 
tained of it; but the foregoing is the final result of 
full reflection. 



Remarks on Lord Grenville's Project of a Commercial 
Treaty, made at the Request of E. Randolph, Esq., 

Secretary of State 

1794. 

A. — Inasmuch as the light-house duties which are 
excepted, constitute an additional charge on vessels 
of the United States beyond those of Great Britain 
in British ports, this article, which puts British ves 
sels in our ports exactly upon the same footing with 
ours, wants reciprocity. But the most important 
consideration will be, that as the distinctions which 
now exist between foreign and our own vessels are 
really of importance to our trade, our merchants will 
see them relinquished with reluctance, unless there 
be some clear equivalent. If the stipulation extends 
to duties on goods brought in British bottoms, the 
conclusion is so much the stronger. 

B. — This article in its operation wants reciprocity. 
The British system contains now numerous prohibi- 

Hamilton to Randolph 137 

tions, ours none. To fix this state of things is to 
renounce an important right and place ourselves 
on an unequal footing. It gives a claim to some 
equivalent. 

C. — It may be supposed that the equivalent in both 
cases is to be found in this article. It would be so 
(excepting one circumstance that will be presently 
mentioned), if the duration of the privileges granted 
was coextensive with that of the other parts of the 
treaty. But the short term of the privileges here 
proposed to be granted renders them of inconsidera 
ble value. The proviso, too, prohibits vessels of the 
United States from carrying "West India" produc 
tions from the British Islands or the United States 
to any other parts of the world. If this prohibition 
is to be taken in a literal sense and to extend to the 
West India possessions of other countries than Great 
Britain, it would be to renounce a valuable branch 
of trade now enjoyed, and probably more than 
would be gained. 

D. — The article giving a duration of twelve years 
to the treaty as it respects the trade with Europe, 
and of only two years as it respects the West Indies, 
will be very unacceptable. It will be more so as the 
project does not even secure the status quo with the 
European dominions of Great Britain — that is, it 
does not secure the particular privileges and exemp 
tions which we now enjoy by proclamation compared 
with other foreign nations. 

Mr. Hamilton communicates these remarks in per 
sonal confidence to Mr. Randolph, with this request, 
that no copy of them may be taken, and that this 

138 Alexander Hamilton 

paper may be returned, after it serves the purpose 
for which these remarks were requested. 

HAMILTON TO WASHINGTON 

(Cabinet Paper.) 

Remarks on the treaty of amity, commerce, and naviga 
tion, made between the United States and Great 
Britain 

July 9, 1795. 

Article I. — This being simply a declaration of 
peace and friendship, is liable to no observation. 

Article II. — This article, by fixing a precise period 
for the evacuation of the posts, namely, the first of 
June, 1796, secures that important event as far as a 
stipulation can do it. 

It is objected that the period is too remote, and 
that reasoning from the past there can be no reliance 
upon a fulfilment at the time. 

It were desirable that a shorter period could have 
been limited, not only because it is interesting to 
repossess the posts as early as possible, but because 
the chances of interfering events which may create 
impediments are multiplied in proportion to the 
delay. 

But the reasons assigned for it, as contained in 
one of Mr. Jay's letters, though not satisfactory with 
regard to us, are not without force with regard to 
the other party, and it may be added to them, that 
the British would naturally wish time to establish 
counter posts within their territories, and that some 
time would really be requisite to prepare, without 

Hamilton to Washington 139 

prejudice to their traders, for the future course of 
their business. 

Yet whatever may be the degree of force which 
may be conceded to the reasons assigned for the 
delay, this circumstance does not appear to me a 
good ground of suspicion, that the postponement 
is with a secret intent to evade the surrender. I 
rather resolve its principal motive into the desire of 
preserving the friendship and confidence of the In 
dians within our territory by the gradual preparation 
of their minds for the event, and also by giving them 
sufficient time to close their quarrel with us, leaving 
things on a footing which it was imagined would 
incline us to better terms of peace than if we were 
previously in actual possession of the posts. 

The extreme profligacy and contempt of appear 
ances, which are implied in the supposition of an 
intention to evade the surrender of the posts, after 
a second and precise stipulation, in a treaty which 
adjusts all the points of difference in a former treaty, 
are so palpable, that the supposition cannot be in 
dulged without such a distrust of the faith of the 
party as would forbid an attempt to treat with him. 
For after all, some future period must have been 
fixed — and that as well as a more remote one might 
have been evaded. 

Besides that, it appears to be extremely probable 
that the course of events will fortify the disposition 
to observe good faith in this particular. 

I therefore venture to count with confidence on 
the surrender of the posts, according to the stipula 
tion., if the treaty is mutually ratified. And this is 

140 Alexander Hamilton 

in my view a matter of signal importance. Besides 
opening to us the Indian trade, which is of some 
value, relieving us effectually from the expenses and 
mischiefs of Indian wars in that quarter, and giving 
a secure course to our Western settlements, it breaks 
up the great and dangerous project of Great Britain 
to confine us to the Ohio and to possess the inter 
mediate country, and it tends most powerfully to 
establish the influence and authority of the general 
government over the Western country. The differ 
ent ways in which it will have this effect will readily 
occur. The firm possession by the general govern 
ment of the Western posts may be considered as a 
very strong link of connection between the Atlantic 
and Western country, to maintain which, with the 
necessary controls, is the knotty point of our affairs, 
as well as a primary object of our policy. 

Moreover, it is to be remarked that the conditional 
ratification of the treaty, as advised by the Senate, 
will occasion delays which would render it scarcely 
possible to effect the surrender sooner than is stipu 
lated, in consequence of the treaty ; and at any rate 
the event could only be retarded, not accelerated, by 
not closing with the treaty as it stands. 

The reservations of this article, with respect to the 
" precincts and jurisdictions" of the posts, are criti 
cised on account of the vagueness of the terms. But 
this criticism does not appear very well founded. 
It would have been difficult to have hit upon a 
definition which would have suited all the circum 
stances of the present occupation; and as any con 
struction which is not entirely absurd will leave full 

Hamilton to Washington 141 

latitude for the progress of settlement during the 
short period of the further detention of the posts, 
a definition was not a matter of moment. In my 
opinion the true construction will be, that those 
places where there are settlements and establishments 
in the vicinity of the posts over which a jurisdiction 
in fact has been exercised since the peace, are to be 
understood to be comprehended within the terms 
"precincts and jurisdictions of the posts," and that 
where there have been no settlements, gunshot must 
be the rule. 

Article III. — This article appears on the whole to 
be advantageous to the United States. Our Indian 
trade, to which it gives the British access, is un 
important. Theirs, to which we acquire access, is 
important, and it is believed by persons conversant 
in the business, that our local situation will enable us 
to maintain the competition within the British terri 
tories on favorable terms. As to other trade, the 
advantage will be still more clearly with us. The 
superior facilities of transportation on our side will 
enable us to supply their possessions with European 
and East India goods, as well as domestic articles, 
far more extensively than they can us. 

It is objected to this article that the clauses which 
regard " the admission of British vessels from the sea 
into the rivers of the United States," etc., and the 
mutual navigation of the Mississippi, will interfere 
with the regulations which the United States may 
hereafter think fit to establish, in order to bring Great 
Britain to better terms of commerce, etc. 

But the ground of this objection appears to be 

i42 Alexander Hamilton 

erroneous. The main and affirmative object of the 
first clause of the article is to secure an intercourse 
between the territories situated on each side of the 
boundary line, by land passage and inland navigation, 
with a right to each, for the purpose of this inland 
navigation, "to navigate all the lakes, rivers, and 
waters thereof." But lest on the one hand this 
should be construed to admit by implication a com 
munication from the sea with Canada or Nova Scotia, 
or through those countries with the sea (a thing not 
now permitted), it is declared negatively that this 
shall not be understood to be implied ; and lest on 
the other hand the same provision should be con 
strued to admit by implication that British vessels 
coming from the sea might go beyond the highest 
ports of entry to which our laws now subject foreign 
vessels, it is in like manner declared negatively, that 
this shall not be understood to be implied. But 
this negative of an implication which might have 
arisen from the principal provision, can by no just 
rules of reasoning or construction be turned into a 
grant of a positive privilege, especially being foreign 
to the object of that principal provision — that is to 
say, to the grant of a right to navigate by sea to and 
from our seaports ; the subject of the main provision 
being land passage and inland navigation* 

1 These terms have no precise legal sense ; but they are always used 
as contra-distinguished from sea navigation, or navigation to and 
from the sea. I should say, then, that inland navigation begins where 
navigation from the sea ends; — that navigation from the sea ends at 
our ports of entry from the sea, where inland navigation begins. This 
construction is strengthened by the reflection, that, according to the 
laws of Great Britain and the United States, rivers, as far as the tide 
flows, are arms of the sea. 

Hamilton to Washington 143 

The absurdity of such a provision becomes the 
more manifest by considering that the trade to be 
regulated by the main provision concerns only that 
portion of the British territories which is on the con 
tinent of America; while the right pretended to be 
grafted upon it would extend to all the other British 
territories in whatever part of the world. With as 
much reason, and on the same principle, might we 
contend under the article for an access by sea to any 
possessions which Great Britain might have or ac 
quire on the opposite coast of our continent. 

The clause with regard to the Mississippi merely 
admits, as far as depends upon us, a positive right to 
navigate that river to any port or place which the 
British may have bordering upon it, and a revocable 
right to navigate it to any port or place which we 
may have bordering upon it. They may use it to 
come to any such port or place, in as ample a manner 
as they may go to an Atlantic port; but not in a 
more ample manner; consequently a prohibition to 
come to an Atlantic port will annihilate the condi 
tional permission to go to a port on the Mississippi. 

We may, therefore, freely, as to any thing in this 
article, prohibit British vessels from coming by sea 
from any part of the world to the United States. 

The latter part of the clause gives permission to 
bring and carry into the respective territories men 
tioned in the article in manner aforesaid, that is to 
say, by land passage and inland navigation, all such 
goods and merchandise whose importation shall not 
be entirely prohibited, paying such duties only as the 
respective subjects and citizens are liable to pay. 

144 Alexander Hamilton 

But we may entirely prohibit any articles we please 
of the produce or manufacture of Great Britain. 
And we may prohibit the exportation to Great Brit 
ain of any articles whatsoever. Thus will there be 
ample room to make regulations of the kind alluded 
to, notwithstanding any thing in this article. 

Article IV. — This article, as far as it is operative, 
is right. A survey is a necessary previous step to 
determine whether the former treaty can be literally 
executed; and if not, the adjustment of the matter 
is referred to future negotiation, which leaves it in 
the power of both parties to come to such an agree 
ment as they deem reasonable and conformable to 
the true intent of the former treaty. 

Article V. — This article also provides a good mode 
of settling the controverted point. 

Article VI. — It was ever my opinion that no ad 
justment of the controversy on the inexecution of 
the former treaty was ever likely to be made, which 
would not embrace an indemnification for losses sus 
tained, in consequence of legal impediments to the 
recovery of debts ; and indeed it always appeared to 
me just that an indemnification should be embraced. 

The article of the former treaty on this head was, 
as I conceive, nothing more than the formal sanction 
of a doctrine which makes part of the modern law or 
usage of nations. The confiscation of private debts 
in time of war is reprobated by the most approved 
writers on the laws of nations, and by the negative 
practice of civilized nations, during the present cent 
ury. The free recovery of them, therefore, on the 
return of peace, was a matter of course, and ought 

Hamilton to Washington 145 

not to have been impeded, had there been no 
article. 

Admitting that the first breaches of the treaty 
were committed, as we alleged, by Great Britain, 
still it would not follow that the impediments which 
the laws of certain States opposed to the recovery 
of debts were justifiable. 

First, Because it manifestly lay with the general 
government, to which belonged the powers of treaty, 
war, and peace, to decide whether, in consequence 
of the breaches of treaty on the other part, it would 
elect to consider as void the whole, or any article of 
the treaty. The general government never did so 
decide, but, on the contrary, repeatedly and wisely 
manifested a different disposition; wisely, because 
it was inexpedient to set afloat so important a 
treaty, which terminated the question of the revo 
lution with the government with which we had con 
tended, and to widen a breach which might at an 
early stage involve us anew in war. Consequently 
the only competent authority having declined to 
pronounce, it was a usurpation in any State to take 
upon itself the business of retaliation. 

Secondly, Because the interruption of the recovery 
of debts is contrary (as before observed) to the 
modern usage of nations, immoral in itself, against 
the opinions of the generality of enlightened men, 
and disreputable to the nation which has recourse 
to it. The practice of most of the States is in con 
formity with, and a comment upon, this doctrine. 

But the question, Who committed the first breach 
of the treaty? if candidly examined, does not admit 

VOL. V.— 10. 

146 Alexander Hamilton 

of as clear a solution in our favor as many imagine 
or assert. 

Two breaches of treaty are imputed to Great 
Britain; one respecting the carrying away of the 
negroes, and the other respecting the retention of 
the posts. 

As to the first, Great Britain has much to say 
with truth and justice. 

Her proceedings in seducing away our negroes 
during the war were to the last degree infamous, 
and form an indelible stain on her annals. 

But having done it, it would have been still more 
infamous to have surrendered them to their masters. 

The reply to this may be, that they ought not then 
to have stipulated it. This is just ; but still the in 
quiry is, whether they have stipulated it; and the 
odiousness of the thing, as applied to them, is an 
argument of weight against such a construction of 
general expressions in the treaty as would imply 
the obligation to restitution. Odious things are not 
favored in the interpretation of treaties ; and though 
the restoration of property is a favored thing, yet the 
surrender of persons to slavery is an odious thing, 
speaking in the language of the laws of nations. 

The words of the article are, that his Britannic 
Majesty shall, with all convenient speed, and without 
causing any destruction or carrying away any negroes 
or other property of the American inhabitants, with 
draw all his armies, etc. 

There are two constructions of this article: one 
that the evacuation should be made without depreda 
tion — that is, without causing any destruction or 

Hamilton to Washington 147 

carrying away any property, which continued to be 
such (having undergone no change by the laws of war) 
at the time of the evacuation; the other, that there 
was to be, besides a forbearance to destroy or carry 
away, a positive restitution of all property taken in 
the war, and, at the time of the evacuation, which then 
existed in kind. 

In favor of the last construction is the most ob 
vious sense of the words; and as it applies to the 
negroes, merely as an article of property, the justice 
of restoring what had been taken away in many in 
stances by unwarrantable means. 

Against it, and in favor of the first construction, 
are these considerations. 

i. That the expressions are, negroes and other 
property; which puts negroes, cows, horses, and all 
other articles of property, on the same footing, and 
considers them, if at all liable, equally liable to 
restitution, and all as having equally the common 
quality of property of the American inhabitants. 

Could any thing be considered as property of the 
American inhabitants, at the time of the treaty, 
and in contemplation of the treaty, which, by the 
ordinary rules of the laws of war, had previously 
become the absolute property of the captors? Is 
there any thing which exempts negroes, more than 
other articles of personal property, from capture 
and confiscation as booty? If there is not, why 
should negroes have been claimed under this article, 
more than the vessels which had been captured and 
condemned? Is that a probable sense of the treaty 
which would require such a restitution? 

148 Alexander Hamilton 

2. If negroes were subjects of capture in war, the 
captor might proclaim their liberty when in his pos 
session. If once declared free, could the grant be 
recalled? Could the British Government stipulate 
the surrender of men made free to slavery? Is it 
natural to put such a construction upon general 
words, if they will bear another? Is not this, as it 
regards the rights of humanity, an odious sense? 

3. The treaty will bear another construction — 
that which is put upon it by the British, — a pro 
vision for greater caution against depredation or the 
carrying away of property not changed by the laws 
of war. It is observable, in confirmation of this, 
that there is no stipulation to restore, but negatively 
not to carry away; whereas, immediately after, in 
the same article, there follows a clause which stipu 
lates that "archives, records, etc., shall be restored 
and delivered up." This different mode of expres 
sion seems to denote a different sense in the two 
cases. 

Let it be observed that I do not mean to advocate 
this sense in preference to the other. I have at dif 
ferent times viewed the matter in different lights, 
and our ablest lawyers differ concerning it. I even 
entertain a clear opinion that the article was in 
tended to operate in our sense of it. But, still, this 
does not obviate the doubt as to its true legal 
signification. 

All I mean to say is, that there is really a well- 
founded doubt as to the true legal construction; 
and, in such case, the acting of the other party, 
on a construction different from ours, could not be 

Hamilton to Washington 149 

deemed such a clear manifest breach of treaty as to 
justify retaliation. The point was merely a matter 
of amicable discussion and negotiation. 

If this was a breach of the treaty, it is necessary 
to note that it was committed in 1783. 

The affair of the posts is more embarrassing. 

It is necessary, in the first place, to settle when it 
became the duty of the British to surrender them. 
The stipulation is, that it shall be done "with all 
convenient speed." But from which of the treaties 
are we to date, the provisional or the definitive? The 
principle of this question is a point of great difficulty, 
not settled either by the opinions of writers or by the 
practice of nations. 

I remember that I contended in Congress, shortly 
after the arrival of the provisional treaty, and when 
it was known that preliminaries had been signed be 
tween France and England, that the execution of 
the treaty was to date from this epoch, and on this 
position I grounded a motion to recommend to the 
States a compliance with the article. 

But on the vote upon this motion, I was left alone, 
and Congress did not act upon the subject till after 
the arrival of the definitive treaty — that is, 1784. 

This amounts to a construction by our govern 
ment, that the execution was to date from the 
definitive treaty. 

Lord Grenville contends with Mr. Jay for the 
same position, and urges, consequently, that it was 
not till after the notice of the ratification by us in 
England, or, in other words, the exchange of ratifi 
cations there, that it could be deemed incumbent 

150 Alexander Hamilton 

upon them to give orders for the evacuation of the 
posts ; which orders could not well have been given 
before May, nor have arrived in Canada till July. 

After the course pursued by us, as already stated, 
it is difficult to see what can be objected to this con 
struction. It is true the Atlantic posts were evacu 
ated shortly after the provisional treaty ; but it may 
be justly observed, upon this, that it was done for 
mutual convenience, and in the spirit of conciliation 
—not on the score of strict obligation; that, how 
ever inconsistent with the spirit of an act for restoring 
peace it might have been to have detained places in 
the heart of our settled country, being, besides, the 
capitals of the States in which they were, there was 
entire liberty to pursue a stricter rule as to the West 
ern posts, some delay concerning which could not 
have been of material inconvenience to us ; and that 
it was reasonable to pursue the strict rule here, to 
see what course the execution of the treaty was 
likely to take on our part. 

But our dilemma is this : that if the delay of orders 
for evacuating the posts till after the exchange of 
ratifications of the definitive treaty was a breach 
of the treaty, as contended for by Mr. Jefferson, the 
delay of acting upon the fifth article till after the 
ratification of the definitive treaty in this country 
was equally a breach of the treaty on our part, and 
a prior, at least a contemporary, breach. 

Let us now see how, in point of time, the breaches 
will stand on our part. In this I shall not aim at 
an accurate enumeration, but shall select particular 
instances. 

Hamilton to Washington 151 

An act of New York for granting a more effectual 
relief in cases of certain trespasses, passed the iyth 
of March, 1783. 

This act takes away from any person within the 
British lines who had occupied, injured, or destroyed 
the property, real or personal, of an inhabitant 
without the lines, the plea of a military order for 
so doing; consequently, the justification which he 
might derive from the laws and usages of war, in con 
travention of the treaty of peace. 

It is true, it preceded for a short time the arrival 
of the provisional treaty in this country; but it is 
notorious that it was in expectation and contempla 
tion of the event. 

This circumstance of priority of time leads Mr. 
Jefferson to put this act out of the question; but in 
fair reasoning this is hardly admissible. 

It continued to have, in fact, an extensive opera 
tion, from the time of the evacuation of the city of 
New York till the repeal of the exceptionable clause, 
by an act of the 4th of April, 1787. 

It hardly appears a satisfactory answer to this to 
say, as Mr. Jefferson has done, that the courts did 
not sanction the principle of the act ; that in one in 
stance, the case of Rutgers and Waddington, the 
mayor's court overruled it. 

The fact is, that from the very express terms of 
the act, a general opinion was entertained, embrac 
ing almost our whole bar, as well as the public, that 
it was useless to attempt a defence; and, accord 
ingly, many suits were brought, and many judg 
ments given, without the point being regularly 

152 Alexander Hamilton 

raised, and many compromises were made, and large 
sums paid, tinder the despair of a successful defence. 
I was for a long time the only practiser who pursued 
a different course, and opposed the treaty to the act ; 
and though I was never overruled in the Supreme 
Court, I never got my point established there. I 
effected many easy compromises to my clients, 
afraid myself of the event in the Supreme Court, 
and produced delays till the exceptionable part 
of the act was repealed. The Supreme Court 
frequently, in a studied manner, evaded the main 
question, and turned their decision upon the forms 
of pleading. 

T is perhaps enough for the other party to say 
that here was a positive law of a State, unrepealed, 
and acted upon so as in fact to defeat, in a material 
degree, the operation of the treaty. The injury 
was suffered, and there ought never to have existed 
so critical a conflict between the treaty and the 
statute law of a State. 

If the operation of this law was a breach of the 
treaty, it was a breach from the first moment of the 
ratification of the provisional articles till the 4th of 
April, 1787. Nothing could be anterior to it. 

Another act, of the 4th of May, 1784, provided a 
mode by which the foregoing act should have effect 
upon the estates of absentees, which in several in 
stances produced judgments without opportunity of 
defence. It is to be observed that the British com- 
mander-in-chief early remonstrated against this act 
as inconsistent with the treaty, and yet it continued 
unrepealed. 

Hamilton to Washington 153 

Another act of New York, of the i2th of May, 
1784, in the strongest and most express terms, con 
firms all confiscations before made, notwithstanding 
any errors in the proceedings, and takes away the 
writ of error upon any judgment before rendered. 

This is substantially a new confiscation. If the 
judgments before rendered were from error invalid, 
the confiscations were nullities; to take away the 
writ of error, which was the mode of annulling them, 
was equivalent to making new confiscations. This 
act was an undoubted breach of the treaty, and is 
prior to the time when the breach by the non-sur 
render of the posts can be dated. 

An act of South Carolina, March 26, 1784, sus 
pends the recovery of British debts for nine months, 
and then allows them to be recovered in four yearly 
instalments. 

This also was a plain contravention of the treaty, 
and dates before the breach by non-surrender of the 
posts. 

Virginia, in June, 1784, resolved that her courts 
should be opened to British suits as soon as repara 
tion should be made with regard to the negroes and 
posts, or otherwise, as Congress should judge it in 
dispensably necessary. 

If her courts were before closed, which this resolu 
tion admits, it was in consequence of acts passed 
prior to the treaty, which her courts had deemed 
obligatory upon them after the treaty — and it fol 
lows that there was a continual violation of the 
treaty from its ratification till 1787, when Virginia 
repealed all acts repugnant to the treaty. 

154 Alexander Hamilton 

Taking, therefore, the carrying away of the ne 
groes to be a breach of treaty, 't is a very moot point 
whether some of the laws of the States did not pro 
duce antecedent breaches. 

Putting that out of the question and taking the 
definitive treaty, according to the construction just 
put upon it by our own conduct, as the act from 
which the execution was to date, and allowing 
reasonable time for the ratification to be notified 
and exchanged — it is certain that the first breaches 
were committed by us. 

The use of these remarks is to show that a candid 
and unprejudiced view of the subject tends to mod 
erate the sanguine pretensions which have been 
built on the suggestion of the first breach having 
been committed by Great Britain, and to manifest 
the reasonableness of having stipulated compensa 
tion in the cases of the breaches made by us. 

Indeed, admitting the first breaches by Great 
Britain, I do not see that it would affect the con 
clusion that compensation was to be made. 

The following seems to be the fair view of the 
subject. 

Mutual infractions of the treaty had taken place. 
Either our infractions were to be considered as the 
equivalents for those of Great Britain, and then 
having enjoyed the equivalents we had no right to 
ask reparation in addition — or, if we preferred re 
paration for the infractions by Great Britain, we 
were to renounce the equivalents for them. 

Then it will follow, that the surrender of the posts 
on their side would draw with it a right of com- 

Hamilton to Washington 155 

pensation for the losses suffered by impediments to 
the recovery of the debts on our side. 

In other words, the treaty was to remain mutually 
broken and unexecuted in certain points, or it was 
to be reinstated by mutual performance. Perform 
ance as to the article of the debts is compensation 
for the losses sustained by impediments to the re 
covery, and the removal of those impediments. 

In fine, it would, in my judgment, independent of 
the treaty, have been dishonorable and unjust in us 
to have interfered with the recovery of private debts ; 
it was dishonorable and unjust to have interfered 
with them on the grounds which were the pretexts, 
and it is honorable and just to make compensation. 
The reputation of the country as well as its peace 
required the stipulation. 

It is not perceived that there is any thing excep 
tionable in the mode of determining and adjusting 
the compensations to be made in the cases in which 
this may be deemed proper — or that any better 
mode could be substituted. The article appears in 
general sufficiently well guarded. 

Article VII. — This article appears to me as well 
arranged as could have been expected. 

It is objected to as too dilatory, but no reasonable 
substitute has occurred. 

The United States could not have demanded a 
gross sum, because they had no adequate standard 
by which to ascertain what was proper. They might 
have asked too much or too little. 

Great Britain, for the same reasons, could not have 
been expected to agree to the demand of a gross sum. 

156 Alexander Hamilton 

This is not the way that nations deal with each other, 
unless where one is in a situation to dictate to the 
other. This was not our situation. 

Indemnification on equitable principles was all 
that could be expected. This necessarily supposes 
a mode of ascertaining with due investigation the real 
losses. 

But one of three modes can well be thought of : to 
refer the adjustment to the tribunals of the United 
States, to refer it to the tribunals of Great Britain, or 
to submit it to referees mutually appointed. 

Either of the first two modes was inadmissible, 
because liable to partiality. The tribunals of the 
United States could never get hold of these cases 
without inverting entirely the course of similar 
transactions. Those of Great Britain will now in 
many cases decide in the first instance, but no Amer 
ican would choose to leave the ultimate decision 
there. Referees have therefore a comprehensive 
power to do justice in all cases in which it could not 
be obtained in the ordinary course. 

But, it is said, 't were better commissioners should 
have decided in the first instance without reference 
to the courts for the greater despatch. 

This might have had a contrary tendency to that 
of promoting despatch. Appeals, in a great number 
of cases, will have gone forward; and it was better 
they should have had their course, than to be ar 
rested to be turned over to the referees. T is 
probable, from the expedition of admiralty proceed 
ings, that the courts will have done their part by 
the time the referees are ready to begin. 

Hamilton to Washington 157 

It is to be observed, too, that this article follows 
closely the provision with regard to the debts; and 
it was material this should be the case. 

We certainly must prefer that our courts of justice 
should have a free course in the affair of the debts, 
in all the cases in which it is now practicable. 

The latter clause of this article respects the prizes 
made within our territorial jurisdiction, or by pri 
vateers originally fitted out in our ports, is confined 
to the cases in which the prizes having been brought 
within our ports, we forbore to make restitution, 
and is purely in execution of the opinion of the 
President conveyed in the letter from Mr. Jefferson, 
which is annexed to the treaty, and which, by being 
annexed and referred to, becomes a part of this 
article. 

Agreeing, then, with the laws of nations, with the 
obligations which our treaties with other nations im 
pose upon us in respect to them, and carrying into 
effect the expectation previously given by the Presi 
dent, it is liable to no just objection. 

Article VIII. — This article seems in all respects 
unexceptionable. 

Article IX. — This article, from having been mis 
understood, caused at first much uneasiness. It was 
considered as giving a permanent reciprocal right 
to the citizens of the two countries indefinitely to 
acquire and hold lands in either. But this is mani 
festly an error, which having been pointed out, the 
uneasiness has subsided. 

It .is expressly confined to those holding lands 
prior to the treaty, (the words are "those who now 

158 Alexander Hamilton 

hold lands, ") x and makes no alteration in the anteced 
ent state of things which can be at all material in a 
national light. 

It is not certain that it makes any other alteration 
than that those who now lawfully hold lands may 
convey those lands to aliens. 

It may, however, give rise to this question, 
whether aliens who now hold lands by a defeasible 
title acquired since the treaty of peace, in States 
whose laws do not authorize it, are not protected in 
their acquisitions? But however this question may 
be decided, it is of little importance ; for in fact the 
alien laws are never enforced, nor likely to be so; 
and the quantity of lands so holden, which are daily 
changing owners, is not considered enough to have 
any consequence in a national scale. 

An objection seems to have been raised in the 
Senate against the constitutionality of this article, 
as though it entrenched upon the authorities of the 
States. 

But this objection is inadmissible. It would to 
tally subvert the power of making treaties. There 
can hardly be made a treaty which does not make 
some alteration in the existing laws, which does not, 
as its object, control the legislative authority; and 
from the nature of our Constitution, this must apply 
to the State laws and Legislatures as well as to those 
of the Union. 

A treaty cannot be made which alters the con 
stitutions of the country, or which infringes any ex- 

1 Mr. King, who has critically examined these points, is of opinion 
that it does not apply to such cases. 

Hamilton to Washington 159 

press exceptions to the power of the Constitution of 
the United States. But it is difficult to assign any 
other bounds to the power. It may certainly alter 
the provisions of the statute and municipal laws, and 
modify the rules of property. 

There are stipulations in our treaty of peace with 
Great Britain, analogous to the one under considera 
tion, the validity of which has never been disputed. 

Of this kind is that which stipulates that all persons 
who have any interest in confiscated lands either by 
debts, marriage settlements, or otherwise, shall meet 
with no lawful impediment in the prosecution of 
their just rights ; and that which stipulates that there 
shall be no future confiscations. 

But a much stronger case is found in the XI 
article of our treaty of amity and commerce with 
France, which is generally understood and practised 
upon, as removing, in toto, the disability of alienism 
from all Frenchmen, so far as respects acquiring and 
holding lands; and certainly gives them important 
rights with regard to lands which they would not 
have but for this treaty on account of their alienism. 

Indeed, the protection of aliens in the enjoyment 
of the landed property they hold is a familiar article 
in treaties of peace ; so also stipulations as to rights 
in lands, more or less qualified, are common in 
treaties of commerce. And the power of making 
treaties is plenary under our present Constitution; 
more so than it was under the Confederation, where 
it has been deemed adequate to do much more in 
this respect than has been done by the treaty in 
question. 

160 Alexander Hamilton 

In fine, the objection to the constitutionality of 
this article, is manifestly futile. 

Article X. — In my opinion this article is nothing 
more than an affirmance of the modern law and 
usage of civilized nations, and is valuable as a check 
upon a measure which, if it could ever take place, 
would disgrace the government of the country, and 
injure its true interests. 

The general proposition of writers on the laws 
of nations is, that all enemy's property, wherever 
found, is liable to seizure and confiscation; but 
reason pronounces that this is with the exception 
of all such property as exists in the faith of the laws 
of your own country; such are the several kinds of 
property which are protected by this article. 

And though in remote periods the exception may 
not have been duly observed, yet the spirit of com 
merce, diffusing more just ideas, has been giving 
strength to it for a century past, and a negative 
usage among nations, according with the opinions 
of modern writers, authorizes the considering the 
exception as established. 

If there have been deviations from that usage in 
the actual war of Europe, they form no just objec 
tion to this reasoning: for this war has violated, in 
different instances, most of the most sacred laws of 
nations. 

It is said that the power which is given up by 
this article was the only effective check upon Great 
Britain. I answer: 

i st. That there existed before no rightful or moral 
power; and, notwithstanding the treaty, there will 

Hamilton to Washington 161 

still exist a power without right or morality. The 
treaty only adds the sanction of an express, to what 
was before an implied, pledge of the public faith. 
The one may be still violated as well as the other; 
and the only use of the article will be to give 
prudent and good men an additional argument 
against an act of national iniquity. 

2d. That the fear of the exercise of this power 
has not hitherto appeared to be a check upon Great 
Britain; and the menace of its exercise can never 
take place without doing ourselves more harm than 
good, by tarnishing our honor and shaking our 
credit. 

3d. That war itself acts as a virtual sequestration 
of property, by interrupting the course of remit 
tances; and the Government by interfering does 
little more than render itself liable for the dilapida 
tions of vicious individuals who take advantage of 
the circumstance ; since treaties of peace, unless one 
party is totally prostrate, will never fail to reinstate 
private debts. 

What benefit did those States derive which had 
recourse to the expedient of sequestrations in our 
war? How much wiser and less embarrassing to 
themselves was the policy of those States who re 
frained from it. And why did they refrain from 
it, but because they thought it unwarrantable and 
impolitic ? 

I have not the State laws by me, and cannot speak 
with certainty from memory; but as far as I recol 
lect, a majority of the States, including the most 
commercial, abstained from the sequestration or 

VOL. V. — II. 

1 62 Alexander Hamilton 

confiscation of private debts, except in the case of 
convicted or attainted criminals, which may be re 
garded as an indication of the general opinion. For 
if ever a war warranted such a measure, it was our 
Revolution war. 

I conclude, from the whole, that no honest or 
truly politic objection lies against this article ; and 
that a willingness to enter into the stipulation is re 
putable to the country, while an unwillingness would 
be disreputable to it. 

These ten are all the permanent articles. They 
close the various matters of controversy with Great 
Britain, and, upon the whole, they close them reason 
ably. Compensation for the negroes, if not a point 
of doubtful right, is certainly a point of no great 
moment. It involves no principle of future opera 
tion. It terminates in itself; and the actual pe 
cuniary value of the object is in a national sense 
inconsiderable and insignificant. 

The remaining articles are temporary. I proceed 
to review them in their order. 

Article XI. — This article is a mere introduction to 
the succeeding articles. 

Article XII. — This article is in my judgment an 
exceptionable one. The principle of a restriction 
upon any thing which is not the produce of the 
treaty itself, is unprecedented and wrong. Had it 
been confined to articles from the British Islands, it 
would have been justified ; but extending to articles 
from other countries, and, according to the letter, to 
one which is the growth of our own country, it ap 
peared to me from the beginning inadmissible. It 

Hamilton to Washington 163 

might also have proved a source of dissatisfaction to 
France, by interrupting in the midst of the war a 
regular and just source of supply through us. And 
though I would not omit any measure which I 
thought for the national interest, because any 
foreign power might capriciously dislike it, yet I 
would do no act giving a reasonable cause of dis 
satisfaction. And for these reasons I am glad, 
though at the risk of the treaty, that the Senate has 
not accepted it. 

I do justice to Mr. Jay's reasoning on this subject. 
He thought rightly that the re-exportation of the 
articles in ordinary times was a matter of little 
consequence to this country, and that it was of im 
portance by a formal treaty to establish the pre 
cedent of a breach in the navigation system of Great 
Britain, which might be successively widened. These 
reasons were not light ones, but they are in my 
judgment outweighed by the other considerations. 

Article XIII. — This article is a valuable one. In 
considering it, it is necessary to reflect that the privi 
leges we now enjoy in the British East Indies are by 
the mere sufferance of the local government, and 
revocable at pleasure. This article converts into a 
right by stipulation , not all that we before enjoyed 
by sufferance, but the most essential and extensive 
part of it — the direct trade between India and the 
United States. Heretofore by sufferance we have 
been occasionally let into the coasting trade, and 
have been permitted to go from India to other 
countries than the United States. The treaty, 
though it permits a circuitous trade to India, permits 
Alexander Hamilton 

only a direct trade from India to the United States; 
but when the articles arrive within the United States, 
we may re-export them, or do whatever else we 
please. 

But though the treaty does not secure to us an 
indirect trade from India, nor the coasting trade 
there, I do not see but that these matters will be left 
just where they were before — that is, depending on 
the sufferance or free permission of the British Gov 
ernment in India. When two parties agree that a 
certain thing shall not be done, it is always with this 
tacit exception, unless the party for whose benefit the 
restriction is imposed shall consent to waive it. If the 
British Government finds it expedient to continue 
to us the advantages not granted by treaty, its per 
mission ad hoc will release the restriction in the 
treaty and confer the right. 'T is by the same 
permission we have hitherto enjoyed it, and by its 
continuance we may enjoy it still. 

The interest of the other party was the only 
ground upon which we heretofore enjoyed any privi 
lege in the British East Indies. That interest with 
out the treaty would continue the privilege so long, 
and so long only, as the interest continued. It will 
still do the same as to what is not included in the 
treaty, and the result of the whole is this: that the 
treaty converts into matter of right the most extensive 
and most valuable part of a trade, which before was 
wholly matter of sufferance, leaving the residue now 
as it was before, matter of sufferance, to be continued 
or discontinued according to the interest of the party. 

Some alarm has been attempted to be excited as 

Hamilton to Washington 165 

if under this article the British merchants could enter 
into competition with us in the India trade, and by 
the superiority of their capitals supplant us. But 
there is not a syllable in this article which renders 
this at all more possible now than it was before. 

There is a clause which says negatively that our 
vessels shall pay in India no other or higher duties 
than are payable on British vessels in the ports of 
the United States. But as it is at the option of the 
other party under this article not to make us pay as 
much tonnage in India as British vessels pay in the 
United States, so before the treaty it was in their 
power to make us pay not only as much but more; 
now by the treaty they are restrained from making 
us pay more, so that something is gained, nothing 
lost. There is a clause which immediately follows, 
very important in a contrary sense to the object. 
This clause secures us from paying higher duties in 
India on articles imported and exported in our 
vessels than are paid on the same articles in British 
vessels ; whereas before they might have imposed at 
pleasure higher duties on our cargoes, and very 
reasonably could have gone so far as to countervail 
the higher duties which we lay on foreign vessels 
bringing goods from India. 

In fine this article is all on one side, and favorable 
to us. 

Article XIV. — This article is a general formula 
without any special or remarkable feature. 

Article XV. — This article, with more precision 
than .is usual, only establishes reciprocally the rule of 
the most favored nation. It stipulates that as to the 

1 66 Alexander Hamilton 

points enumerated, Great Britain shall be on no 
worse footing than other nations, but it gives her no 
preferences. It was impossible to expect that a 
treaty could be formed of which this was not the 
basis. 

The last clause but one assures to Great Britain 
the right of imposing on American vessels entering 
into her ports in Europe, and their cargoes, duties 
which shall countervail the differences made in our 
ports between British and American vessels and 
their cargoes. This right Great Britain enjoyed 
before the treaty, and it depended then upon her 
option, as it does still, to exercise or not to exercise 
it. And it is now in our option to defeat the re 
servation if we choose it by equalizing the duties. 

The last clause stipulates on our side a continuance 
of the status quo as to the tonnage duty on British 
vessels, and as to the proportional difference of duties 
on articles imported in British and American vessels. 
This status quo is such as we have no interest to vary, 
unless on the plan of coercive regulations, an idea 
which is certainly incompatible with the being of 
the treaty while it continues in force. 

Article XVI. — This article merely relates to con 
suls, and is on the common and a harmless footing. 

Article XVII. — This article, recognizing the right 
of a belligerent nation to take its enemy's goods out 
of a neutral vessel, establishes the usual grounds 
against abuse. 

It is impossible to deny that the principle recog 
nized is conformable with the laws of nations. It 
is the uniform doctrine of writers, and was the uni- 

Hamilton to Washington 167 

form and universally allowed practice of nations 
before the armed neutrality brought it into contro 
versy. A combination like this, formed in the midst 
of a war of temporary duration, and on special 
motives of policy, not acceded to by all the powers 
of Europe, not having acquired the sanction of time, 
is clearly not sufficient to alter a rule in the law of 
nations. This might be done by common consent, 
or by long and general usage. Neither is the case 
here. On the contrary, some of the powers which 
combined to introduce the innovation, now support 
in arms a contrary principle; and all the neutral 
powers — the United States included — have ex 
pressly or virtually relinquished the ground in 
the whole course of the present war. None, that 
I know of, has seriously contended for it, even in 
argument. 

Our government, at an early day, on full and 
mature examination and reflection, by an unanimous 
opinion of those consulted, gave up the ground as 
untenable. The President's files of Mr. Jefferson's 
letters are evidence of this. Indeed it is not very 
probable that the new principle will ever become 
an established one of the laws of nations. It is too 
contrary to the spirit of war. 

Where, therefore, the rule exists, it must depend 
on treaty, and apply only to the powers who are 
parties to it. 

This article, therefore, does no more than was 
done before, and rightly and wisely done. 

For besides that one or a few nations cannot justly 
make and attempt to enforce a new principle, it is 

1 68 Alexander Hamilton 

folly in a young and weak country like ours to take 
a ground which cannot clearly be maintained on 
precedent and principle. 

The dilemma was to renounce the pretension, or to 
insist upon and maintain it. To have attempted the 
last would have been madness. 

It were to have been wished that this article had 
stipulated, with regard to contraband goods, what 
has been stipulated with regard to enemy's goods, to 
wit, that the contraband only should be detained — 
the rest of the cargo liberated ; since it is contended, 
in certain cases, that the contraband articles will 
infect the ship and the residue of the cargo. But 
though such a stipulation would have been a point 
gained, the want of it relinquishes nothing. The 
point is left where it was before — to the decision of 
the laws of nations. 

Article XVIIL— The first clause of this article 
specifies the articles to be deemed generally contra 
band. This specification agrees with the laws of 
nations, as laid down by writers, and sanctioned by 
long practice, in all cases in which there are not 
limitations or exceptions in particular treaties. 

The enumeration, however, comprises articles as 
contraband which are excepted in our other treaties, 
and is so far less well than might be wished, though 
probably as well as circumstances would permit to 
be done at the present juncture. 

In embracing generally articles for ship-building, 
it affects some of the staples of some of the States; 
but it is to be observed that it only leaves them, in 
this respect, where they are at present. It is, how- 

Hamilton to Washington 169 

ever, our interest to narrow upon all occasions as 
much as possible the list of contraband. 

The second clause recites the difficulty of agreeing 
on the precise cases in which alone provisions and 
other articles not generally contraband may be re 
garded as such; to prevent inconvenience and mis 
understandings, provides, that in the cases in which, 
by the existing laws of nations, they do become con 
traband, they shall not be confiscated; but, being 
taken, shall be paid for at their full value, with a 
reasonable mercantile profit, freight, and demurrage. 

But one case in which such articles may be deemed 
contraband is, by the succeeding clause, subjected 
to a particular and different regulation. A vessel 
with her cargo, going to a port or place blockaded, 
besieged, or invested, if without notice, cannot be 
seized or detained, but must be turned back. If she 
contumaciously persists, and makes a second at 
tempt, she may then be seized, and she and her cargo 
confiscated. 

The last sentence guards our property found in 
places afterwards besieged, etc., from vexations and 
depredations to which they have been in some cases 
liable. 

The second clause has been the subject of much 
censure, as though it sanctioned generally the seizing 
of provisions and other articles not generally con 
traband, on the condition of paying for them ; for it 
is said that all the cases in which the acknowledged 
laws of nations authorize such seizure, are differently 
provided for in the third clause (those of blockades, 
sieges, and investments), and that consequently the 

170 Alexander Hamilton 

provision in the second must be understood virtually 
to admit that there are other cases, and must be 
referred to the general position set up and acted upon 
by Great Britain in her order of June. 

But this argument is erroneous in principle and in 
fact. 

1. The cases in which articles not generally con 
traband may be seized, even with compensation, 
are expressly those in which "they become contra 
band according to the existing laws of nations.11 The 
appeal is then to these laws, as the criterion ; and the 
government will be as free after the treaty as before it, 
to deny any arbitrary construction which Great Brit 
ain may think fit to put upon these laws, and to main 
tain its opposition in all the ways it may think fit. 

2. It is not true that the third clause provides for 
all the cases where the acknowledged laws of nations 
authorize seizure of such articles. It provides for 
only one single case — that of a vessel going without 
notice to a place blockaded, besieged, or invested. 
The case of a vessel going to such a place with notice 
is not included. Other cases in which provisions, 
etc., may be properly contraband may be conceived. 
That of carrying them with the direct intent of sup 
plying a besieging army in the act of carrying on the 
siege, is one; for there is no reason why the party 
besieged should not intercept and seize supplies 
going to the besiegers, as well as the latter those 
which are destined for the besieged. 

Various combinations of circumstances, which do 
not at first sight occur, may beget other cases in 
which the seizure may be justified. 

Hamilton to Washington 171 

The clause in question, then, speaks simply this 
language : that inasmuch as cases may exist, in which 
provisions and other articles not generally contra 
band become so; as it is difficult beforehand to de 
fine them, as even in the admitted cases of blockades, 
sieges, and investments, it may not always be easy to 
pronounce what is a blockade, siege, or investment; 
as the parties cannot at this time agree upon a de 
finition of the doubtful cases, they agree at least (with 
one exception, which has been noticed) that in all 
cases of the seizure of such articles as contraband, 
full compensation shall be made, to the end that in 
doubtful cases, the inconvenience being thereby much 
lessened, the danger of rupture may be diminished 
by inclining the party which conceives itself in 
jured to acquiesce in the pecuniary compensation. 

But though I have no doubt that this is the true 
and genuine sense of the clause, and that it does by 
no means warrant the construction put upon it, yet 
as it may possibly become the pretext of abuses on 
the side of Great Britain, and of complaint on that 
of France, I should have liked the treaty better 
without it. On the whole, I think this article the 
worst in the treaty, except the 1 2th, though not de 
fective enough to be an objection to its adoption. 

Articles XIX. and XX. — These articles require no 
comment. They are usual and every way unex 
ceptionable provisions. 

Article XXI. — This article is liable to no just ob 
jection. The first part of it restrains generally the 
citizens of each party from participating in hostili 
ties against the other. This is implied in the leading 

172 Alexander Hamilton 

article of every treaty of peace, is conformable with 
every moral idea, and though more comprehensive 
in the extent of the inhibition, is agreeable to the 
principle of the law of Congress on this subject. 

It is also agreeable to the true policy of the United 
States, which is, to keep its citizens as much as pos 
sible from being implicated in the quarrels and con 
tests of other nations, in foreign feelings, interests, 
and prejudices. This is an idea of great importance 
to our security in various ways. The only case, if 
at all, in which it can be our interest that our citizens 
should engage in foreign service, is that of young 
men of education entering into foreign service to 
acquire military knowledge and experience. 

But it is conceived that the doing of this in time 
of peace is not forbidden. The citizens of each party 
are not to accept commissions from, nor to be per 
mitted to be enlisted by, the enemies of the other. 
This seems to suppose a state of war when the for 
bidden act is done. The punishment for infractions 
of this part of the article is referred to the laws of the 
party whose citizens commit them. No precise one 
is defined. 

The latter part of the clause subjects to the penal 
ties of piracy the citizens of one party accepting 
commissions from the enemy of the other for arming 
any vessel to act as a privateer. 

A similar provision is to be found in all our com 
mercial treaties heretofore made, and is familiar in 
the commercial treaties of other powers during the 
present century. It has wisely become the policy of 
nations to confine the mischievous practice of pri- 

Hamilton to Washington 173 

vateering to the belligerent parties. This is pecu 
liarly our true policy; as from situation the contrary 
would never fail to compromise our peace. 

It is to be observed that this crime of piracy does 
not extend to land service, nor to service on board of 
public ships of war, commonly called men-of-war. 

Article XXII. — This is a reasonable and usual 
provision in affirmance of the laws of nations, and 
calculated to prevent war. 

Article XXIII. — This article merely stipulates 
those rights of hospitality which the courtesy and 
humanity of nations owe to each other, and which 
it has been the endeavor of our government to ob 
serve. It does not extend to privateers, which are 
never denominated ships of war, and consequently 
does not interfere with our treaty with France as 
hitherto interpreted and acted upon. 

Articles XXIV. and XXV.— These articles, which 
are compatible with the rules of neutrality and the 
rights of belligerent nations, are becoming formulas 
in most modern treaties. They are to be found es 
sentially in our treaties with France, Sweden, and 
partly if not wholly in that with Prussia, and in the 
treaty of 1786 between France and Great Britain. 
They stipulate : 

1. That the enemies of one party shall not arm 
their privateers in the ports of the other. 

2. That they shall not sell their prizes there. 

3. That they shall not be allowed to purchase 
more provisions than are sufficient to carry them to 
the nearest port of the prince or state to which they 
belong. 

1 74 Alexander Hamilton 

4. That the ships of war or privateers of the two 
contracting parties may carry whithersoever they 
please the prizes made of their respective enemies, 
without being obliged on entering the ports of each 
other to pay fees, or being detained or seized or sub 
ject to search, except to prevent infractions of the 
laws of revenue, navigation, and commerce, or hav 
ing cognizance taken of the validity of their prizes, 
and with free liberty to depart to the places men 
tioned in their commissions, which they are to show. 

5. That no shelter or refuge shall be given to such 
as have made prizes of each other's ships or vessels, 
but if forced by stress of weather to enter, their de 
parture is to be hastened. 

6. That while the parties continue in amity, they 
will make no future treaty inconsistent with these 
two articles. But there is this express proviso, that 
nothing in the treaty shall be construed or operate 
contrary to former and existing public treaties with 
other sovereigns or states. 

Hence, while on the one hand these articles make 
no unreasonable stipulations in favor of Great Brit 
ain, they can by no possibility interfere with prior 
stipulations to France or any other power. If, con 
sequently, there is any repugnancy, the treaty with 
Great Britain must give way to those prior treaties. 
There is only one particular in the conduct hitherto 
observed towards France in which the treaty with 
Great Britain will produce an alteration — that is, 
the selling of prizes in our ports; because this indul 
gence has been granted not upon the ground of any 
obligation to do it to be found in our treaty with 

Hamilton to Washington 175 

France, but upon that of there being no law of the 
United States against it. The XXIVth article of 
the present treaty will be a law against it, and will 
restrain it. 

But nothing can be more proper; and I well re 
member, that when it was concluded to permit the 
selling of prizes, it was unanimously regretted that 
the Executive, for want of law, could not do other 
wise : because the measure had an unneutral aspect, 
permitting to one party a military advantage which 
our treaty with that party did not leave us at liberty 
to extend to the other ; and was of very questionable 
propriety. The permission was of a nature to give 
much dissatisfaction to the other powers. A re 
vocation of it, therefore, by a treaty with one of those 
powers, is unexceptionably equitable. The clause 
which restrains the making of future treaties in the 
given case, has been grossly misunderstood. It is 
expressly confined to the two articles, and, for aught 
I see, is nugatory. For a treaty implies of itself, 
that while the contracting parties remain in amity, 
they shall make no subsequent treaty inconsistent 
with the prior one between those parties. 

Articles XXVI. and XXVII.— These articles need 
no particular comment. They are liberal and equi 
table, and interfere with no interest or duty. The 
part which regards ambassadors and ministers, is 
calculated to avoid very delicate embarrassments, 
and to exclude intrigues and bad conduct in foreign 
ministers. It would be a valuable article in all our 
treaties. 

Article XXVIIL— The effect of this article is to 

176 Alexander Hamilton 

enable either party in two years after the termina 
tion of the existing European war, to put an end to 
all the articles of the treaty except the first ten. 

This, upon the whole, is a desirable ingredient. It 
makes the commercial part of the treaty a mere ex 
periment of short duration, and enables each party, 
if any part of it should be found to work amiss, or if 
it thinks that upon the whole the treaty is not suf 
ficiently advantageous, to put an end to it unless the 
parts not satisfactory can be amended, or the addi 
tional provisions which are desired can be agreed 
upon. 

Article XXIX. — This, which is the last article, pro 
vides merely for the ratification, and looks to future 
negotiations for more beneficial arrangements. 

To these particular views of the different articles 
of the treaty, the following general views may be 
added. 

The truly important side of this treaty is, that it 
closes, and upon the whole as reasonably as could 
have been expected, the controverted points be 
tween the two countries; and thereby gives us the 
prospect of repossessing our Western posts, an ob 
ject of primary consequence in our affairs, of escap 
ing finally from being implicated in the dreadful war 
which is ruining Europe, and of preserving ourselves 
in a state of peace for a considerable time to come. 

Well considered, the greatest interest of this coun 
try in its external relations, is that of peace. The 
more or less of commercial advantages which we 
may acquire by particular treaties, are of far less 

Hamilton to Washington 177 

moment. With peace, the force of circumstances 
will enable us to make our way sufficiently fast in 
trade. War, at this time, would give a serious 
wound to our growth and prosperity. Can we es 
cape it for ten or twelve years more, we may then 
meet it without much inquietude, and may advance 
and support with energy and effect any just pre 
tensions to greater commercial advantages than we 
may enjoy. 

It follows that the objects contained in the per 
manent articles are of real and great value to us. 
The price they will cost us in the article of com 
pensation for the debts, is not likely to bear any 
proportion to the expenses of a single campaign to 
enforce our rights. The calculation is therefore a 
simple and a plain one. The terms are no way in 
consistent with national honor. As to the commer 
cial arrangements in the temporary articles, they 
can be of no great importance either way ; if it were 
only for the circumstance that it is in the power of 
either party to terminate them within two years 
after the war. So short a duration renders them 
unimportant, however considered as to intrinsic 
merit. 

Intrinsically considered, they have no very posi 
tive character of advantage or disadvantage. They 
will in all probability leave the trade between the 
two countries where it at present is. 

Supplementary Remarks 

There is, however, one material circumstance in 
which this will not happen. The XVth article 

VOL. V. — 12. 

178 Alexander Hamilton 

declares that there shall be no prohibition of the im 
portation or exportation to and from the respective 
territories of the contracting parties, which shall not 
equally extend to all other nations. This permits 
us to carry to the British dominions any article the 
growth or manufacture of another country, which 
may be carried from such country to those domin 
ions. This is a serious innovation on the British 
navigation act, and an important privilege to us. 

It is to be remarked, however, that it does not 
secure to us the continuance of these discrimina 
tions in our favor, compared with foreign powers, 
which have in practice existed; but as these dis 
criminations have always been revocable at the 
pleasure of the other party, and are evidently 
founded on the interest that party has to procure 
the supply from us, rather than from other quarters, 
the inference is that the security for the continuance 
of the advantage is as great as before. 

The obstacle to its becoming matter of stipula 
tion was, that it was deemed to be inconsistent with 
treaties with other powers. 

Comparing this treaty with the commercial treaties 
heretofore entered into by the United States, the 
real advantage is on the side of the former. 

As to the European dominions of the different 
powers, the footing will be essentially equal. 

As to their colonies, Great Britain gives us greater 
advantages by this treaty, than any other nation 
having colonies by its treaty. There is nothing in 
any of our other treaties equivalent to the advan 
tages granted to us in the British East Indies. To 

Hamilton to Washington 179 

this may be added the advantages contained in the 
Canada article. 

Against this may be set the stipulation that free 
ships shall make free goods; and the extended 
enumeration of contraband; but besides that these 
are provisions relative to a state of war, our experi 
ence in the present war, in reference to France, has 
shown us that the advantages expected are not to 
be counted upon. 

Since, then, the permanent articles are of material 
consequence, the temporary ones of small import 
ance ; since our faith is preserved with other powers ; 
since there are no improper concessions on our part, 
but rather more is gained than given, it follows that 
it is the interest of the United States that the treaty 
should go into effect. 

But will it give no umbrage to France? 

It cannot do it, unless France is unreasonable ; be 
cause our engagements with her remain unimpaired, 
and because she will still be upon as good a footing 
as Great Britain. We are in a deplorable situation 
if we cannot secure our peace, and promote our own 
interests, by means which not only do not derogate 
from our faith, but which leave the same advan 
tages to France as to other powers with whom we 
form treaties. Equality is all that can be claimed 
from us. It is improbable that France will take 
umbrage, because there is no cause given for it, be 
cause there is no disposition on her part to break 
with us, and because her situation forbids a breach. 

But will it not hinder us from making a more 
beneficial treaty with France ? 

i So Alexander Hamilton 

This can only turn upon the question of equi 
valents to be given by us. 

As to this, though our treaty with England would 
prevent in many particulars our giving preferences 
to France, yet there are still important points, from 
the natural relations of commerce, which are open 
to arrangements beneficial to France, and which 
might serve as equivalents. 

There is not leisure to enter into the detail, or 
this might be shown. It may, however, be men 
tioned, by way of example, that we may lower, or 
remove wholly, the duties on French wines, which 
would be one important item. 

But it would be very unwise to refrain from doing 
with one power, a thing which it was our interest to do, 
because there was a possibility that some other power 
might be willing to make a better bargain with us. 

What evidence has France given that she is dis 
posed to make such better bargain? All that she 
has hitherto proffered under her present govern 
ment, has contemplated as the consideration our 
becoming parties to the war. As she will and ought 
to calculate her own interest, we ought to dismiss 
the expectation of peculiar favors. Favors, indeed, 
in trade, are very absurd, and generally imaginary 
things. Let it be remembered, too, that the short 
necessary duration of our treaty leaves us a wide 
field future and not remote. But, upon the whole, 
we shall be least likely to be deceived, by taking this 
as the basis of our commercial system, that we are 
not to make particular sacrifices to, nor expect par 
ticular favors from, any power. 

Horatius 181 

It is conceived, therefore, upon the whole, to be 
the true interest of the United States, to close the 
present treaty with Great Britain in the manner 
advised by the Senate. 

HORATIUS x 

May, 1795. 

To the People of the United States: 

COUNTRYMEN AND FELLOW-CITIZENS : — Nothing 
can be more false or ridiculous, justly considered, 
than the assertion that great sacrifices of your in 
terests are made in the treaty with Great Britain. 

As to the controverted points between the two 
nations, the treaty provides satisfactorily for the 
great and essential ones; and only foregoes objects 
of an inferior and disputable nature, of no real con 
sequence to the permanent welfare of the country. 
As to trade, the dilemma is this : if an article is added 
for granting us such privileges in the British West 
Indies as are satisfactory to us, it will give a dura 
tion of TWELVE years to the treaty, and will render 
it as good a one as the most sanguine could desire, 
and a better one than any other power of Europe 
can make with us ; for no other power in Europe can 
give us the advantages in the East Indies which this 
treaty confers. 

If that article be not added, the commercial part 

1 The strongly hostile feeling in regard to the Jay treaty produced 
immediate agitation against it in all parts of the country. Hamilton, 
anxious to check the current and divert it at the beginning, published 
this appeal signed "Horatius." 

1 82 Alexander Hamilton 

of the treaty will expire in TWO years after the 
present war, by its own limitation. 

It is therefore preposterous to talk of great sacri 
fices in a commercial sense. This observation is to 
be understood with the exception of the third article ; 
which regulates the trade between us and the neigh 
boring British territories, which is permanent, and 
which is certainly a precious article; inevitably 
throwing into our lap the greatest part of the fur 
trade, with the trade of the two Canadas. This is 
a full answer to the idle tale of sacrifices by the 
treaty, as the pretext for violating your Constitu 
tion, and for sullying your faith and your honor. 

It is an unquestionable truth, fellow-citizens, one 
which it is essential you should understand, that the 
great and cardinal sin of the treaty in the eyes of its 
adversaries is, that it puts an end to controversy 
with Great Britain. 

We have a sect of politicians among us, who, in 
fluenced by a servile and degrading subserviency to 
the views of France, have adopted it as a fundamental 
tenet, that there ought to subsist between us and 
Great Britain, eternal variance and discord. 

What we now see is a part of the same system 
which led the ministry of Louis XVI. to advise our 
commissioners for making peace to treat with Great 
Britain without the acknowledgment of our inde 
pendence ; wishing that the omission of this acknow 
ledgment might perpetuate a jealousy and dread of 
Great Britain, and occasion a greater necessity for 
our future dependence on France. 

It is a part of the same system which, during our 

Horatius 183 

war with Great Britain, produced a resolution of 
our public councils, without adequate motive or 
equivalent, to sacrifice the navigation of the Missis 
sippi to Spain; and which also begat a disposition 
to abandon our claim to any equal participation in 
the cod fisheries. 

It is a part of the same disgraceful system which 
fettered our commissioners for making peace with 
the impolitic and humiliating instruction to sub 
mit all their motions to the direction of the French 
Cabinet, and which attempted a censure upon them 
for breaking through that system, and in conse 
quence of it effecting a peace, glorious and advan 
tageous for this country beyond expectation. 

The present rulers of France proclaimed to the 
world the insidious and unfriendly policy of the 
former government towards this country. Their 
successors may hereafter unmask equally insidious 
and unfriendly views in the present rulers. 

But if you are as discerning as I believe you to 
be, you will not wait for this evidence to form your 
opinion. You will see in the conduct of the agents 
of that government, wherever they are, that they are 
machinating against your independence, peace, and 
happiness ; that not content with a fair competition 
in your trade, on terms of equal privilege, they are la 
boring to continue you at variance with Great Britain, 
in order that you may be dependent on France. 

This conduct in the known agents of a foreign 
government is not to be wondered at. It marks the 
usual and immemorial policy of all the governments 
of Europe. 

Alexander Hamilton 

But, that any of your countrymen — that men who 
have been honored with your suffrages — should be 
the supple instruments of this crooked policy; that 
they should stoop to nourish and foster this exotic 
plant, and should exchange the pure and holy love 
of their own country for a meretricious foreign 
amour; that they should be willing to sacrifice your 
interests to their animosity against one foreign na 
tion and their devotion for another, is justly matter 
of surprise and indignation. No terms of reproba 
tion are too severe for so faithless and so unworthy 
a conduct. 

Reason, religion, philosophy, policy, disavow the 
spurious and odious doctrine, that we ought to cher 
ish and cultivate enmity with any nation whatever. 

In reference to a nation with whom we have such 
extensive relations of commerce as with Great Brit 
ain — to a power so capable, from her maritime 
strength, of annoying us — it must be the offspring of 
treachery or extreme folly. If you consult your true 
interest your motto cannot fail to be: " PEACE and 
TRADE with ALL NATIONS; beyond our present en 
gagements, POLITICAL CONNECTION with NONE." You 
ought to spurn from you, as the box of Pandora, the 
fatal heresy of a close alliance, or in the language 
of Genet, a true family compact, with France. This 
would at once make you a mere satellite of France, 
and entangle you in all the contests, broils, and wars 

Tis evident that the controversies of Europe 
must often grow out of causes and interests foreign 
to this country. Why then should we, by a close 

Horatius 185 

political connection with any power of Europe, ex 
pose our peace and interest, as a matter of course, to 
all the shocks with which their mad rivalship and 
wicked ambition so frequently convulse the earth? 
'Twere insanity to embrace such a system. The 
avowed and secret partisans of it merit our con 
tempt for their folly, or our execration for their 
depravity. 

HORATIUS. 

CAMILLUS 

(From the Argus.) 

DEFENCE OF MR. JAY'S TREATY 

NO. I 

July 22, 1795. 

IT was to have been foreseen, that the treaty which 
Mr. Jay was charged to negotiate with Great 
Britain, whenever it should appear, would have to 
contend with many perverse dispositions and some 
honest prejudices; that there was no measure in 
which the government could engage, so little likely 
to be viewed according to its intrinsic merits — so 

1 The agitation against the Jay treaty grew daily more dangerous, 
and the attacks on the Administration became more virulent. Hamil 
ton did all he could to stem the tide, but the popular feeling was such 
that he was actually stoned at a public meeting. Four days later he 
entered the field in a more formidable manner, by publishing the first 
of the "Camillus" essays, which were continued throughout the year. 
Gradually the opposition concentrated their whole fire upon Hamilton, 
who kept up his chief argument in "Camillus," and replied to his an 
tagonists, driving one after another from the field, as " Philo-Camillus." 
These last papers of "Philo-Camillus" add nothing to the main body 
of argument, are in their nature ephemeral, and exhibit only the 
writer's power of retort. It does not seem necessary to reprint them. 

The "Camillus" essays, however, deserve careful study. In a con 
troversial sense they stand first among Hamilton's writings. They 
did more to check an apparently irresistible popular feeling and turn 
it the other way, than anything else. They show Hamilton's ability 
in argument, a masterly handling of the immediate issue, and a pro- 
i9° Alexander Hamilton 

very likely to encounter misconception, jealousy, 
and unreasonable dislike. For this, many reasons 
may be assigned. 

It is only to know the vanity and vindictiveness 
of human nature, to be convinced, that while this 
generation lasts there will always exist among us 
men irreconcilable to our present national Constitu 
tion ; embittered in their animosity in proportion to 
the success of its operations, and the disappointment 
of their inauspicious predictions. It is a material 
inference from this, that such men will watch, with 
lynx's eyes, for opportunities of discrediting the 
proceedings of the government, and will display a 
hostile and malignant zeal upon every occasion, 
where they think there are any prepossessions of 
the community to favor their enterprises. A treaty 
with Great Britain was too fruitful an occasion not 
to call forth all their activity. 

It is only to consult the history of nations, to 
perceive, that every country, at all times, is cursed 
by the existence of men who, actuated by an ir 
regular ambition, scruple nothing which they im 
agine will contribute to their own advancement 
and importance: in monarchies, supple courtiers; in 

found knowledge of the question in all its bearings. They also exhibit 
Hamilton's general theory of our foreign relations, and his wide know 
ledge of the whole field of international law. 

The force and ability of these essays were not lost upon the opposi 
tion. It was in this connection that Jefferson wrote that "Hamilton 
was a Colossus to the Anti-Republican party," and he urged Madison 
to take the field against their great enemy. Madison, however, had 
no stomach for the fight, and prudently abstained. Nothing shows 
more strongly Hamilton's influence upon public opinion than the 
effects produced by this remarkable series of essays. 

Camillas 191 

republics, fawning or turbulent demagogues, wor 
shipping still the idol — power — wherever placed, 
whether in the hands of a prince or of the people, 
and trafficking in the weaknesses, vices, frailties, or 
prejudices of the one or the other. It was to have 
been expected that such men, counting more on the 
passions than on the reason of their fellow-citizens, 
and anticipating that the treaty would have to 
struggle with prejudices, would be disposed to make 
an alliance with popular discontent, to nourish it, 
and to press it into the service of their particular 
views. 

It was not to have been doubted, that there would 
be one or more foreign powers indisposed to a 
measure which accommodated our differences with 
Great Britain, and laid the foundation of future 
good understanding, merely because it had that 
effect. 

Nations are never content to confine their rival- 
ships and enmities to themselves. It is their usual 
policy to disseminate them as widely as they can, 
regardless how far it may interfere with the tran 
quillity or happiness of the nations which they are 
able to influence. Whatever pretensions may be 
made, the world is yet remote from the spectacle 
of that just and generous policy, whether in the 
Cabinets of republics or of kings, which would dis 
pose one nation, in its intercourses with another — 
satisfied with a due proportion of privileges and 
benefits — to see that other pursue freely its true in 
terest with regard to a third, though at the expense 
of no engagement, nor in violation of any rule of 

192 Alexander Hamilton 

friendly or fair procedure. It was natural that 
the contrary spirit should produce efforts of foreign 
counteraction to the treaty; and it was certain that 
the partisans of the counteracting power would sec 
ond its efforts by all the means which they thought 
calculated to answer the end. 

It was known, that the resentment produced by 
our revolution war with Great Britain had never been 
entirely extinguished, and that recent injuries had 
rekindled the flame with additional violence. It was 
a natural consequence of this, that many should be 
disinclined to any amicable arrangement with Great 
Britain, and that many others should be prepared 
to acquiesce only in a treaty which should present 
advantages of so striking and preponderant a kind 
as it was not reasonable to expect could be obtained, 
unless the United States were in a condition to give 
the law to Great Britain, and as, if obtained under 
the coercion of such a situation, could only have been 
the short-lived prelude of a speedy rupture to get 
rid of them. 

Unfortunately, too, the supposition of that situa 
tion has served to foster exaggerated expectations; 
and the absurd delusion to this moment prevails, 
notwithstanding the plain evidence to the contrary, 
which is deducible from the high and haughty 
ground still maintained by Great Britain against 
victorious France. 

It was not to be mistaken, that an enthusiasm 
for France and her revolution, throughout all its 
wonderful vicissitudes, has continued to possess the 
minds of the great body of the people of this country; 

Camillus 193 

and it was to be inferred, that this sentiment would 
predispose to a jealousy of any agreement or treaty 
with her most persevering competitor, — a jealousy 
so excessive, as would give the fullest scope to in 
sidious arts to perplex and mislead the public opinion. 
It was well understood, that a numerous party 
among us, though disavowing the design, because 
the avowal would defeat it, have been steadily en 
deavoring to make the United States a party in 
the present European war, by advocating all those 
measures which would widen the breach between us 
and Great Britain, and by resisting all those which 
would tend to close it; and it was morally certain, 
that this party would eagerly improve every cir 
cumstance which would serve to render the treaty 
odious, and to frustrate it, as the most effectual road 
to their favorite goal. 

It was also known beforehand, that personal and 
party rivalships, of the most active kind, would as 
sail whatever treaty might be made, to disgrace, if 
possible, its organ. 

There are three persons prominent in the public 
eye, as the successor of the actual President of the 
United States, in the event of his retreat from the 
station — Mr. Adams, Mr. Jay, and Mr. Jefferson. 

No one has forgotten the systematic pains which 
have been taken to impair the well-earned popularity 
of the first gentleman. Mr. Jay, too, has been re 
peatedly the object of attacks with the same view. 
His friends, as well as his enemies, anticipated that 
he could make no treaty which would not furnish 
weapons against him; and it were to have been 

194 Alexander Hamilton 

ignorant of the indefatigable malice of his adver 
saries, to have doubted that they would be seized 
with eagerness and wielded with dexterity. 

The peculiar circumstances which have attended 
the two last elections for governor of this State,1 
have been of a nature to give the utmost keenness 
to party animosity. It was impossible that Mr. 
Jay should be forgiven for his double, and in the last 
instance triumphant, success ; or that any promising 
opportunity of detaching from him the public con 
fidence, should pass unimproved. 

Trivial facts frequently throw light upon important 
designs. It is remarkable, that in the toasts given 
on the 4th of July, wherever there appears a direct 
or indirect censure of the treaty, it is pretty uni 
formly coupled with compliments to Mr. Jefferson, 
and to our late governor, Mr. Clinton, with an evi 
dent design to place those gentleman in contrast with 
Mr. Jay, and, decrying him, to elevate them. No 
one can be blind to the finger of party spirit, visible 
in these and similar transactions. It indicates to 
us clearly one powerful source of opposition to the 
treaty. 

No man is without his personal enemies. Pre 
eminence even in talents and virtue is a cause of 
envy and hatred of its possessor. Bad men are the 
natural enemies of virtuous men. Good men some 
times mistake and dislike each other. 

Upon such an occasion as the treaty, how could it 
happen otherwise, than that personal enmity would 
be unusually busy, enterprising, and malignant? 

1 New York. 

Camillus 195 

From the combined operations of these different 
causes, it would have been a vain expectation that 
the treaty would be generally contemplated with 
candor and moderation, or that reason would regu 
late the first impressions concerning it. It was cer 
tain, on the contrary, that however unexceptionable 
its true character might be, it would have to fight its 
way through a mass of unreasonable opposition ; and 
that time, examination, and reflection would be re 
quisite to fix the public opinion on a true basis. It 
was certain that it would become the instrument of 
a systematic effort against the national government 
and its administration ; a decided engine of party to 
advance its own views at the hazard of the public 
peace and prosperity. 

The events which have already taken place are a 
full comment on these positions. If the good sense 
of the people does not speedily discountenance the 
projects which are on foot, more melancholy proofs 
may succeed. 

Before the treaty was known, attempts were 
made to prepossess the public mind against it. It 
was absurdly asserted, that it was not expected by 
the people that Mr. Jay was to make any treaty; 
as if he had been sent, not to accommodate dif 
ferences by negotiation and agreement, but to dic 
tate to Great Britain the terms of an unconditional 
submission. 

Before it was published at large, a sketch, cal 
culated to produce false impressions, was handed 
out to the public, through a medium noted for 
hostility to the administration of the government. 

196 Alexander Hamilton 

Emissaries flew through the country, spreading alarm 
and discontent ; the leaders of clubs were everywhere 
active to seize the passions of the people, and pre 
occupy their judgments against the treaty. 

At Boston it was published one day, and the next 
a town-meeting was convened to condemn it; with 
out ever being read, without any serious discussion, 
sentence was pronounced against it. 

Will any man seriously believe, that in so short a 
time an instrument of this nature could have been 
tolerably understood by the greater part of those 
who were thus induced to a condemnation of it? 
Can the result be considered as any thing more than 
a sudden ebullition of popular passion, excited by 
the artifices of a party which had adroitly seized a 
favorable moment to furorize the public opinion? 
This spirit of precipitation and the intemperance 
which accompanied it, prevented the body of the 
merchants and the greater part of the most con 
siderate citizens from attending the meeting, and 
left those who met, wholly under the guidance of a 
set of men, who with two or three exceptions, have 
been the uniform opposers of the government. 

The intelligence of this event had no sooner 
reached New York than the leaders of the clubs were 
seen haranguing in every corner of the city, to stir up 
our citizens into an imitation of the example of the 
meeting at Boston. An invitation to meet at the 
City Hall quickly followed, not to consider or discuss 
the merits of the treaty, but to unite with the meet 
ing at Boston to address the President against its 
ratification. 

Camillus 197 

This was immediately succeeded by a hand-bill, 
full of invectives against the treaty, as absurd as 
they were inflammatory, and manifestly designed to 
induce the citizens to surrender their reason to the 
empire of their passions. 

In vain did a respectable meeting of the merchants 
endeavor, by their advice, to moderate the violence 
of these views, and to promote a spirit favorable to a 
fair discussion of the treaty ; in vain did a respectable 
majority of the citizens of every description attend 
for that purpose. The leaders of the clubs resisted 
all discussion, and their followers, by their clamors 
and vociferations, rendered it impracticable, not 
withstanding the wish of a manifest majority of the 
citizens convened upon the occasion. 

Can we believe that the leaders were really sincere 
in the objections they made to a discussion, or that 
the great and mixed mass of citizens then assembled 
had so thoroughly mastered the merits of the treaty 
as that they might not have been enlightened by 
such a discussion? 

It cannot be doubted that the real motive to the 
opposition was the fear of a discussion ; the desire of 
excluding light; the adherence to a plan of surprise 
and deception. Nor need we desire any fuller proof 
of the spirit of party which has stimulated the op 
position to the treaty, than is to be found in the 
circumstances of that opposition. 

To every man who is not an enemy to the national 
government, who is not a prejudiced partisan, who 
is capable of comprehending the argument, and dis 
passionate enough to attend to it with impartiality, 

198 Alexander Hamilton 

I flatter myself I shall be able to demonstrate satis 
factorily in the course of some succeeding papers : 

1. That the treaty adjusts, in a reasonable man 
ner, the points in controversy between the United 
States and Great Britain, as well those depending on 
the inexecution of the treaty of peace, as those grow 
ing out of the present European war. 

2. That it makes no improper concessions to Great 
Britain, no sacrifices on the part of the United States. 

3. That it secures to the United States equivalents 
for what they grant. 

4. That it lays upon them no restrictions which 
are incompatible with their honor or their interest. 

5. That in the articles which respect war, it con 
forms to the laws of nations. 

6. That it violates no treaty with, nor duty 
towards, any foreign power. 

7. That, compared with our other commercial 
treaties, it is, upon the whole entitled to a preference. 

8. That it contains concessions of advantages by 
Great Britain to the United States, which no other 
nation has obtained from the same power. 

9. That it gives to her no superiority of advan 
tages over other nations with whom we have treaties. 

10. That the interests of primary importance to 
our general welfare are promoted by it. 

11. That the too probable result of a refusal to 
ratify is war, or, what would be still worse, a dis 
graceful passiveness under violations of our rights, 
unredressed, and unadjusted; and consequently that 
it is the true interest of the United States that the 
treaty should go into effect. 

Camillus 199 

It will be understood that I speak of the treaty as 
advised to be ratified by the Senate — for this is the 
true question before the public. 

CAMILLUS. 

NO. II 

1795- 

Previous to a more particular discussion of the 
merits of the treaty, it may be useful to advert to a 
suggestion which has been thrown out, namely : that 
it was foreseen by many that the mission to Great 
Britain would produce no good result, and that the 
event has corresponded with the anticipation. 

The reverse of this position is manifestly true. 

All must remember the very critical posture of 
this country at the time that mission was resolved 
upon. A recent violation of our rights, too flagrant 
and too injurious to be submitted to, had filled every 
American breast with indignation, and every pru 
dent man with alarm and disquietude. A few hoped, 
and the great body of the community feared, that 
war was inevitable. 

In this crisis two sets of opinions prevailed: one 
looked to measures which were to have a compulsory 
effect upon Great Britain, the sequestration of Brit 
ish debts, and the cutting off intercourse wholly or 
partially between the two countries; the other to 
vigorous preparations for war, and one more effort of 
negotiation, under the solemnity of an extraordinary 
mission, to avert it. 

That the latter was the best opinion, no truly 

2oo Alexander Hamilton 

sensible man can doubt; and it may be boldly 
affirmed that the event has entirely justified it. 

If measures of coercion and reprisal had taken 
place, war, in all human probability, would have 
followed. 

National pride is generally a very untractable 
thing. In the councils of no country does it act with 
greater force than in those of Great Britain. What 
ever it might have been in her power to yield to 
negotiation, she could have yielded nothing to com 
pulsion, without self-degradation, and without the 
sacrifice of that political consequence which, at all 
times very important to a nation, was peculiarly so 
to her at the juncture in question. It should be re 
membered, too, that from the relations in which the 
two countries have stood to each other, it must have 
cost more to the pride of Great Britain to have re 
ceived the law from us than from any other power. 

When one nation has cause of complaint against 
another, the course marked out by practice, the 
opinion of writers, and the principles of humanity, 
the object being to avoid war, is to precede reprisals 
of any kind by a demand of reparation. To begin 
with reprisals is to meet on the ground of war, and 
put the other party in a condition not to be able to 
recede without humiliation. 

Had this course been pursued by us, it would not 
only have rendered war morally certain, but it would 
have united the British nation in a vigorous support 
of their government in the prosecution of it ; while, 
on our part, we should have been quickly distracted 
and divided. The calamities of war would have 

Camillus 201 

brought the most ardent to their senses, and placed 
them among the first in reproaching the government 
with precipitation, rashness, and folly for not having 
taken every chance, by pacific means, to avoid so 
great an evil. 

The example of Denmark and Sweden is cited in 
support of the coercive plan. Those powers, it is 
asserted, by arming and acting with vigor, brought 
Great Britain to terms. 

But who is able to tell us the precise course of this 
transaction, or the terms gained by it? Has it ap 
peared that either Denmark or Sweden has obtained 
as much as we have done — a stipulation of reparation 
for the violation of our property, contrary to the 
laws of war? 

Besides, what did Denmark and Sweden do? 
They armed, and they negotiated. They did not 
begin by retaliations and reprisals. The United 
States also armed and negotiated, and, like Denmark 
and Sweden, prudently forbore reprisals. The con 
duct of the three countries agreed in principle, 
equally steering clear of a precipitate resort to re 
prisals, and contradicting the doctrines and advice 
of our war party. 

The course pursued by our government was, then, 
in coincidence with the example of Denmark and 
Sweden — and, it may be added, was in every view 
the wisest. 

Few nations can have stronger inducements than 
the United States to cultivate peace. Their infant 
state in general, their want of a marine in particular, 
to protect their commerce, would render war, in 

2O2 Alexander Hamilton 

an extreme degree, a calamity. It would not only 
arrest our present rapid progress to strength and 
prosperity, but would probably throw us back into 
a state of debility and impoverishment, from which 
it would require years to emerge. 

Our trade, navigation, and mercantile capital 
would be essentially destroyed. Spain being an as 
sociate of Great Britain, a general Indian war might 
be expected to desolate the whole extent of our 
frontier; our exports obstructed, agriculture would 
of course languish; all other branches of industry 
would proportionately suffer; our public debt, in 
stead of a gradual diminution, would sustain a great 
augmentation, and draw with it a large increase of 
taxes and burthens on the people. 

But these evils, however great, were, perhaps, not 
the worst to be apprehended. It was to be feared 
that the war would be conducted in a spirit which 
would render it more than ordinarily calamitous. 
There are too many proofs that a considerable party 
among us is deeply infected with those horrid prin 
ciples of Jacobinism which, proceeding from one 
excess to another, have made France a theatre of 
blood, and which, notwithstanding the most vigorous 
efforts of the national representation to suppress it, 
keeps the destinies of France, to this moment, sus 
pended by a thread. It was too probable, that the 
direction of the war, if commenced, would have fallen 
into the hands of men of this description. The con 
sequences of this, even in imagination, are such as to 
make any virtuous man shudder. 

It was, therefore, in a peculiar manner, the duty 

Camillus 203 

of the government to take all possible chances for 
avoiding war. The plan adopted was the only one 
which could claim this advantage. 

To precipitate nothing, to gain time by negotia 
tions, was to leave the country in a situation to 
profit by any events which might turn up, tending 
to restrain a spirit of hostility to Great Britain, and 
to dispose her to reasonable accommodation. 

The successes of France, which opportunely oc 
curred, allowing them to have had an influence upon 
the issue, so far from disparaging the merit of the 
plan that was pursued, serve to illustrate its wisdom. 
This was one of the chances which procrastination 
gave, and one which it was natural to take into the 
calculation. 

Had the reverse been the case, the posture of 
negotiation was still preferable to that of retalia 
tion and reprisal; for in this case, the triumphs of 
Great Britain, the gauntlet having been thrown by 
us, would have stimulated her to take it up without 
hesitation. 

By taking the ground of negotiation in the atti 
tude of preparation for war, we at the same time 
carried the appeal to the prudence of the British 
Cabinet, without wounding its pride, and to the 
justice and interest of the British nation, without 
exciting feelings of resentment. 

This conduct was calculated to range the public 
opinion of that country on our side, to oppose it to 
the indulgence of hostile views in the Cabinet, and, 
in case of war, to lay the foundation of schism and 
dissatisfaction. 

204 Alexander Hamilton 

But one of the most important advantages to be 
expected from the course pursued, was the securing 
of unanimity among ourselves, if, after all the pain 
taken to avoid the war, it had been forced upon us. 

As, on the one hand, it was certain that dissension 
and discontent would have embarrassed and en 
feebled our exertions, in a war produced by any cir 
cumstances of intemperance in our public councils, 
or not endeavored to be prevented by all the milder 
expedients usual in similar cases; so, on the other, 
it was equally certain that our having effectually 
exhausted those expedients would cement us in a 
firm mass, keep us steady and persevering amidst 
whatever vicissitudes might happen, and nerve our 
efforts to the utmost extent of our resources. 

This union among ourselves and disunion among 
our enemies were inestimable effects of the moderate 
plan, if it had promised no other advantage. 

But to gain the time was of vast moment to us 
in other senses. Not a seaport of the United States 
was fortified, so as to be protected against the in 
sults of a single frigate. Our magazines were, in 
every respect, too scantily supplied. It was highly 
desirable to obviate these deficiencies before matters 
came to extremity. 

Moreover, the longer we kept out of war, if obliged 
to go into it at last, the shorter would be the dura 
tion of the calamities incident to it. 

The circumstances of the injury of which we more 
immediately complain afforded an additional reason 
for preceding reprisals by negotiation. The order of 
the 6th of November directed neutral vessels to be 

Camillas 205 

brought in for adjudication. This was an equivocal 
phrase; and though there was too much cause to 
suspect that it was intended to operate as it did, yet 
there was a possibility of misconstruction ; and that 
possibility was a reason, in the nature of the thing, 
for giving the English Government an opportunity 
of explaining before retaliations took place. 

To all this it may be added, that one of the sub 
stitutes for the plan pursued, the sequestration of 
debts, was a measure no less dishonest than im 
politic ; as will be shown in the remarks which will be 
applied to the loth article of the treaty. 

But is it unimportant to the real friends of repub 
lican government, that the plan pursued was con 
genial to the public character which is ascribed to it ? 
Would it have been more desirable that the govern 
ment of our nation, outstripping the war maxims 
of Europe, should, without a previous demand of re 
paration, have rushed into reprisals, and consequently 
into a war? 

However this may be, it is a well-ascertained fact, 
that our country never appeared so august and re 
spectable as in the position which it assumed upon 
this occasion. Europe was struck with the dignified 
moderation of our conduct ; and the character of our 
government and nation acquired a new elevation. 

It cannot escape an attentive observer, that the 
language which, in the first instance, condemned the 
mission of an Envoy Extraordinary to Great Britain, 
and which now condemns the treaty negotiated by 
him, seems to consider the United States as among 
the first-rate powers of the world in point of strength 

206 Alexander Hamilton 

and resources, and proposes to them a conduct pre 
dicated upon that condition. 

To underrate our just importance would be a de 
grading error. To overrate it may lead to dangerous 
mistakes. 

A very powerful state may frequently hazard a 
high and haughty tone with good policy ; but a weak 
state can scarcely ever do it without imprudence. 
The last is yet our character; though we are the 
embryo of a great empire. It is, therefore, better 
suited to our situation to measure each step with the 
utmost caution; to hazard as little as possible, in 
the cases in which we are injured; to blend modera 
tion with firmness; and to brandish the weapons 
of hostility only when it is apparent that the use of 
them is unavoidable. 

It is not to be inferred from this, that we are to 
crouch to any power on earth, or tamely to suffer 
our rights to be violated. A nation which is capable 
of this meanness will quickly have no rights to pro 
tect, or honor to defend. 

But the true inference is, that we ought not lightly 
to seek or provoke a resort to arms; that, in the 
differences between us and other nations, we ought 
carefully to avoid measures which tend to widen 
the breach; and that we should scrupulously abstain 
from whatever may be construed into reprisals, till 
after the employment of all amicable means has 
reduced it to a certainty that there is no alternative. 

If we can avoid a war for ten or twelve years more, 
we shall then have acquired a maturity, which will 
make it no more than a common calamity, and will 

Camillas 207 

authorize us, in our national discussions, to take a 
higher and more imposing tone. 

This is a consideration of the greatest weight to 
determine us to exert all our prudence and address 
to keep out of war as long as it shall be possible ; to 
defer, to a state of manhood, a struggle to which 
infancy is ill adapted. This is the most effectual 
way to disappoint the enemies of our welfare; to 
pursue a contrary conduct may be to play into their 
hands, and to gratify their wishes. If there be a 
foreign power which sees with envy or ill-will our 
growing prosperity, that power must discern that 
our infancy is the time for clipping our wings. We 
ought to be wise enough to see that this is not a time 
for trying our strength. 

Should we be able to escape the storm which 
at this juncture agitates Europe, our disputes with 
Great Britain terminated, we may hope to postpone 
war to a distant period. This, at least, will greatly 
diminish the chances of it. For then there will 
remain only one power with whom we have any 
embarrassing discussions. I allude to Spain, and 
the question of the Mississippi; and there is reason 
to hope that this question, by the natural progress 
of things, and perseverance in an amicable course, 
will finally be arranged to our satisfaction without 
the necessity of the dernier ressort. 

The allusion to this case suggests one or two im 
portant reflections. How unwise would it have been 
to invite or facilitate a quarrel with Great Britain 
at a moment when she and Spain were engaged 
in a common cause, both of them having, besides, 

208 Alexander Hamilton 

controverted points with the United States! How 
wise will it be to adjust our differences with the 
most formidable of these two powers, and to have 
only to contest with one of them! 

This policy is so obvious, that it requires an extra 
ordinary degree of infatuation not to be sensible of 
it, and not to view with favor any measure which 
tends to so important a result. 

This cursory view of the motives which may be 
supposed to have governed our public councils in the 
mission to Great Britain, serves not only to vindicate 
the measures then pursued, but warns us against a 
prejudiced judgment of the result, which may, in the 
end, defeat the salutary purposes of those measures. 

I proceed now to observe summarily that the 
objects of the mission, contrary to what has been 
asserted, have been substantially obtained. What 
were these? They were principally: 

1 . To adjust the matters of controversy concerning 
the inexecution of the treaty of peace, and especially 
to obtain restitution of our Western posts. 

2. To obtain reparation for the captures and 
spoliations of our property in the course of the exist 
ing war. 

Both these objects have been provided for, and it 
will be shown, when we come to comment upon the 
articles which make the provisions in each case, that 
it is a reasonable one, as good a one as ought to have 
been expected; as good a one as there is any pro 
spect of obtaining hereafter; one which it is consist 
ent with our honor to accept, and which our interest 
bids us to close with. 

Camillus 209 

The provisions with regard to commerce were in 
cidental and auxiliary. The reasons which may be 
conceived to have led to the including of the subject 
in the mission will be discussed in some proper place. 

CAMILLUS. 

NO. Ill 

1795- 

The opposers of the treaty seem to have put in 
vention on the rack, to accumulate charges against 
it, in a great number of cases, without regard even 
to plausibility. If we suppose them sincere, we 
must often pity their ignorance; if insincere, we 
must abhor the spirit of deception which it betrays. 
Of the preposterous nature of some of their charges, 
specimens will be given in the course of these re 
marks; though, while nothing which is colorable will 
remain unattended to, it were endless to attempt a 
distinct refutation of all the wild and absurd things 
which are and will be said. It is vain to combat 
the vagaries of diseased imaginations. The mon 
sters they engender are no sooner destroyed than new 
legions supply their places. Upon this, as upon all 
former occasions, the good sense of the people must 
be relied upon; and it must be taken for granted, 
that it will be sufficient for their conviction to give 
solid answers to all such objections as have the sem 
blance of reason; that now, as heretofore, they will 
maintain their character abroad and at home for 
deliberation and reflection, and disappoint those who 
are in the habit of making experiments upon their 

2io Alexander Hamilton 

credulity, who, treating them as children, fancy that 
sugar-plums and toys will suffice to gain their con 
fidence and attachment, and to lead them blindfold 
whithersoever it is desired. 

In considering the treaty, it presents itself under 
two principal heads: the permanent articles, which 
are the first ten, and which, with some supplementary 
provisions, adjust the controverted points between 
the two countries ; and the temporary articles, which 
are all the remaining ones, and which establish the 
principles of mutual intercourse, as to GENERAL navi 
gation and commerce. The manner of the discus 
sion will correspond with this natural division of the 
subject. 

An objection meets the treaty at the threshold. It 
is said that our envoy abandoned the ground which 
our government had uniformly held, and with it our 
rights and interests as a nation, by acceding, in the 
preamble of the treaty, to the idea of terminating the 
differences between the two countries, "in such a 
manner as, without reference to the merits of their 
respective complaints and pretensions, may be best 
calculated to produce mutual satisfaction and good 
understanding. ' ' 

It is observed, in support of this, that our govern 
ment has constantly charged the first breaches of the 
treaty upon Great Britain, in the two particulars of 
carrying away the negroes and detaining the posts; 
that while the evacuation of New York was going on, 
a demand of the surrender of the negroes was made 
by Congress, through our commander-in-chief , which 
not being complied with, commissioners were sent to 

Camillas 2 1 1 

ascertain the number carried away, with a view to a 
claim of compensation ; that early and repeated ap 
plications were also made for the surrender of the 
Western posts, which not only was not done, but it 
is proved by the circumstances that orders were not 
given for it, according to the true intent of the treaty, 
and that there was, from the beginning, a design to 
infract, and a virtual infraction of the article with 
respect to this object. All this, it is alleged, has 
been the uniform language of our government, and 
has been demonstrated by Mr. Jefferson to be true, 
in his letter to Mr. Hammond, of the 2gth of May, 
1792; and it is asserted that the ground ought not 
to have been given up by Mr. Jay, because it was the 
standard of the mutual rights and duties of the 
parties, as to the points unexecuted of the treaty of 
peace. 

A proper examination of these matters is there 
fore called for, not only by the specific objection 
which is made to the principle which is contained 
in the preamble, but by the influence which a right 
solution is calculated to have, in giving a favorable 
or unfavorable complexion to the whole plan of the 
adjustment. 

It is true, as suggested, that our government has 
constantly charged as breaches of the treaty by Great 
Britain, the two particulars which have been stated; 
but it is believed to be not true, that it has uniformly 
charged them as FIRST breaches of the treaty. Indi 
viduals may have entertained this idea. The State 
of Virginia seems to have proceeded upon it in some 
public acts ; but as far as is recollected, that ground 

212 Alexander Hamilton 

was never formally or explicitly taken by the gov 
ernment of the United States until the above-men 
tioned letter from Mr. Jefferson to Mr. Hammond, 
when, for the first time, an attempt was made to 
vindicate or excuse the whole conduct of this country, 
in regard to the treaty of peace, contrary, I will 
venture to say, to the general sense of well-informed 
men. 

The most solemn act of our government on this 
head is an address of Congress to the different States, 
of the 1 3th of April, 1787. 

This address admits contraventions of the treaty 
on our part; and instead of deriving either justifica 
tion or extenuation of them from prior infractions by 
Great Britain, urges the different States to a repeal 
of all contravening laws. 

But if the fact, in this respect, were admitted to 
be, as stated by the adversaries of the treaty, it 
would not authorize their conclusion. 

It would not follow, that, because the ground had 
been taken by the government, it ought to have 
been pertinaciously kept, if, upon fair examination, 
it had appeared to be not solid, or if an adherence to 
it would have obstructed a reasonable adjustment of 
differences. 

Nations, no more than individuals, ought to per 
sist in error, especially at the sacrifice of their peace 
and prosperity; besides, nothing is more common, 
in disputes between nations, than each side to charge 
the other with being the aggressor or delinquent. J 
This mutual crimination, either from the nature of 
circumstances, or from the illusions of the passions, 

Camillas 213 

is sometimes sincere ; at other times it is dictated by 
pride or policy. But in all such cases, where one 
party is not powerful enough to dictate to the other, 
and where there is a mutual disposition to avoid war, 
the natural retreat for both is in compromise, which 
waives the question of first aggression or delin 
quency. This is the salvo for national pride; the 
escape for mutual error ; the bridge by which nations, 
arrayed against each other, are enabled to retire with 
honor, and without bloodshed, from the field of con 
test. In cases of mutual delinquency, the question 
of the first default is frequently attended with real 
difficulty and doubt. One side has an equal right 
with the other to have and maintain its opinion. 
What is to be done when the pride of neither will 
yield to the arguments of the other? War, or a 
waiver of the point, is the alternative. What sensi 
ble man, what humane man, will deny that a com 
promise, which secures substantially the objects of 
interest, is almost always preferable to war on so 
punctilious and unmanageable a point? 

Reject the principle of compromise, and the feuds 
of nations must become much more deadly than they 
have hitherto been. There would scarcely ever be 
room for the adjustment of differences without an 
appeal to the sword; and, when drawn, it would 
seldom be sheathed but with the destruction of one 
or the other party. The earth, now too often stained, 
would then continually stream with human gore. 

From the situation of the thing, and of the parties, 
there never could be a rational doubt that the com 
promising plan was the only one on which the United 

214 Alexander Hamilton 

States and Great Britain could ever terminate their 
differences without war ; that the question, who was 
the first delinquent, would have been an eternal bar 
to accommodation, and consequently, that a dis 
mission of that question was a prerequisite to agree 
ment. Had our envoy permitted the negotiation to 
be arrested by obstinacy on this head, he would have 
shown himself to be the diplomatic pedant, rather 
than the able negotiator, and would have been 
justly chargeable with sacrificing to punctilio the 
peace of his country. It was enough for him, as he 
did, to ascertain, by a preliminary discussion, the 
impossibility of bringing the other party to concede 
the point. 

An impartial survey of the real state of the ques 
tion will satisfy candid and discerning men, that it 
was wise and politic to dismiss it. This shall be 
attempted. 

It has been observed that two breaches of the 
treaty of peace are charged upon Great Britain : the 
carrying away of the negroes, and the detention of 
the posts. It remains to investigate the reality of 
these breaches, and to fix the periods when they can 
be said to have happened. 

As to the negroes, the true sense of the article in 
the treaty of peace, which respects them, is disputed. 

The words of the stipulation are (Art. 7) that "his 
Britannic Majesty shall, with all convenient speed, 
and without causing any destruction or carrying 
away any negroes or other property of the American 
inhabitants, withdraw all his armies, garrisons, and 
fleets from the United States." 

Camillas 215 

These terms admit of two constructions: one, that 
no negroes, or other articles which had been American 
property, should be carried away; the other, that 
the evacuations were to be made without depreda 
tion; consequently, that no new destruction was to 
be committed, and that negroes, or other articles, 
which, at the time of the cessation of hostilities, con 
tinued to be the property of American inhabitants, 
unexchanged by the operations of war, should be 
forborne to be carried away. 

The first was the construction which was adopted 
by this country; and the last is that insisted upon 
by Great Britain. 

The arguments which support her construction 
are these: 

I. — The established laws of war give to an enemy 
the use and enjoyment, during the war, of all real 
property, of which he obtains possession, and the 
absolute ownership of all personal property which 
falls into his hands. The latter is called booty; and, 
except ships, becomes vested in the captors the 
moment they acquire a firm possession. With regard 
to ships, it seems to be a general rule of the marine 
law, that condemnation is necessary to complete in 
vestment of the property in the captor. 

II. — Negroes, by the laws of the States in which 
slavery is allowed, are personal property. They, 
therefore, on the principle of those laws, like horses, 
cattle, and other movables, were liable to become 
booty, and belonged to the enemy as soon as they 
came into his hands. Belonging to him, he was free 
either to apply them to his own use, or set them at 

216 Alexander Hamilton 

liberty. If he did the latter, the grant was irre 
vocable, restitution was impossible. Nothing in the 
laws of nations or in those of Great Britain will 
authorize the resumption of liberty, once granted to 
a human being. 

III. — The negroes in question were either taken in 
the course of military operations, or they joined the 
British army upon invitation by proclamation. How 
ever dishonorable to Great Britain the latter may 
have been, as an illiberal species of warfare, there is 
no ground to say that the strict rules of war did not 
warrant it ; or that the effect was not, in the one case, 
as well as in the other, a change of property in the 
thing. 

IV. — The stipulation relates to " negroes or other 
property of the American inhabitants"; putting 
negroes on the same footing with any other article. 
The characteristic of the subject of the stipulation 
being property of American inhabitants, whatever 
had lost that character could not be the object of the 
stipulation. But the negroes in question, by the 
laws of war, had lost that character; they were 
therefore not within the stipulation. 

Why did not the United States demand the sur 
render of captured vessels, and of all other movables, 
which had fallen into the hands of the enemy? The 
answer is, because common sense would have re 
volted against such a construction. No one could 
believe that an indefinite surrender of all the spoils 
or booty of a seven-years' war was ever intended to 
be stipulated; and yet the demand for a horse, or 
an ox, or a piece of furniture, would have been as 

Camillus 217 

completely within the terms " negroes and other 
property," as a negro; consequently, the reasoning 
which proves that one is not included, excludes the 
other. 

The silence of the United States as to every other 
article is therefore a virtual abandonment of that 
sense of the stipulation which requires the surrender 
of negroes. 

V. — In the interpretation of treaties, things odious 
or immoral are not to be presumed. The abandon 
ment of negroes, who had been induced to quit their 
masters on the faith of official proclamation, promis 
ing them liberty, to fall again under the yoke of their 
masters, and into slavery, is as odious and immoral a 
thing as can be conceived. It is odious, not only as 
it imposes an act of perfidy on one of the contracting 
parties, but as it tends to bring back to servitude 
men once made free. The general interests of 
humanity conspire with the obligation which Great 
Britain had contracted towards the negroes, to 
repel this construction of the treaty, if another can 
be found. 

VI. — But another and a less exceptionable con 
struction is found in considering the clause as 
inserted, for greater caution, to secure evacuations 
without depredation. It may be answered that this 
was superfluous, because hostilities having ceased, 
the stipulation to surrender implied of itself that it 
was to be done without depredation. But to this 
the reply is, that a part of the clause manifestly 
contemplates the case of new depredations, and pro 
vides a guard against it, in the promise that the 

218 Alexander Hamilton 

evacuations shall be made without causing any 
destruction. To cause destruction is to do some new 
act of violence. This reflection destroys the argu 
ment drawn from the superfluousness of the stipula 
tion in the sense here given to it, and by showing 
that it must have such a sense in one part, authorizes 
the conclusion, that the remainder of the clause has 
a similar sense. The connection of the two things, 
in parts of one sentence, confirms this inference. 

These arguments certainly have great weight, and 
do not admit of easy refutation. It is a fact, too, 
that the opinions of some of the ablest lawyers of 
our own country have, from the beginning, corre 
sponded with the construction they enforce. 

It is not enough for us to be persuaded, that some 
of the negotiators, who made the peace, intended 
the article in our sense. It is necessary that it 
should be found in the instrument itself, and, from 
the nature of it, ought to have been expressed with 
clearness and without ambiguity. If there be real 
ambiguity in such a case, the odiousness of the effect 
will incline the scale against us. 

It does not remove the difficulty, to say, that com 
pensation for the negroes might have been a sub 
stitute for the thing. When one party promises 
a specific thing to another, nothing but the thing 
itself will satisfy the promise. The party to whom 
it is made cannot be required to accept in lieu of it 
an equivalent. It follows, that compensation for 
the negroes would not have been a performance of 
the stipulation to forbear to carry them away; and 
therefore, if there be any thing odious in the specific 

Camillus 219 

thing itself, the objection to the interpretation which 
requires it is not done away by the idea of sub 
stituting compensation. For the article does not 
admit such substitution, and its sense cannot be 
defined by what it does admit. 

Some color to our sense of the article results from 
these expressions in the same clause, " leaving in 
all fortifications the American artillery that may be 
therein." But this expression is not of equivalent 
force to that of property of American inhabitants. 
For example, suppose an American ship to have been 
captured and condemned, it might still be said of 
her, in a certain sense, this is an "American ship," 
alluding to the country of which she had been the 
ship; but it could not be said in any sense of her, 
this ship is American property, or the property of 
American inhabitants. The country of which a 
thing was, may often be used with aptness as a term 
of description of that thing, though it may have 
changed owners; but the term property, which is 
synonymous with ownership, can never be used in 
the present tense as descriptive of an ownership 
which has ceased. Moreover, if the expressions in 
the two cases had been (as they are not) of equi 
valent force, it would not follow that they were to 
have the same meaning in both cases, being applied 
to different matters. For an odious consequence in 
one instance, would be a reason for rejecting a par 
ticular sense of a word or phrase, which would be 
proper in another, to which no such consequence was 
attached. 

Let me now ask this question of any candid man : 

220 Alexander Hamilton 

Is our construction of the article respecting the 
negroes so much better supported than that of Great 
Britain, as to justify our pronouncing with positive- 
ness, that the carrying them away was a breach of 
the treaty? 

To me it appears clear that this must be con 
sidered, speaking favorably for us, as a very doubtful 
point, and that we cannot, with confidence, predicate 
a breach of the treaty by Great Britain upon this 
event. If it was one, it happened in May, 1783. 

The affair of the Western posts is now to be 
examined. That the detention of them, after the 
proper point of time for delivering them up, was a 
breach of the treaty, will not bear a dispute. But 
what that proper time was, is a serious question 
between the two parties. 

Our government has contended, that the posts 
ought to have been surrendered with all convenient 
speed after the provisional treaty took effect; and 
Mr. Jefferson, who is much cited on the present 
occasion, has shown by an ingenious and elaborate 
deduction of circumstances, that this was not only 
not done but never intended. 

But Mr. Jefferson has not even discussed the ques 
tion, whether the provisional or the definitive treaty 
was the act from which the obligation to perform 
was to date. This is an important omission; for 
Great Britain affirms the definitive treaty to be the 
criterion. 

As an original question much might be said on 
both sides. The natural relation of the terms pro 
visional or preliminary and definitive, seems to ex- 

Camillus 221 

hibit the former as inchoate and imperfect, and to 
refer to the latter the conclusive obligatory force and 
legal perfection. There is room, therefore, to say, 
that all but the mere cessation of hostilities, or for 
the execution of which there is no precise point of 
time fixed in the preliminary articles, is referred to 
in the definitive treaty. 

On the other hand, it may be argued, that a pre 
liminary treaty is as much a national treaty as a 
definitive one, both being made by an equal and a 
competent authority; and that there is no good 
reason why those things which are sufficiently regu 
lated by the preliminary, should not go into im 
mediate and complete effect, equally as if regulated 
by the definitive treaty ; or why the latter should be 
considered as any thing more than an instrument 
for adjusting points which may have been left open 
by the preliminary articles, and for giving more 
perfect form. Accordingly, there are examples of 
preliminary treaties going into mutual and full exe 
cution, though never followed by definitive treaties. 

But, however this question may have stood on 
principle, the conduct of our government in the 
particular case has settled it against us, and has 
completely sanctioned the doctrine of Great Britain. 

If performance was to date from the provisional 
articles, this applies as well to us as to Great Britain. 
It was incumbent upon Congress to have notified 
the treaty, with the proper solemnities, to the differ 
ent States and their citizens; to have made the re 
commendations stipulated by the fifth article; and 
to have enjoined the observance of all those things 

222 Alexander Hamilton 

which we promised on our part. The nature of some 
of these stipulations rendered it particularly urgent 
that no time should be lost. But all was deferred 
till the ratification in this country of the definitive 
treaty. The i$th of January, 1784, is the date of 
the act which attempts to carry the treaty into 
effect on our part. This then is a practical settle 
ment by ourselves of the principle, that performance 
was to date from the definitive treaty. 

It is no objection to the position, that our seaports 
were previously evacuated. That was matter of 
mutual convenience; and though done, does not 
change the state of strict obligation between the 
parties. Even in the view of liberal and conciliating 
procedure, the prompt surrender of our seaports is, 
for obvious reasons, a very different thing. 

But our dilemma is this, if the delay of orders for 
evacuating the Western posts, previous to the rati 
fication of the definitive treaty, was, on the part of 
Great Britain, a breach of treaty, our delay to act 
upon the points stipulated by us, till after that 
ratification, must have been equally a breach of 
treaty; and it must have been at least contemporary 
with any breach that could have been committed by 
Great Britain. 

We are compelled, then, by our own example to 
agree with Great Britain, that she was not obliged to 
surrender the Western posts till after the mutual 
ratification of the definitive treaty, and to abandon 
the superstructure, however soothing to our wishes, 
which has been reared upon a different foundation. 
If so, we must look to the period of the exchange of 

Camillus 223 

the ratification in Europe for the date of the orders 
for evacuating. I have not in my possession ma 
terials for fixing with accuracy that period; but 
considering the time of the ratification here, and 
the time of its probable arrival in England, we are 
carried to the latter end of April, or beginning of 
May, 1784; so that it is not till about May, 1784, 
that we can charge upon Great Britain a delinquency 
as to the surrender of the posts. 

Having now examined the nature of the infrac 
tions of the treaty of peace charged upon Great 
Britain with reference to dates, I shall, in the next 
number of this defence, trace some instances of in 
fraction on our part with a like reference. The 
conclusions to be drawn from this comparison, if I 
mistake not, will greatly disconcert some articles of 
the prevailing creed on this head, and go far towards 
confirming what was preliminarily offered to evince 
the prudence of our envoy in relinquishing the 
favorite ground. 

CAMILLUS. 

NO. IV 

1795- 

An accurate enumeration of the breaches of the 
treaty of peace on our part, would require a tedious 
research. It will suffice to select and quote a few of 
the most prominent and early instances. 

One of the earliest is to be found in an act of this 
State, for granting a more effectual relief in cases of 
certain trespasses, passed the i7th of March, 1783. 
This act takes away from any person (subjects of 

224 Alexander Hamilton 

Great Britain of every description included) who 
had, during the war, occupied, injured, destroyed, 
or received property, real or personal, of any in 
habitant without the British lines, the benefit of the 
plea of a military order; consequently the justifica 
tion which the laws and usages of war give, and 
the immunity resulting from the reciprocal amnesty 
which, expressly or virtually, is an essential part of 
every treaty of peace. To this it may be added that 
it was considered by Great Britain as a direct in 
fraction of the sixth article of her treaty with us, 
which exempts all persons from prosecution "by 
reason of the part they might have taken in the 

war." 

Mr. Jefferson, not controverting the point that 
the provisions of this act were contrary to the treaty, 
endeavors to get rid of the inference from it, by 
alleging three things : ist. That it passed ante 
cedently to the treaty, and so could not be a violation 
of an act of subsequent date. 2d. That the treaty 
was paramount to the laws of the particular States, 
and operated a repeal of them. 3d. That the ex 
ceptionable principle of this act was never sanc 
tioned by the courts of justice, and in one instance 
(the case of Rutgers and Waddington in the mayor's 
court) was overruled. 

As to the first point, it is sufficient to answer, that 
the law continued to operate, in fact, from the time 
of the treaty till the 4th of April, 1787, when there 
was a repeal of the exceptionable clause, by an act of 
our Legislature. During the period of four years, 
many suits were brought and many recoveries had; 

Camillus 225 

extending even to persons who had been in the 
military service of Great Britain. 

To the second point, these observations may be 
opposed: 

The articles of the Confederation did not, like 
our present Constitution, declare that treaties were 
supreme laws of the land. The United States, under 
that system, had no courts of their own, to expound 
and enforce their treaties as laws. All was to de 
pend upon the comparative authority of laws and 
treaties, in the judgment of the State courts. 

The question, whether treaties were paramount to, 
and a virtual repeal of, antecedent laws, was a ques 
tion of theory, about which there was room for, and 
in this country did exist, much diversity of opinion. 
It is notorious, that it has been strenuously main 
tained that however a national treaty ought, in good 
faith, to be conclusive on a State, to induce a repeal 
of laws contrary to it, yet its actual laws could not 
be controverted by treaty, without an actual re 
peal by its own authority. This doctrine has been 
emphatically that of the party distinguished by its 
opposition to national principles. 

And it is observable, that Congress, not relying 
entirely upon the force of the treaty to abrogate 
contravening laws, in their address already cited, 
urge the States to a repeal of those laws. It is like 
wise observable in respect to the very act under 
consideration, that the Legislature of the State, in 
April,, 1 7 87, thought a positive repeal of the excep 
tionable clause necessary. 

The complaints of a power whose treaty with us 

VOL. V. — 15. 

226 Alexander Hamilton 

was, in fact, violated by the operation of a State law, 
could never be satisfactorily answered by referring 
to a theoretic, abstract, disputed proposition. Such a 
power might reply with irresistible force: "It is not 
for us to concern ourselves about the structure and 
meaning of your political constitutions, or the force 
of legal maxims deducible from the forms and dis 
tributions of power which you have adopted for your 
government. It is the act in which alone we are 
interested; you have stipulated this and that to us — 
your stipulation in practice is contravened. It is 
your duty to see that there are no impediments from 
conflicting authorities within yourselves, to an exact 
fulfilment of your promises. If you suffer any such 
impediment to exist, you are answerable for the 
consequences." 

As to the third point, it is to be observed, that 
though there may have been no express formal 
decision of our courts, enforcing the exceptionable 
principle of the trespass act, yet there never was a de 
cision of a Supreme Court against it; and it may not 
be amiss to remark incidentally, that the decision of 
the mayor's court, from which Mr. Jefferson is glad 
to derive an exculpation of our conduct, was the 
subject of a severe animadversion at a popular meet 
ing in this city, as a judiciary encroachment on the 
legislative authority of the State. The truth on this 
point is, that according to the opinion of our bar, a 
defence under a military order was desperate, and it 
was believed that a majority of our Supreme-Court 
bench would overrule the plea. Hence, in numerous 
cases where it might have been used, it was waived ; 

Camillas 227 

and the endeavor on behalf of the defendants was 
either to effect, on collateral grounds, a mitigation 
of damages, or to accomplish the best compromises 
that could be obtained; even the suit of Rutgers 
and Waddington, after a partial success in the may 
or's court, was terminated by a compromise, accord 
ing to the advice of the defendant's council, owing 
to the apprehension of an unfavorable issue in the 
Supreme Court; and this, notwithstanding the de 
fendant was a British subject. 

Under these circumstances, which are faithfully 
represented, is it possible to doubt, that the act in 
question operated a breach of our treaty with Great 
Britain — and this from the commencement of its 
existence? Can we reasonably expect that nations 
with whom we have treaties will allow us to sub 
stitute theoretic problems to performances of our 
engagements, and will be willing to accept them as 
apologies for actual violations? 

It is pertinent to remark that the British com- 
mander-in-chief very early remonstrated against this 
act ; but the remonstrance produced no effect. 

Another act of the State of New York may be 
cited as a violation of the treaty on our part, which 
must have been nearly contemporary with that of 
the detention of the posts. Its date is the i2th of 
May, 1784. This act confirms, in express terms, all 
confiscations before made, notwithstanding errors in 
the proceedings, and takes away the writ of error 
upon .any judgment previously rendered. 

This was, in substance, a new confiscation ; judg 
ments which from error were invalid, were nullities. 

228 Alexander Hamilton 

To take away the writ of error, by which their nullity 
might be established, was to give them an efficacy 
which they did not before possess; and, as to the 
operation, cannot be distinguished from the render 
ing of new judgments. To make voidable acts of 
confiscation valid and conclusive, is equivalent to 
new acts of confiscation. A fair execution of the 
treaty required that every thing in this respect 
should be left where it was, and forbade the remedy 
ing of defects in former proceedings, as much as the 
restitution of new judgments. 

Another and an unequivocal breach of the treaty is 
found in an act of South Carolina, of March 26, 1784. 
This act suspends the recovery of British debts for 
nine months, and then allows them to be recovered 
only in four yearly instalments, contrary to the 
express stipulation of the fourth article, "that 
creditors on either side shall meet with no lawful im 
pediments to the recovery of the full value in sterling 
money of all bona-fide debts theretofore contracted.'" 

It is idle to attempt to excuse infractions of this 
kind by the pleas of distress and inability. This is 
to make the convenience of one party the measure of 
its obligation to perform its promises to another. If 
there was really an impossibility of payment, as has 
been pretended, there was no need of legislative ob 
struction; the thing would have regulated itself; 
and the very interest of the creditor was a pledge 
that no general evil could have resulted from allow 
ing a free course to the laws. If such impediments 
could be justified, what impediments might not be 
justified? What would become of the article, the 

Camillas 229 

only one in the treaty, to be performed by us, of real 
consequence to Great Britain? 

This infraction by South Carolina was prior to 
that of the detention of the posts by Great Britain. 

But the case of Virginia is still stronger than that 
of South Carolina. There is evidence which cannot 
be disputed, that her courts, in defiance of the 
treaty, have constantly remained shut to the re 
covery of British debts, in virtue of laws passed 
during the war. 

An act of her General Assembly of the 226. June, 
1784, after suggesting as breaches of the treaty by 
Great Britain the carrying off of the negroes and 
the detention of the posts, after instructing her 
delegates in Congress to request a remonstrance to 
the British court complaining of those infractions 
and desiring reparation, and after declaring that the 
national honor and interest of the citizens of that 
commonwealth obliged the Assembly to withhold 
their co-operation in the complete fulfilment of the said 
treaty, until the success of the aforementioned re 
monstrance is known, or Congress shall signify their 
sentiments touching the premises, concludes with 
the following resolution : 

"That so soon as reparation is made for the fore 
going infraction, or Congress shall judge it indisputa 
bly necessary, such acts and parts of acts passed 
during the late war, as inhibit the recovery of British 
debts, ought to be repealed, and payment thereof made 
in such time and manner as shall consist with the ex 
hausted situation of the commonwealth." 

The plain language of this resolution is, that there 

230 Alexander Hamilton 

were acts passed during the war, which then actually 
inhibited the recovery of British debts ; and that for 
the removal of this inhibition, a repealing act by the 
authority of Virginia was necessary. 

However unfounded this position might have been 
in theory, here is conclusive evidence that the fact in 
Virginia was conformable to it ; that her courts had 
been, ever since the peace, then were, and until a 
repealing law was passed were likely to continue, to 
be shut against the recovery of British debts. When 
testimony of this kind was urged by the British 
minister, was it possible for our envoy to make any 
solid reply ? Who could be supposed to know better 
than the Legislature of Virginia the real state of the 
fact? When that Legislature declared it to be as 
has been stated, who or what could contradict it? 
With what truth has it been asserted, that "it was 
at all times perfectly understood" that treaties con 
trolled the laws of the States? 

Additional proof of the contrary is found in the 
subsequent conduct of Virginia. On the i2th of 
December, 1787, the State passed an act repealing 
all such acts or parts of acts of the State as had pre 
vented or might prevent the recovery of debts due 
to British subjects according to the true intent of the 
treaty; but with this proviso, that there should be 
a suspension of the repeal till the governor, by ad 
vice of council, had, by proclamation, notified that 
Great Britain had delivered up the posts, and was 
taking measures for the further fulfilment of the 
treaty, by delivering up the negroes, or by making 
compensation for them. This denotes clearly, that 

Camillas 231 

in the opinion of the Legislature of Virginia there 
were acts of that State which had prevented and 
might prevent the recovery of debts according to the 
treaty. 

It is observable, too, that the resolutions of June, 
1784, do not even give the expectation of a complete 
repeal of the impeding laws, in the event of repara 
tion of the breaches of treaty by Great Britain. 
They only promise such a modification of them as 
would permit the payment in such time and manner 
as should consist with the exhausted situation of the 
commonwealth; that is, not according to the true 
intent of the treaty, but according to the opinion 
of the Legislature of Virginia of the abilities of the 
commonwealth. 

As the infraction which these proceedings of Vir 
ginia admit resulted from acts passed during the 
war, it was of course coeval with the first existence 
of the treaty of peace, and seems to preclude the 
possibility of any prior breach by Great Britain. It 
has been at least demonstrated, that the detention 
of the posts was not such prior breach, as there was 
no obligation to surrender till after the exchange of 
the ratifications of the definitive treaty in England. 

I pass by the serious contraventions of the treaty 
in this important article of the debts, which are of 
later date, because they do not affect the question of 
the first breach, though they are of great weight to 
demonstrate the obligation of the United States to 
make compensation. 

The argument, then, upon the whole, as to the 
question of the first breach, stands thus: It is a 

232 Alexander Hamilton 

great doubt whether the carrying away of the negroes 
was at all a breach. If it was one, the trespass 
act of this State preceded it in date, and went into 
operation the very moment it was possible to issue 
process. The detention of the posts is subsequent 
to breaches of the article concerning their recovery 
of debts on our part. This, in the case of South 
Carolina, is determined by the date of her act 
(March 26, 1784), which is before the exchange of the 
ratifications of the definitive treaty could have taken 
place. In that of Virginia, it results from her own 
testimony, that impediments to the recovery of 
British debts, created by acts passed during the war, 
continued from the first moment of the peace until 
after the year 1787. Or if , contrary to our own in 
terpretation, we are disposed to adhere to the pro 
visional treaty, as the .act from which performance 
was to date, we are guilty of a breach in not acting 
ourselves upon that treaty; a breach which, being 
contemporary with the existence of the treaty, seems 
not to admit of any prior contravention. From all 
which it follows, that take what ground we will, we 
must be perplexed to fix the charge of the first 
breach of the treaty upon Great Britain. 

Let the appeal be to the understandings and hearts 
of candid men — men who have force of mind suffi 
cient to rescue themselves from the trammels of 
prejudice, and who dare to look even unpalatable 
truths in the face. Let such men pronounce, 
whether they are still satisfied that Great Britain 
is clearly chargeable with the first breaches of the 
treaty? whether they are not, on the contrary, con- 

Camillus 233 

vinced that the question is one so mixed and doubt 
ful, as to render a waiver of it, even on the score of 
intrinsic merit, expedient on our part? and especially 
whether they can entertain a particle of doubt, that 
it was wiser to waive it than to suffer it to prove a 
final obstacle to the adjustment of a controversy on 
which the peace of their country was suspended? 
This was undoubtedly the alternative to our envoy. 
In the choice he made, the ultimate opinion of our en 
lightened country cannot fail to applaud his prudence. 

CAMILLUS. 

NO. v 

1795- 

The discussion in the last two numbers has shown, 
if I mistake not, that this country by no means 
stands upon such good ground, with regard to the 
inexecution of the treaty of peace, as some of our 
official proceedings have advanced, and as many 
among us have too lightly credited. The task of 
displaying this truth has been an unwelcome one. 
As long as a contrary doctrine was either a mere 
essay of polemical skill, or a convenient ingredient 
of negotiation, it was natural for those who thought 
differently of it, to prefer silence to contradiction; 
but when it is made the engine of great errors, of 
national conduct, of excessive pretensions, which 
forbid a reasonable accommodation of national dif 
ference, and endanger rupture and war, on grounds 
which reason disapproves and prudence condemns, 
it becomes an indispensable duty to expose its hollow- 
ness and fallacy. Reserve then would be a crime. 

234 Alexander Hamilton 

The true patriot, who never fears to sacrifice popu 
larity to what he believes to be the cause of public 
good, cannot hesitate to endeavor to unmask the 
error, though with the certainty of incurring the 
displeasure and censure of the prejudiced and un 
thinking. 

The disposition to infract the treaty, which, in 
several particulars, discovered itself among us, almost 
as soon as it was known to have been made, was, 
from its first appearance, a source of humiliation, 
regret, and apprehension to those who could dis 
passionately estimate the consequences, and who 
felt a proper concern for the honor and character 
of the country. They perceived that besides loss 
of reputation, it must sooner or later lead to very 
serious embarrassments. They have been hitherto 
mistaken in no part of their anticipations; and if 
their faithful warning voice, now raised to check the 
progress of error, is as little listened to as when it 
was raised to prevent the commencement of it, there 
is too much cause to fear, that the experience of 
extensive evils may extort regrets which the fore 
sight of an enlightened people ought to avert. 

Citizens of United America! as you value your 
present enviable lot, rally round your own good 
sense! Expel from your confidence, men who have 
never ceased to misadvise you ! Discard intemperate 
and illiberal passions! Aspire to the glory of the 
greatest triumph which a people can gain, a triumph 
over prejudice! Be just, be prudent! Listen im 
partially to the unadulterated language of truth! 
And, above all, guard your peace with anxious vigil- 

Camillas 235 

ance against all the artful snares which are laid for 
it! Accompany me with minds open to conviction, 
in a discussion of unspeakable importance to your 
welfare ! 

Weigh well, as preliminary to further investiga 
tion this momentous proposition. " PEACE, in the 
particular situation of this independent country, is 
an object of such GREAT and PRIMARY magnitude, 
that it ought not to be relinquished, unless the re- 
linquishment be clearly necessary to PRESERVE OUR 
HONOR in some UNEQUIVOCAL point, or to avoid the 
sacrifice of some RIGHT or INTEREST of MATERIAL and 
PERMANENT importance." This is the touchstone 
of every question which can come before us respecting 
our foreign concerns. 

As a general proposition, scarcely any will dispute 
it; but in the application of the rule there is much 
confusion of ideas — much false feeling, and falser 
reasoning. The ravings of anger and pride are mis 
taken for the suggestions of honor. Thus are we 
told in a delirium of rage, by a gentleman of South 
Carolina, that our envoy should have demanded an 
unconditional relinquishment of the Western posts 
as a right; till which was granted, and until Lord 
Grenville had given orders to Lord Dorchester to 
that effect, open, to be sent to our President, to be by 
him forwarded, he should not have opened his lips 
about the treaty. It was prostrating the dearest rights 
of freemen, and laying them prostrate at the feet of 
royalty. 

In a case of incontestible mutual infractions of a 
treaty, one of the parties is to demand, peremptorily 

236 Alexander Hamilton 

of the other, an unconditional performance upon his 
part, by way of preliminary, and without negotia 
tion. An envoy sent to avert war, carrying with 
him the clearest indications of a general solicitude of 
his country that peace might be preserved, was, at 
the very first step of his progress, to render hostility 
inevitable, by exacting, not only what could not have 
been complied with, but what must have been re 
jected with indignation. The government of Great 
Britain must have been the most abject on earth, in 
a case so situated, to have listened for a moment to 
such a demand. And because our envoy did not 
pursue this frantic course — did not hold the language 
of an IMPERIOUS BASHAW to his TREMBLING SLAVE, 
he is absurdly stigmatized as having prostrated the 
rights of freemen at the foot of royalty. What are we 
to think of the state of mind which could produce so 
extravagant a sally ? Would a prudent people have 
been willing to have entrusted a negotiation which 
involved their peace to the author of it? Will they 
be willing to take him as their guide in a critical 
emergency of their affairs? ' 

True honor is a rational thing. It is as distin 
guishable from Quixotism as true courage from the 
spirit of the bravo. It is possible for one nation to 
commit so undisguised and unqualified an outrage 
upon another as to render a negotiation of the ques 
tion dishonorable. But this seldom, if ever, hap 
pens. In most cases, it is consistent with honor to 

1 No man in the habit of thinking well either of Mr. Rutledge's head 
or heart but must have felt, at reading the passages of his speech 
which have been published, pain, surprise, and mortification. I regret 
the occasion, and the necessity of animadversion. 

Camillus 237 

precede rupture by negotiation, and whenever it is, 
reason and humanity demand it. Honor cannot be 
wounded by consulting moderation. As a general 
rule, it is not till after it has become manifest that 
reasonable reparation for a clear premeditated wrong 
cannot be obtained by an amicable adjustment, that 
honor demands a resort to arms. In all the ques 
tions between us and Great Britain, honor permitted 
the moderate course; in those which regard the in- 
execution of the treaty of peace, there had un 
doubtedly been mutual faults. It was, therefore, a 
case for negotiation and mutual reparation. True 
honor, which can never be separated from justice, 
even requires reparation from us to Great Britain, 
as well as from her to us. The injuries we complain 
of in the present war, were also of a negotiable kind. 
The first was bottomed on a controverted point in 
the laws of nations. The second left open the ques 
tion, whether the principal injury was a designed 
act of the government or a misconstruction of its 
courts. To have taken, therefore, the imperious 
ground which is recommended, in place of that 
which was taken, would have been not to follow the 
admonitions of honor, but to have submitted to the 
impulse of passion and phrensy. 

So likewise, when it is asserted that war is pre 
ferable to the sacrifice of our rights and interests, 
this, to be true, to be rational, must be understood 
of such rights and interests as are certain, as are 
important, such as regard the honor, security, or 
prosperity of our country. It is not a right disputa 
ble, or of small consequence, it is not an interest 

238 Alexander Hamilton 

temporary, partial, and inconsiderable, which will 
justify, in our situation, an appeal to arms. 

Nations ought to calculate as well as individuals, 
to compare evils, and to prefer the lesser to the 
greater; to act otherwise, is to act unreasonably; 
those who counsel it are impostors or madmen. 

These reflections are of a nature to lead to a right 
judgment of the conduct of our envoy in the plan 
of adjustment to which he has given his assent. 

Three objects, as has appeared, were to be aimed 
at, on behalf of the United States: ist. Compensa 
tion for negroes carried away. 2d. Surrender of 
the Western posts. 3d. Compensation for spoliation 
during the existing war. 

Two of these objects, and these in every view the 
most important, have been provided for; how fully, 
will be examined hereafter. One of them has been 
given up — to wit : compensation for the negroes. 

It has been shown, as I trust, to the conviction of 
dispassionate men, that the claim of compensation 
for the negroes is, in point of right, a very doubtful 
one ; in point of interest, it certainly falls under the 
description of partial and inconsiderable; affecting 
in no respect the honor or security of the nation, 
and incapable of having a sensible influence upon its 
prosperity. The pecuniary value of the object is, in 
a national scale, trifling. 

Not having before me the proper documents, I can 
only speak from memory. But I do not fear to be 
materially mistaken in stating that the whole num 
ber carried away, so ascertained as to have afforded 
evidence for a claim for compensation, was short of 

Camillus 239 

3,000 persons, of whom about 1,300 were of sixteen 
years and upwards, men, women, and children. 
Computing these at an average of 150 dollars per 
head, which is a competent price, the amount would 
be 450,000 dollars, and not two or three millions, as 
has been pretended. 

It is a fact, which I assert on the best authority, 
that our envoy made every effort in his power to 
establish our construction of the article relating to 
this subject, and to obtain compensation; and that 
he did not relinquish it till he became convinced, 
that to insist upon it would defeat the purpose of 
his mission, and leave the controversy between the 
two countries unsettled. 

Finding, at the same time, that the two other 
points in dispute could be reasonably adjusted, is 
there any one who will be rash enough to affirm, 
that he ought to have broken off the negotiation on 
account of the difficulty about the negroes? Yes! 
there are men, who are thus inconsiderate and in 
temperate ! But will a sober, reflecting people ratify 
their sentence? 

What would such a people have said to our envoy, 
had he returned with this absurd tale in his mouth : 
"Countrymen! I could have obtained the surrender 
of your posts, and an adequate provision for the 
reparation of your losses by unjust captures; I 
could have terminated your controversy with Great 
Britain, and secured the continuance of your peace, 
but fpr one obstacle — a refusal to compensate for 
the negroes carried away; on this point the British 
Government maintained a construction of the treaty 

240 Alexander Hamilton 

different from ours, and adhered to it with inflexi 
bility. I confess, that there appeared to be much 
doubt concerning the true construction; I confess, 
also, that the object was of inconsiderable value. 
Yet it made a part of our claims, and I thought the 
hazards of war preferable to a renunciation of it." 

What would his adversaries have replied to him 
on such an occasion? No ridicule would have been 
too strong, no reproach too bitter. Their triumph 
would have been complete ; for he would have been 
deservedly left without advocate, without apologist. 

It cannot admit of a serious doubt, that the affair 
of the negroes was too questionable in point of right, 
too insignificant in point of interest, to have been 
suffered to be an impediment to the immense objects 
which were to be promoted by an accommodation of 
differences acceptable in other respects. There was 
no general principle of national right or policy to be 
renounced. No consideration of honor forbade the 
renunciation; every calculation of interest invited 
to it. The evils of war for one month would out 
weigh the advantage, if at the end of it there was a 
certainty of attainment. 

But was war the alternative? Yes, war or dis 
grace? 

The United States and Great Britain had been 
brought to issue. The recent spoliations on our 
commerce, superadded to the evils of a protracted 
Indian war, connected with the detention of the 
Western posts, and accompanied with indications of 
a design to contract our boundaries, obstructing the 
course of our settlements and the enjoyment of 

Camillas 
private rights, and producing serious and growing 
discontent in our Western country, rendered it in 
dispensable that there should be a settlement of 
old differences, and a reparation of new wrongs ; or, 
that the sword should vindicate our rights. 

This was certainly, and with reason, the general 
sense of our country when our envoy left it. There 
are many indications that it was the opinion of our 
government ; and it is to be inferred, that our envoy 
understood the alternative to be as has been stated. 

Indeed, what else could be contemplated? After 
the depredations which had been committed upon 
our commerce, after the strong sensibility which had 
been discovered upon the occasion in and out of 
our public councils, after an envoy extraordinary 
had been sent to terminate differences and obtain 
reparation; if nothing had resulted, was there any 
choice but reprisals? Should we not have rendered 
ourselves ridiculous and contemptible in the eyes of 
the whole world by forbearing them? 

It is curious to observe the inconsistency of cer 
tain men. They reprobate the treaty as incompati 
ble with our honor, and yet they affect to believe 
an abortion of the negotiations would not have led 
to war. If they are sincere, they must think that 
national honor consists in perpetually railing, com 
plaining, blustering, and submitting. For my part, 
much as I deprecate war, I entertain no doubt that 
it would have been our duty to meet it with decision, 
had negotiation failed; that a due regard to our 
honor, our rights, and our interests would have 
enjoined it upon us. Nor would a pusillanimous 

VOL. V. — 16. 

242 Alexander Hamilton 

passiveness have saved us from it. So unsettled a 
state of things would have led to fresh injuries and 
aggravations; and circumstances, too powerful to 
be resisted, would have dragged us into war. We 
should have lost our honor without preserving our 
peace. Nations in similar situations have no option 
but to accommodate differences, or to fight. Those 
which have strong motives to avoid war, should, by 
their moderation, facilitate the accommodation of 
differences. This is a rule of good sense, a maxim 
of sound policy. 

But the misfortune is, that men will oppose 
imagination to fact. Though we see Great Britain 
predominant on the ocean; though we observe her 
pertinaciously resisting the idea of pacification with 
France, amidst the greatest discouragements ; though 
we have employed a man whose sagacity and integ 
rity have been hitherto undisputed, and of a character 
far from flexible, to ascertain what was practicable ; 
though circumstances favored his exertions ; though 
much time and pains were bestowed upon the sub 
ject ; though there is not only his testimony, but the 
testimony of other men who were immediately on 
the scene, and in whom there is every reason to con 
fide, that all was attained which was attainable : yet 
we still permit ourselves to imagine, that more and 
better could have been done, and that by taking even 
now a high and menacing tone, Great Britain may 
be brought to our feet. 

Even a style of politeness in our envoy has been 
construed to his disadvantage. Because he did not 
mistake strut for dignity, and rudeness for spirit; 

Camillas 243 

because he did not, by petulance and asperity, enlist 
the pride of the British court against the success of 
his mission, he is represented as having humiliated 
himself and his nation. It is forgotten that mildness 
in the manner and firmness in the thing are most 
compatible with true dignity, and almost always go 
further than harshness and stateliness. 

Suppositions that more could be done by display 
ing what is called greater spirit, are not warranted 
by facts. It would be extremely imprudent, on 
that basis, to trust ourselves to a further experi 
ment — to the immense vicissitudes in the affairs of 
Europe, which from moment to moment may essen 
tially vary the relative situations of the contending 
parties. If there ever was a state of things which 
demanded extraordinary circumspection, and for 
bade a spirit of adventure, it is that of the United 
States at the existing juncture, viewed in connec 
tion with the present very singular and incalculable 
posture of Europe. 

But it is asked, to avoid Scylla, may we not run 
upon Charybdis? If the treaty should preserve our 
peace with Britain, may it not interrupt it with 
France? I answer, that to me there appears no 
room for apprehension. It will be shown in the 
course of the discussion, that the treaty interferes in 
no particular with our engagements to France, and 
will make no alteration whatever in the state of things 
between us and her, except as to the selling prizes in 
our ports, which, not being required by treaty, was 
originally permitted merely because there was no law 
to forbid it, and which being confined to France, was 

244 Alexander Hamilton 

of very questionable propriety on the principles of 
neutrality, and has been a source of dissatisfaction to 
the other belligerent powers. This being the case, no 
cause of umbrage is given to France by the treaty, 
and it is as contrary to her interest as to inclination, 
wantonly to seek a quarrel with us. Prostrate in 
deed were our situation, if we could not, without 
offending France, make a treaty with another 
power, which merely tended to extinguish contro 
versy, and to regulate the rules of commercial inter 
course, and this not only without violating any duty 
to France, but without giving any preference to 
another. It is astonishing that those who affect so 
much nicety about national honor, do not feel the 
extreme humiliation of such an idea. As to the 
denomination of alliance with Great Britain which 
has been given to the treaty, it is an insult to the 
understandings of the people to call it by such a 
name. There is not a tittle of it which warrants the 
appellation. 

CAMILLUS. 

NO. VI 

1795- 

There is one more objection to the treaty for what 
it does not do, which requires to be noticed. This is 
an omission to provide against the impressment of 
our seamen. 

It is certain that our trade has suffered embarrass 
ments in this respect, and that there have been 
abuses which have operated very oppressively upon 

Camillas 245 

our seamen; and all will join in the wish that they 
could have been guarded against in future by the 
treaty. 

But it is easier to desire this, than to see how it 
could have been done. A general stipulation against 
the impressment of our seamen would have been 
nugatory, if not derogatory. Our right to an ex 
emption is perfect by the laws of nations, and a con 
trary right is not even pretended by Great Britain. 
The difficulty has been, and is, to fix a rule of evi 
dence, by which to discriminate our seamen from 
theirs, and by the discrimination to give ours pro 
tection, without covering theirs in our service. It 
happens that the two nations speak the same lan 
guage, and in every exterior circumstance closely 
resemble each other; that many of the natives of 
Great Britain and Ireland are among our citizens, 
and that others, without being properly our citizens, 
are employed in our vessels. 

Every body knows that the safety of Great Britain 
depends upon her marine. This was never more 
emphatically the case, than in the war in which she 
is now engaged. Her very existence as an independ 
ent power, seems to rest on a maritime superiority. 

In this situation, can we be surprised that there 
are difficulties in bringing her to consent to any 
arrangement which would enable us, by receiving 
her seamen into our employment, to detain them 
from her service? Unfortunately, there can be de 
vised no method of protecting our seamen which 
does not involve that danger to her. Language and 
appearance, instead of being a guide, as between 

246 Alexander Hamilton 

other nations, are, between us and Great Britain, 
sources of mistake and deception. The most familiar 
experience in the ordinary affairs of society proves, 
that the oaths of parties interested cannot be fully 
relied upon. Certificates of citizenship, by officers 
of one party, would be too open to the possibility 
of collusion and imposition, to expect that the other 
would admit them to be conclusive. If inconclusive, 
there must be a discretion to the other party which 
would destroy their efficacy. 

In whatever light they may be viewed, there will 
be found an intrinsic difficulty in devising a rule of 
evidence safe for both parties, and consequently, in 
establishing one by treaty. No nation would readily 
admit a rule which would make it depend on the 
good faith of another, and the integrity of its agents, 
whether her seamen, in time of war, might be drawn 
from her service, and transferred to that of a neutral 
power. Such a rule between Great Britain and us 
would be peculiarly dangerous, on account of circum 
stances, and would facilitate a transfer of seamen 
from one party to another. Great Britain has ac 
cordingly perseveringly declined any definite arrange 
ment on the subject, notwithstanding earnest and 
reiterated efforts of our government. 

When we consider candidly the peculiar difficulties 
which various circumstances of similitude between 
the people of the two countries oppose to a satis 
factory arrangement, and that to the belligerent party 
it is a question of national safety, to the neutral 
party a question of commercial convenience and in 
dividual security, we shall be the less disposed to 

Camillas 247 

think the want of such a provision as our wishes 
would dictate a blemish in the treaty. 

The truth seems to be, that, from the nature of 
the thing, it is matter of necessity to leave it to oc 
casional and temporary expedients — to the effects of 
special interpositions from time to time, to procure 
the correction of abuses; and if the abuse becomes 
intolerable, to the ultima ratio; the good faith of 
the parties, and the motives which they have to re 
spect the rights of each other and to avoid causes of 
offence, and vigilance in noting and remonstrating 
against the irregularities which are committed, are 
probably the only peaceable sureties of which the 
case is susceptible. 

Our Minister Plenipotentiary, Mr. Pinckney, it is 
well known, has long had this matter in charge, and 
has strenuously exerted himself to have it placed 
upon some acceptable footing; but his endeavors 
have been unsuccessful, further than to mitigate the 
evil by some additional checks, and by drawing the 
attention of the British Government to the observ 
ance of more caution. A more sensible effect of 
our representations has been lately experienced; 
and with attention and vigilance that effect may 
be continued, and perhaps increased. But there is 
reason to fear that it would constantly be found im 
practicable to establish an efficacious conventional 
guard. 

I proceed now to the examination of the several 
articles in the treaty, in the order in which they 
stand. 

The first contains merely a general declaration 

248 Alexander Hamilton 

that there shall be peace and friendship between the 
contracting parties, the countries and people of each, 
without exceptions of persons or places. 

One would have imagined that this article, at least, 
would have escaped a formal objection, however it 
might have been secretly viewed as the most sinful 
of all, by those who pant after war and enmity be 
tween the two countries. Nothing but the fact could 
have led to a surmise that it was possible for it to 
have been deemed exceptionable; and nothing can 
better display the rage for objection which actuates 
the adversaries of the treaty, than their having in 
vented one against so innocent a provision. 

But the committee appointed by a meeting at 
Charleston (South Carolina) have sagaciously dis 
covered, that this article permits " the unconditional 
return to our country of all persons who were pro 
scribed during the late war." 

With all but men determined to be dissatisfied, it 
would be a sufficient answer to such an objection to 
say, that this article is a formula in almost every 
treaty on record, and that the consequence attributed 
to it was never before dreamt of, though other na 
tions besides ourselves have had their proscriptions 
and their banishments. 

But this is not all — our treaty of peace with Great 
Britain in 1783 has an equivalent stipulation in 
these words (article 6): "There shall be a firm and 
perpetual peace between his Britannic Majesty and 
the said States, and between the subjects of the one, 
and the citizens of the other. " In calling this an 
equivalent stipulation, I speak with reference to 

Camillas 249 

the objection which is made. The argument to sup 
port that objection would be to this effect: " Exiles 
and criminals are regarded as within the peace of a 
country; but the people of each are, by this article, 
placed within the peace of the other; therefore pro 
scribed persons are restored to the peace of the 
United States, and so lose the character of exiles and 
criminals." Hence the argument will turn upon the 
word " peace" — the word " friendship" will have 
no influence upon the question. In other respects 
there is no difference in substance between the two 
articles. For the terms " people, " " subjects, " " citi 
zens," as used in the two treaties, are synonymous. 
If, therefore, the last treaty stipulates that there 
shall be peace between the governments, countries, 
and people of the two nations, the first stipulates 
what is equivalent, that there shall be peace between 
the two governments, and the subjects and citizens 
of each. The additional words, " without exception 
of persons and places," can make no difference, being 
merely surplusage. If A says to B : "I will give you 
all the money in this purse," the gift is as complete 
as if he had said: " I give you all the money in this 
purse, without exception of a single dollar." 

But the object of the stipulation, and the subject 
of the objection, have no relation to each other. 
National stipulations are to be considered in the sense 
of the laws of nations. Peace, in the sense of those 
laws, defines a state which is opposite to WAR. Peace, 
in the. sense of the municipal laws, defines a state 
which is opposite to that of criminality. They are, 
consequently, different things; and a subject of 

250 Alexander Hamilton 

Great Britain, by committing a crime, may put him 
self out of the peace of our government, in the sense 
of our municipal laws, while there might be a perfect 
peace with him, in the sense of the laws of nations; 
and vice versa, there might be war with him, in the 
sense of the laws of nations, and peace in that of the 
municipal laws. 

The punishment of a subject of Great Britain as a 
felon would certainly not constitute a state of war 
between the parties, nor interfere with the peace 
which is stipulated by this article; though it is de 
clared that it shall be inviolable, and might as well 
be affirmed to prevent the punishment of future as 
of former criminals. 

But who, in the contemplation of the laws of the 
respective states, are the proscribed persons? They 
must have been understood to have been subjects or 
citizens of the states which proscribed them — con 
sequently cannot be presumed to be comprehended in 
an article which stipulates peace between the nations 
and their respective citizens. 

This is not a stipulation of peace between a nation 
and its own citizens ; nor can the idea of expatriation 
be admitted to go so far as to destroy the relation of 
citizen, as regards amenability for a crime. To this 
purpose, at least, the offender must remain a citizen. 

There can hardly have been a time when a treaty 
was formed between two nations, when one or the 
other had not exiled criminals or fugitives from jus 
tice, which it would have been unwilling to reinstate. 
Yet this was never deemed an obstacle to the article, 
nor has an immunity from punishment ever been 

Camillas 
claimed under it, nor is there the least ground to 
assert that it might be claimed under it. 

It follows that the objection which has been taken 
to this article is wholly without foundation. It is 
humiliating to the human understanding, or dis 
reputable to the human heart, that similar objections 
should come from sensible men; it is disgustful to 
have to refute them. The regard I feel for some of 
those who have brought it forward makes it a pain 
ful task. How great is the triumph of passion over 
the judgment on this occasion! 

CAMILLUS. 

NO. VII 

1795- 

The second article of the treaty stipulates that his 
Britannic Majesty will withdraw all his troops and 
garrisons from all posts and places within the bound 
ary lines assigned by the treaty of peace to the 
United States; and that this evacuation shall take 
place on or before the first day of June, 1796; the 
United States, in the meantime, at their discretion, 
extending their settlements to any part within the 
said boundary lines, except within the precincts or 
jurisdictions of any of the said posts ; that all settlers 
and traders within the precincts or jurisdictions of 
the said posts, shall continue to enjoy, unmolested, 
all their property of every kind, and shall be pro 
tected therein ; that they shall be at liberty to remain 
there, or to remove with all or any part of their effects ; 
also to sell their lands, houses, or effects, or to retain 

252 Alexander Hamilton 

the property thereof at their discretion ; that such of 
them as shall continue to reside within the said bound 
ary lines shall not be compelled to become citizens of 
the United States, but shall be at liberty to do so, if 
they think proper, making and declaring their election 
within a year after the evacuation; and that those 
who should continue after the expiration of a year, 
without having declared their intention of remain 
ing subjects of his Britannic Majesty, shall be con 
sidered as having elected to become citizens of the 
United States. 

This article, which accomplishes a primary object 
of our envoy's mission, and one of primary import 
ance to the United States, has been as much clamored 
against as if it had made a formal cession of the 
posts to Great Britain. On this point an uncommon 
degree of art has been exerted, and with no small 
success. The value of the principal thing obtained 
has been put out of sight by a misrepresentation of 
incidental circumstances. 

But the fact is, nevertheless, that an object has 
been accomplished, of vast consequence to our 
country. The most important desiderata in our 
concerns with foreign powers are, the possession of 
the Western posts, and a participation in the navi 
gation of the river Mississippi. More or fewer of com 
mercial privileges are of vastly inferior moment. The 
force of circumstances will do all we can reasonably 
wish in this respect; and, in a short time, without 
any steps that may convulse our trade or endanger 
our tranquillity, will carry us to our goal. 

The recovery of the Western posts will have many 

Camillus 253 

important consequences. It will extinguish a source 
of controversy with Great Britain, which at a period 
not distant, must have inevitably involved the two 
countries in a war, and the thing was becoming every 
day more and more urgent. It will enable us 
effectually to control the hostilities of the Northern 
and Western Indians, and in so doing will have a 
material influence on the Southern tribes. It will 
therefore tend to rescue the country from what is 
at present its greatest scourge, Indian wars. When 
we consider that these wars have, four years past, 
taken an extra million annually from our revenue, 
we cannot be insensible of the importance of ter 
minating that source of expense. This million, 
turned to the redemption of our debt, would con 
tribute to complete its extinguishment in about 
twenty years.1 The benefits of tranquillity to our 
frontier, exempting its inhabitants from the com 
plicated horrors of savage warfare, speak too loudly 
to our humanity, as well as to our policy, to need a 
commentary. 

The advantages of the recovery of the posts do 
not stop here; an extension of trade is to be added 
to the catalogue. This, however, need only be men 
tioned at this time, as it will come again into view in 
considering the third article. 

But two consequences, not commonly adverted to, 
require particular notice in this place. 

There is just ground of suspicion, corroborated by 
various concurring circumstances, that Great Britain 
has entertained the project of contracting our 

1 This is a rough calculation, but it cannot materially err. 

254 Alexander Hamilton 

boundaries to the Ohio. This has appeared in Canada 
— at the British garrisons — at the Indian towns— 
at Philadelphia — and at London. The surrender of 
the posts forever cuts up by the roots this pernicious 
project. The whole of our Western interests are 
immediately and deeply concerned in the question. 

The harmonious and permanent connection of our 
Western with our Atlantic country, materially de 
pends on our possession of the Western posts. Al 
ready has great discontent been engendered in that 
country by their detention. That discontent was 
increasing and rankling daily. It was actually one 
of the aliments of the insurrection in the western 
parts of Pennsylvania. While the posts remained 
in the hands of Great Britain, dangerous tamperings 
with the inhabitants of that country were to be ap 
prehended — a community of views between Great 
Britain and Spain might have taken place, and by 
force and sedition events formidable to our general 
union might have been hazarded. The disposition 
or prevention of that community of views is a point 
of the greatest moment in our system of national 
policy. It presses us to terminate differences and 
extinguish misunderstandings with Great Britain; 
it urges us to improve the favorable moment, and 
stamps with the charge of madness the efforts to let 
go the hold which the treaty, if mutually ratified, 
would give us. 

Whoever will cast his eye upon .the map of the 
United States, will survey the position of the West 
ern posts, their relations to our Western waters, and 
their general bearings upon our Western country, 

Camillas 
and is at the same time capable of making the re 
flections which an accurate view of the subject 
suggests, will discover multiplied confirmations of 
the position, that the possession of those posts by us 
has an intimate connection with the preservation of 
union between our Western and Atlantic territories; 
and whoever can appreciate the immense mischiefs 
of a disunion will feel the prodigious value of the 
acquisition. To such a man the question may be 
confidently put: Is there any thing in the treaty 
conceded by us to Great Britain, to be placed in 
competition with this single acquisition? The an 
swer could not fail to be in the negative. 

But it is said by way of objection, that, admitting 
the posts will be surrendered at the time stipulated, 
it is no acquisition by this treaty; it is only the 
enjoyment of a right which was secured by the 
treaty of peace. 

With as much good sense might it be said, that 
the stipulation of reparation for the spoliation of our 
property, or even immediate actual reparation, if it 
had been obtained, was nothing gained, because the 
laws of nations gave us a right to such reparation; 
and it might in this way be proved to have been 
impossible for our envoy to have effected any thing 
useful or meritorious. 

Let us see what is the real state of the case. 
Great Britain had engaged, by the treaty of peace, to 
surrender the Western posts with all convenient speed, 
but without fixing a precise time. For the cause or 
on the pretext of our not having complied with 
the treaty on our part, especially in not removing 

256 Alexander Hamilton 

the impediments which the antecedent laws of par 
ticular States opposed to the recovery of British 
debts, she delayed, and afterward refused, to make 
the surrender; and when our envoy left this country, 
there was too much appearance of an intention on 
her part to detain them indefinitely, and this after 
having actually kept them ten years. The treaty 
of peace was consequently in this particular sus 
pended, if not superseded. It was either to be re 
instated by a new agreement, or enforced by arms. 
The first our envoy has effected; he has brought 
Great Britain to abandon the dispute, and to fix a 
precise, determinate time when, at furthest, the 
posts are to be delivered up. It is therefore to this 
new agreement that we shall owe the enjoyment of 
them, and it is, of course, entitled to the merit of 
having obtained them; it is a positive ingredient in 
its value, which cannot be taken from it ; and it may 
be added, that this is the first time that the merit 
of procuring, by negotiation, restitution of a right 
withheld was ever denied to the instrument which 
procured it. 

But the picture given of the situation of Great 
Britain, to warrant the inferences which are drawn, 
is exaggerated and false. It cannot be denied that 
she is triumphant on the ocean; that the acquisi 
tions which she has made upon France are hitherto 
greater than those which France has made upon 
her. If, on the one hand, she owes an immense 
debt, on the other she possesses an immense credit, 
which there is no symptom of being impaired. Brit 
ish credit has become, in a British mind, an article of 

Camillus 257 

faith, and is no longer an article of reason. How 
long it may last, how far it may go, is incalculable. 
But it is evident that it still affords prodigious re 
sources, and that it is likely, for some time to come, 
to continue to afford them. In addition to this, it 
is a well-ascertained fact, that her government pos 
sesses internally as much vigor, and has as much 
national support, as it perhaps ever had at any 
former period of her history. Alarmed by the un 
fortunate excesses in France, most men of property 
cling to the government, and carry with them the 
great bulk of the nation, almost the whole of the 
farming interest, and much the greatest proportion 
of other industrious classes. Her manufactures, 
though probably wounded by the war, are still in 
a comparatively flourishing condition. They suffice 
not only for her own supply, but for the full extent 
of foreign demand, and the markets for them have 
not been materially contracted by the war. Her 
foreign commerce continues to be immense; as a 
specimen of it, it may be mentioned, that the ships 
from India this year announced to have been seen 
upon or near the British coast amounted to thirty- 
five in number, computed to be worth between four 
and five millions sterling. It is no light circumstance 
in the estimate of her resources, that a vast pre- 
ponderancy in that quarter of the globe continues to 
nourish her wealth and power. 

If from a view of Great Britain, singly, we pass to 
a view of her in her foreign connections, we shall 
find no cause to consider her a prostrate nation. 
Among her allies are the two greatest powers of 

VOL. V.— 17. 

258 Alexander Hamilton 

Europe (France excepted) — namely, Russia and 
Austria, or the emperor; Spain and Sardinia con 
tinue to make a common cause with her. There is 
no power of Europe which has displayed a more 
uniform character of perseverance than Austria; 
for which she has very strong motives on the present 
occasion. Russia, too, is remarkable for her steadi 
ness to her purpose, whatever it may be. It is true, 
that heretofore she has not discovered much zeal in 
the coalition, but there are symptoms of her be 
coming more closely and cordially engaged. If she 
does, she is a great weight in the scale. 

Against this will be set the astonishing victories, 
heroic exploits, and vast armies of France, her rapid 
conquests to the Rhine, the total reduction of Hol 
land, the progress of her arms in Spain and Italy, the 
detaching of the King of Prussia from the coali 
tion, and the prospect of detaching some others of 
the German princes; and it will be added, that the 
continental enemies of France appear exhausted, 
despairing, and unable to continue the war. 

This, if offered only to show that there is no prob 
ability that the enemies of France can succeed in 
the original object of the war against her, or can 
divest her of her acquisitions on the continent, has 
all the force that may be desired to be given to it; 
but when it is used to prove that the situation of 
Great Britain is so desperate and humbled as to 
oblige her to receive from France, or the United 
States, any conditions which either of them may 
think fit to impose, the argument is carried infinitely 
too far. It is one thing for a country to be in a pos- 

Camillas 259 

ture not to receive the law from others, and a very 
different thing for her to be in a situation which 
obliges others to receive the law from her, and, what 
is still stronger, from all her friends. France evi 
dently cannot annoy Russia; she cannot, without 
great difficulty, from their geographical position, 
make any further acquisitions upon the territories of 
Austria. Britain and her possessions are essentially 
safe while she maintains a decided maritime superi 
ority. As long as this is the case, even supposing 
her abandoned by all her allies, she never can be in 
the situation which is pretended by the opposers 
of the treaty. 

But in describing the situation of France, only one 
side of the medal is presented. There is another 
side far less flattering, and which, in order to come 
to a just conclusion, must be impartially viewed. 

If the allies of Great Britain are fatigued and ex 
hausted, France cannot be in a better condition. 
The efforts of the latter, in proportion to intrinsic 
resources, have, no doubt, been much greater than 
those of the former. It is a consequence from this, 
physically certain, that France must be still more 
fatigued and exhausted even than her adversaries. 
Her acquisitions cannot materially vary this con 
clusion : the Low Countries, long the theatre of the 
war, must have been pretty well emptied before they 
fell into her hands. Holland is an artificial power; 
her life and strength were in her credit ; this perished 
with her reduction. Accordingly the succors ex 
tracted from her, compared with the scale of the 
war, have been insignificant. 

260 Alexander Hamilton 

But it is conjectured, that as much has not been 
done as might have been done; that restitution of 
the posts has not been procured, but only a promise 
to restore them at a remote period, in exchange for 
a former promise which had been violated; that 
there is no good ground of reliance upon the fulfil 
ment of this new promise, for the performance of 
which there ought to have been some surety or 
guaranty; that the restitution of the posts ought 
to have been accompanied with indemnification for 
the detention, and for the expenses of the Indian 
wars which have been occasioned by that detention 
and by the instigation of British intrigue; that it 
was better to go to war than to relinquish our 
claim to such indemnification, or if our present cir 
cumstances did not recommend this, it was better 
to wait till it was more convenient to us to enforce 
our claims than to give them up. These are the 
declamations by which this part of the treaty is 
arraigned. Let us see if they are the random 
effusions of enthusiasm, or the rational dictates of 
sound policy. 

As to the suggestion that more might have been 
done than was done, it must of necessity be mere 
conjecture and imagination. If the picture given 
of the situation of Great Britain was better justified 
by facts than it is, it would not follow that the sug 
gestion is true; for the thing would depend not on 
the real situation of the country, but on the opinion 
entertained of it by its own administration, — on the 
personal character of the prince and of his council, 
— on the degree in which they were influenced by 

Camillus 261 

pride and passion, or by reason. The hypothesis, 
that the dispositions of a government are conforma 
ble with its situation, is as fallacious a one as can 
be entertained. It is to suppose, contrary to every 
day's experience, that Cabinets are always wise. It 
is, on the part of those who draw the inference, to 
suppose, that a Cabinet, the most violent, rash, and 
foolish of Europe, is at the same time moderate and 
prudent enough to act according to the true situa 
tion of the country. Who of our enthusiasts, rea 
soning from his view of the abased condition of Great 
Britain, has not long since imagined that she ought 
to be on her knees to France suing for mercy and 
forgiveness? Yet how different hitherto is the fact! 
If we carefully peruse the speeches of the leading 
members of the convention, we shall observe the 
menaces against Britain frequently interspersed 
with invitations to peace; while the British Gov 
ernment maintains a proud and distant reserve, re 
pels every idea of peace, and inflexibly pursues the 
path of war. If the situation of Europe in general, 
and of Great Britain in particular, as is pretended, 
authorized us to expect whatever we chose, how 
happens it that France, with all her victories, has 
not yet been able to extort peace? 

As to the true position of France, we are not left 
to mere inference. All the official reports, all the 
private accounts from thence acknowledge a state 
of extreme embarrassment and distress — an alarm 
ing derangement of the finances, and a scarcity not 
distant from famine. To this are to be added a 
continuance of violent and destructive conflicts 

262 Alexander Hamilton 

of parties, and the unextinguishable embers of 
insurrection. 

This fair comparison of the relative situation of 
the contending parties will, I know, be stigmatized 
as blazoning the strength and resources of Great 
Britain, and depreciating the advantages of France. 
But the cant phrases of party cannot alter the nature 
of truth; nor will they prevent the people of the 
United States from listening impartially to it, or 
from discerning that it is a mark of fidelity to their 
interests to counteract misrepresentation by placing 
facts fairly before them, and a duty which they owe 
to themselves, and which they cannot omit to per 
form without betraying their own interests, to re 
ceive them candidly, and weigh them maturely. 

The conclusion is, that all those highly charged 
declamations which describe Great Britain to us as 
vanquished and humbled, as ready to pass under 
the yoke at command, and to submit to any condi 
tions which we may think fit to prescribe, are either 
the chimeras of over-heated imaginations, or the 
fabrications of impostors; and if listened to, can 
have no other effect than to inspire a delusive pre 
sumption and a dangerous temerity. 

But to judge the better of the extravagance of 
these declamations, it will be useful to go back to 
the periods when the negotiation began and ended. 
Our envoy arrived in England, and entered upon the 
business of his mission, at the moment when there 
was a general elation on account of the naval victory 
gained by Lord Howe, and previous to those im 
portant successes which have terminated in the con- 

Camillus 263 

quest of Holland ; and the treaty was concluded by 
the iQth of November last, prior to the last-men 
tioned event, and the defection of the King of 
Prussia. The posture of things at the time it was in 
negotiation, and not at this time, is the standard by 
which to try its merits; and it may be observed, 
that it is probable the negotiation received its first 
impression, and even its general outline, anterior to 
the principal part of the disasters sustained by the 
coalesced powers in the course of the last campaign. 

It may not be improper to add, that if we credit 
the representations of our envoy, Great Britain 
manifested similar dispositions with regard to the 
treaty at the commencement as at the close of the 
negotiation ; whence it will follow that too much has 
been attributed in this country to the victories of 
France. 

The subject of the second article will be resumed 
and concluded in the next number. 

CAMILLUS. 

NO. VIII 

1795- 

One of the particulars in which our envoy is al 
leged to have fallen short of what might or ought 
to have been done, respects the time for the sur 
render of the Western posts. It is alleged, that 
there ought either to have been an immediate sur 
render, or some guaranty or surety for the per 
formance of the new promise. Both parts of the 
alternative presuppose that Great Britain was to 
have no will upon the subject ; that no circumstances 

264 Alexander Hamilton 

of security or convenience to her were to be con 
sulted; that our envoy was not to negotiate, but to 
command. How unsubstantial the foundation on 
which this course of proceeding is recommended, 
has been already developed. 

The fact was, that our envoy pressed an early 
evacuation of the posts ; but there was an inflexible 
adherence on the other side to the term limited in 
the treaty. The reasons understood to have been 
assigned for it were to this effect, viz. : That accord 
ing to the course of the Indian trade, it was custom 
ary to spread through the nations goods to a large 
amount, the returns for which could not be drawn 
into Canada in a shorter period than was proposed 
to be fixed for the evacuation; that the impression 
which the surrender of all the posts to American 
garrisons might make on the minds of the Indians 
could not be foreseen; that there was the greatest 
reason for caution, as, on a former occasion, it had 
been intimated to them by public agents of the 
United States, that they had been forsaken and 
given up by the British Government; that the pro 
tection promised on our part, however sincere, and 
however competent in other respects, might not be 
sufficient in the first instance to prevent the em 
barrassment which might ensue; that for these 
reasons the traders ought to have time to conclude 
their adventures, which were predicated upon the 
existing state of things; that they would in future 
calculate upon the new state of things ; but that, in 
the meantime, the care of government ought not to 
be withdrawn from them. 

Camillus 265 

There is ground to believe, that there were repre 
sentations on behalf of the Canada traders, alleging 
a longer term than that which was adopted in the 
treaty, to be necessary to wind up and adapt their 
arrangements to the new state of things; and that 
the term suggested by them was abridged several 
months. And it may not be useless to observe, as 
explanatory to the reasons given, that in fact it is 
the course of the trade to give long credits to the 
Indians, and that the returns for goods furnished in 
one year, only come in the next year. 

What was to be done in this case ? Was the nego 
tiation to break off, or was the delay to be admitted? 
The last was preferred by our envoy; and the prefer 
ence was rightly judged. 

The consequence of breaking off the negotiation 
has been stated. No reasonable man will doubt 
that delay was preferable to war, if there be good 
ground of reliance that the stipulation will be ful 
filled at the appointed time. Let us calmly examine 
this point. 

The argument against it is drawn from the breach 
of the former promise. To be authorized to press 
this argument, we ought to be sure that all was right 
on our part. After what has been offered on this 
subject, are we still convinced that this was the case? 
Are we able to say that there was nothing in our con 
duct which furnished a ground for that of Great 
Britain? Has it not been shown to be a fact, 
that,, from the arrival of the provisional articles in 
this country, till after the ratification thereof, by 
the definitive treaty, acts of States interdicting the 

266 Alexander Hamilton 

recovery of British debts, and other acts militating 
against the treaty, continued in operation? Can we 
doubt, that subjects of Great Britain, affected by 
these acts, carried complaints to the ears of their 
government? Can we wonder, if they made serious 
impressions there, if they produced dissatisfaction 
and distrust? Is it very extraordinary, if they ex 
cited the idea of detaining the posts as a pledge till 
there were better indications on our part? Is it 
surprising, if the continuance of these acts, and the 
addition of others, which were new and positive 
breaches of the treaty, prolonged the detention of 
the posts? 

In fine, was the delay in surrendering so entirely 
destitute of cause, so unequivocal a proof of a per 
fidious character, as to justify the conclusion, that 
no future dependence can be made on the promises 
of the British Government? Discerning men will 
not hastily subscribe to this conclusion. 

Mutual charges of breach of faith are not uncom 
mon between nations; yet this does not prevent 
their making new stipulations with each other, and 
relying upon their performance. The argument from 
the breach of one promise, if real, to the breach of 
every other, is not supported by experience; and 
if adopted as a general rule, would multiply, in 
finitely, the impediments to accord and agreement 
among nations. 

The truth is, that though nations will too often 
evade their promises on colorable pretexts, yet few 
are so profligate as to do it without such pretexts. 
In clear cases, self-interest dictates a regard to the 

Camillus 267 

obligations of good faith; nor is there any thing 
in the history of Great Britain which warrants the 
opinion, that she is more unmindful than other na 
tions of her character for good faith. 

Yet she must be so, and in an extreme degree, if 
she be capable of breaking, without real cause, a 
second promise on the same point, after the termina 
tion, by a new treaty, of an old dispute concerning it, 
and this too on the basis of mutual reparation. It 
would indicate a destitution of principle, a contempt 
of character, much beyond the usual measure, and 
to an extent which it may be affirmed is entirely 
improbable. 

It is a circumstance of some moment in the ques 
tion, that the second promise is free from the vague 
ness of the first, as to the time of execution. It 
is not to be performed with all convenient speed, 
but by a day certain, which cannot be exceeded. 
This would give point to violation, and render it 
unequivocal. 

Another argument against the probability of per 
formance has been deduced from the supposed 
deficiency of good reasons for the delay, which is 
represented as evidence of want of sincerity in the 
promise. 

Besides the reasons which were assigned for that 
delay, there are others that may be conjectured to 
have operated, which it would not have been equally 
convenient to avow, but which serve to explain the 
delay, different from the supposition of its having 
been calculated for ultimate evasion. If, as we have 
with too much cause suspected, Great Britain, or 

268 Alexander Hamilton 

her representatives in Canada, whether with or with 
out orders, had really countenanced the hostilities 
of the Western Indians, it was to be expected that 
she should think it incumbent upon her to give 
them sufficient time to make peace, before an evacua 
tion of the posts should put them entirely in our 
power. She might, otherwise, have provoked them 
to hostilities against her own settlements, and have 
kindled in their minds inextinguishable resentments. 
It was not certain how soon a peace should be 
brought about ; and it might be supposed, that the 
disposition to it on our part might be weakened or 
strengthened by the proximity or remoteness of the 
period of the surrender. Moreover, some consider 
able time might be requisite to prepare those estab 
lishments for the security of Canada which the 
relinquishment of the posts on our side would be 
deemed to render necessary. 

The latter motive is one not justly objectionable; 
the former implies an embarrassment, resulting 
from a culpable policy, which was entitled to no in 
dulgence from us, but which, nevertheless, must have 
had a pretty imperious influence on the conduct of 
the other party, and must have created an obstacle 
to a speedy surrender not easy to be surmounted. 
Taken together, we find in the reasons assigned, and 
in those which may be presumed to have operated, a 
solution of the pertinacity of Great Britain on the 
subject of time, without impeaching, on that ac 
count, the sincerity of the promise to surrender. 

But we have very strong holds, for the perform 
ance of this promise, upon the interest of Great 

Camillas 269 

Britain: ist. The interest which every nation has in 
not entirely forfeiting its reputation for honor and 
fidelity. 2d. The interest which results from the 
correlative stipulation with regard to the indemni 
fication for the British debts, a point upon which 
there will be no inconsiderable mercantile sensi 
bility. 3d. The interest of preserving peace with 
this country, the interruption of which, after all 
that has passed, could not fail to attend the non- 
surrender of the posts at the stipulated time. 

It is morally certain that circumstances will every 
day add strength to this last motive. Time has 
already done much for us, and will do more. Every 
hour's continuance of the war in Europe must 
necessarily add to the inconveniences of a rupture 
with this country, and to the motives which Great 
Britain must feel, to avoid an increase of the number 
of her enemies, to desire peace, and, if obtained, to 
preserve it. 

The enemies of the treaty, upon their own calcula 
tions, can hardly dispute that if the war continues 
another year after the present, the probable situa 
tion of Great Britain will be a complete security for 
her compliance with her promise to surrender the 
posts. But let us suppose that a general peace 
takes place in Europe this winter, what may then 
be the disposition of Great Britain in June next, as 
to war or peace with this country? 

I answer that the situation will be, of all others, 
that which is most likely to indispose her to a war 
with us. There is no juncture at which war is more 
unwelcome to a nation than immediately after the 

270 Alexander Hamilton 

experience of another war, which has required great 
exertions, and has been expensive, bloody, and ca 
lamitous. The minds of all men then dread the 
renewal of so great an evil, and are disposed rather 
to make sacrifices to peace than to plunge afresh into 
hostilities. The situation of Great Britain, at the 
end of the war in which she is now engaged, is likely 
to be the most discouraging that can be imagined to 
the provocation of new wars. Here we may dis 
cover a powerful security for the performance of her 
stipulations. 

As to the idea of a guaranty or surety for the 
fulfilment of the promise, it cannot be seriously be 
lieved that it was obtainable. It would have been 
an admission of the party that there was a well- 
founded distrust of its faith. To consent to it, 
therefore, would have been to subscribe to its own 
humiliation and disgrace, the expectation of which 
has been shown to be ridiculous. 

But why was there not equally good reason that 
we should have given a guaranty or surety for the 
performance of our new promise, with regard to the 
debts? And if there was to have been reciprocity, 
where should we have conveniently found that guar 
anty or surety? Should we have thought it very 
reputable to ourselves to have been obliged to fur 
nish it? 

The arguments of the opposers of the treaty are 
extremely at variance with each other. On the one 
hand, they represent it as fraught with advantages 
to Great Britain, without equivalents to the United 
States — as a premeditated scheme to sacrifice our 

Camillas 271 

trade and navigation to hers — as a plan dictated by 
her for drawing the two countries into close connec 
tion and alliance, and for making our interests sub 
servient to hers; on the other hand, they tell us 
that there is no security for the surrender of the 
posts according to stipulation. How is the one 
thing to be reconciled with the other? If the treaty 
is such an immense boon to Great Britain, if it be 
such a masterpiece of political craft on her side, can 
there be any danger that she will destroy her favorite 
work by not performing the conditions on which its 
efficacy and duration must depend? There is no 
position better settled than that the breach of any 
article of a treaty by one party, gives the other an 
option to consider the whole treaty as annulled. 
Would Great Britain give us this option, in a case 
in which she had so much to lose by doing it ? 

This glaring collision of arguments proves how 
superficially the adversaries of the treaty have con 
sidered the subject, and how little reliance can be 
placed on the views they give of it. 

In estimating the plan which the treaty adopts 
for the settlement of the old controversy, it is an 
important reflection that, from the course of things, 
there will be nothing to be performed by us be 
fore the period for the restitution of the posts will 
have elapsed; and that, if this restitution should 
be evaded, we shall be free to put an end to the 
whole treaty, about which there could not be a mo 
ment's hesitation. We should then be where we 
were before the treaty, with the advantage of 
having strengthened the justice of our cause, by 

272 Alexander Hamilton 

removing every occasion of reproach which the in 
fractions of the treaty of peace may have furnished 
against us. 

Two other particulars, in which this part of the 
treaty is supposed to be defective, regard the want 
of indemnification for the detention of the posts, 
and for the expenses of Indian wars. 

Those who make the objection may be safely 
challenged to produce precedents of similar indem 
nifications, unless imposed by conquering powers 
on the vanquished, or by powers of overbearing 
strength upon those which were too weak to dispute 
the logic of superior force. If this were the real 
situation of the United States and Great Britain, 
then is the treaty inexcusably faulty; but if the 
parties were to treat and agree as equal powers, then 
is the pretension extravagant and impracticable. 
The restitution of the specific thing detained is all 
that was to be expected, and, it may be added, it 
is all that was ever really expected on the part of 
this country, so far as we may reason either from 
official acts or informal expressions in the public 
opinion. 

In cases where clear injuries are done, affecting 
objects of known or easily ascertained values, pecuni 
ary compensation may be expected to be obtained 
by negotiation; but it is believed that it will be 
impossible to cite an example of compensation so 
obtained, in a case in which territory has been with 
held on a dispute of title, or as a hostage for some 
other claim (as, in the present instance, for securing 
the performance of the 4th article of the treaty of 

Camillus 273 

peace). The recovery of the territory withheld is 
the usual satisfaction. 

The want of a rule to adjust consequential dam 
ages is, in such cases, a very great difficulty. In the 
instance under discussion, this difficulty would be 
peculiarly great. The posts are, for the most part, 
in a wilderness. There are but two of them which 
have any adjacent settlements: Point-au-Fer, or 
Dutchman's Point, to which a part of a tract of 
land, called Caldwell's Manor, with a few inhabit 
ants, has been claimed as appurtenant ; and Detroit, 
which has a settlement in the town and neighbor 
hood of between two and three thousand souls. In 
the vicinity of the other posts, on our side there is 
scarcely an inhabitant. It follows that very little 
damage could be predicated either upon the loss of 
revenue from, or of the profits of trade with, the 
settlements in the vicinity of the posts. The trade 
of the Indians within our limits would consequently 
be the basis of the claim of compensation. But 
here the ignorance or spirit of exaggeration of the 
opponents of the treaty has been particularly 
exemplified. The annual loss from this source 
has been stated by a very zealous writer against 
the treaty, who signs himself Cato, at 800,000 
dollars. 

Now it is a fact well ascertained, that the mean 
value of the whole exports from Canada in peltries 
(which constitute the returns of Indian trade) in 
the years 1786 and 1787, was something short of 
800,000 dollars. It is also a fact, in which all men 
informed on the subject agree, that the trade with 

VOL. V.— 18. 
Alexander Hamilton 

the Indians within our limits * is not more than 
about one eighth of that which furnishes the peltry 
exported from Canada. Hence the total product of 
our Indian trade could not be computed at more 
than 100,000 dollars. What proportion of this may 
be profit is not easy to be determined; but it is cer 
tain that the profits of that trade, from the decrease 
of wild animals, and the inferiority of their kinds, 
are not considerable. Many assert that it is scarcely 
any longer worth following. Twenty per cent. , there 
fore, would probably be a large allowance, which 
would bring the loss on our Indian trade, by the 
detention of the posts, to about 20,000, instead of 
800,000, dollars per annum, as has been asserted. 

But might not a claim, even of this sum, by way 
of indemnification, be encountered with some force, 

1 An account of peltries exported from Canada in 1786 and 1787: 

Beaver skins . 

Martin 

do. 

. 

Otter 



Mink 


, 

Fisher 


t 

Fox 


•. 

Bear 


. f 

Deer 

do. 


Racoon 


. 

Cat 

do., 

cased . 

Do. 

Elk 


open . 

Wolf 



Carcajoux 
Tiger 
Seal 

do. 

• 

Muskrat 


. 

Deer 

do., 

dressed 

Castors 

, 


i786 
116,509 

i39,509 

. 58,132 

68,132 

26,330 


9,95 i 

17,951 

5,813 

5,8i3 

6,213 

8,9i3 

22,108 

17,108 

. 126,000 

102,656 

. ' 108,346 

140,346 

3,026 

4,526 

2,925 

1,825 

7,515 

9,8i5 

12,287 

9,687 
653 
27 
125 

202,456 

240,456 

Ibs. 5,488 

i,778 

. " 1,454 

i,434 

Camillus 275 

by the observation, that there is the highest proba 
bility that the capital and labor which would have 
been employed to produce 20,000 dollars profit on 
the trade with the Indians, have been quite as pro 
ductively employed in other channels, and conse 
quently, that there may have been no loss at all? 

Thus we see how erroneous are the data which 
serve to magnify claims, in themselves insignificant, 
and which, from the great uncertainty of their 
quantum, are exposed to serious objections. Are 
claims like these, proper subjects on which to stake 
the peace of the United States? 

The reasonableness of indemnification for the ex 
penses of Indian wars, independent of the unusual 
nature of the claim, might have been matter of end 
less debate. We might have been told, that the 
Indians ascribe those wars to pretensions upon their 
lands, by virtue of treaties with the former Govern 
ment of the United States, imposed by violence, or 
contracted with partial and inadequate representa 
tions of their nation; that our own public records 
witness, that the proceedings of our agents, at some 
of those treaties, were far from unexceptionable; 
that the wars complained of are to be attributed to 
errors in our former policy, or mismanagement of 
our public agents, not to the detention of the posts ; 
that it must be problematical how much of the dura 
tion or expenses of those wars are chargeable upon 
that detention; and, that the posts having been 
detained by way of security for the performance of 
the article respecting debts, there was no respon 
sibility for collateral and casual damages. Had we 

276 Alexander Hamilton 

resorted to the charge of their having instigated or 
prompted those wars, they would have denied the 
charge, as they have repeatedly done before; and, 
though we might have been able to adduce circum 
stances of suspicion against them, they would have 
contested their validity and force; and, whether 
guilty or not, would have thought their honor con 
cerned in avoiding the most distant concession of 
having participated in so improper a business. 

In every view, therefore, the claim for indemni 
fication was a hopeless one; and to have insisted 
upon it would have answered no other purpose than 
to render an amicable adjustment impossible. No 
British Minister would have dared to go to a British 
Parliament to ask provision for such an expenditure. 
What, then, was to be done? Were we now or here 
after to go to war to enforce the claim? Suppose 
this done, and fifty or a hundred millions of dollars 
expended in the contest, what certainty is there 
that we should at last accomplish the object? 

Moreover, the principle of such a war would re 
quire that we should seek indemnification for the 
expenses of the war itself, in addition to our former 
claim. What prospect is there, that this also would 
be effected? yet if not effected, it is evident that we 
should have made a most wretched bargain. 

Why did we not insist on indemnification for the 
expenses of our Revolution war? Surely, not be 
cause it was less reasonable, but because it was 
evident that it could not have been obtained, and 
because peace was necessary to us as well as to our 
enemy. 

Camillas 277 

This likewise would be the end of a war undertaken 
to enforce the claim of indemnification for the de 
tention of the posts. We should at length be glad 
to make peace, either without the indemnification 
sought, or at best at an expense to carry on the war, 
without a chance of reimbursement, with which the 
thing gained would bear no comparison. 

The idea which has been thrown out, of leaving 
the posts in the hands of the British, till we might 
be better able than at present to go to war for in 
demnification, is a notable political expedient. This 
would be to postpone, of choice, the possession of an 
object which has been shown to be demanded by 
very urgent and important general considerations; 
to submit to certain and great inconveniences from 
that privation, including probably the continuance 
or renewal of Indian hostilities ; and to run the risk, 
from the growth of the British settlements in the 
neighborhood of the posts, and various unforeseen 
casualties, of their ultimate acquisition becoming 
difficult and precarious. For what ? why, to take at 
last the chances of war, the issue of which is ever 
doubtful, to obtain an object which, if obtained, will 
certainly cost more than it is worth. The expenses 
of war apart, pecuniary indemnification upon any 
possible scale will ill compensate for the evils of the 
future detention, till the more convenient time for 
going to war should arrive. What should we think 
of this policy, if it should turn out that the posts 
and the indemnification too were to be finally 
abandoned ? 

CAMILLUS. 

278 Alexander Hamilton 

NO. IX 

1795. 

It was my intention to have comprised in two 
numbers the examination of the second article ; but, 
on experiment, it was found expedient to add a 
third. I resume, for a moment, the subject of in 
demnification for the detention of the posts. 

As an inducement to persist in this claim, we are 
assured that the magnanimity of France would have 
procured for us its establishment. In the first 
place, this supposes that we were to have become a 
party in the war; for, otherwise, it would be silly to 
imagine that France would, on our account, embar 
rass herself with a difficulty of this sort. In this 
case, and supposing the object accomplished, still 
the injuries, losses, and expenses of war would have 
greatly overbalanced the advantage gained. But 
what certainty have we that France will be able to 
dictate terms even for herself? Could we expect 
or rely, after the terrible and wasting war in which 
she has been engaged, that she would be willing to 
encumber the making of peace with additional ob 
stacles, to secure so trifling a point with us? Would 
it be even humane or friendly in us to ask her to 
risk the prolonging of her calamities for so trivial an 
object? A conduct like this, with reference either to 
France or to ourselves, would resemble that of the 
gamester who should play millions against farthings. 
It is so preposterous in every sense, that the recom 
mendation of it, if sincere, admits of but one con 
struction — namely, that those who recommend it 
wish our envoy to have acted not as if he had been 

Camillas 2 79 

sent to make peace, but as if he had been sent to make 
war, to blow and spread the desolating flames of dis 
cord and contention. 

There is a marked disingenuousness running 
through the observations which are made to the 
prejudice of the treaty; they endeavor constantly 
to have it understood that our envoy abandoned, 
without effort, the claims which have not been es 
tablished. Whence is this inferred? Is it from the 
silence of the treaty? Surely we can only expect to 
find there what was agreed upon, not what was dis 
cussed and rejected. The trrth is, that as well on this 
point of indemnification for the detention of the 
posts, as on that of compensation for the negroes 
carried away, our envoy urged our pretensions as 
far and as long as he could do it, without making 
them final obstacles to the progress of the negotiation. 

I shall now enumerate and answer the remaining 
objections which have appeared against this article. 
They are these: i. That the posts to be surrendered, 
instead of being described in general terms, should, 
for greater certainty, have been specially enumer 
ated; that now the uncertainty of a part of the 
boundary line may furnish a pretext for detaining 
some of them. 2. That the expressions " precincts 
and jurisdictions," which are excepted from our 
right of settlement, previous to the surrender, are so 
vague and indeterminate, as to be capable of being 
made to countenance encroachments. 3. That it was 
improper to have stipulated, for the inhabitants, the 
option of residing and continuing British subjects, 
or of becoming American citizens : that the first was 

280 Alexander Hamilton 

to establish, by treaty, a British colony within our 
limits ; the last, to admit, without the power of ex 
ception, bitter enemies of the country to the privileges 
of citizens. 4. That the securing to those inhabitants 
the enjoyment of their property is exceptionable, as 
being a " cession without equivalent of an indefinite 
extent of territory." This is the character given to it 
by the meeting at Philadelphia. 

The answer to the first objection is, that the 
enumeration proposed might have included the very 
danger which is objected to the provision as it 
stands, and which is completely avoided by it. The 
principal posts occupied by the British are known, 
and might easily have been enumerated ; but there is 
a possibility of there being others not known, which 
might have escaped. Last year there started up a 
post, which had not been before heard of, on the 
pretence of an old trading establishment. Who 
knows with absolute certainty how many similar 
cases may exist in the vast extent of wilderness, as 
far as the Lake of the Woods, which, for several years 
past, has been inaccessible to us? If our envoy's 
information could have been perfect at the time of 
his last advices from America, between that period 
and the signing of the treaty changes might have 
taken place — that is, trading houses might have 
grown into military posts, as they did in the case 
referred to; a case which, in fact, happened after 
the departure of our envoy from the United States. 
Was it not far better than to hazard an imperfect 
specification, to use terms so general and compre 
hensive, as could not fail, in any circumstances, to 

Camillas 281 

embrace every case? Certainly it was; and the 
terms " all ports and places,'1 which are those used in 
the treaty, are thus comprehensive. Nothing can 
escape them. 

Neither is there the least danger that the uncer 
tainty x of a part of the boundary line can be made 
a pretext for detaining the posts which it was im 
possible to enumerate. This will appear from an 
inspection of the map. The only uncertain part of 
the boundary line (except that depending on the 
river St. Croix, which is on a side unconnected with 
the position of the posts) is that which is run from 
the Lake of the Woods to the Mississippi. The 
most western of our known posts is at Michilimacki- 
nac, at or near the junction of the lakes Huron and 
Michigan, eastward near eleven degrees of longitude 
of the Lake of the Woods, and about ten degrees of 
longitude of that point on the Mississippi, below the 
Falls of St. Anthony, where a survey, in order to a 
settlement of the line, is to begin. Moreover, our 
line, by the treaty of peace, is to pass through the 
Lake Huron, and the water communication between 
that lake and Lake Superior, and through the middle 
of Lake Superior, and thence westward through other 
waters, to the Lake of the Woods — that is, about 
half a degree of latitude more northward, and about 
eight degrees of longitude more westward, than any 
part of the Lake Michigan. Whence it is manifest, 

1 This uncertainty, it is to be observed, results not from the late 
treaty, but from the treaty of peace. It is occasioned by its being un 
known whether any part of the Mississippi extends far enough north 
to be intersected by a due west line from the Lake of the Woods. 

282 Alexander Hamilton 

that any closing line, to be drawn from the Lake of 
the Woods to the Mississippi, must pass at a dis 
tance of several hundred miles from Michilimackinac. 
If the British, therefore, should be disposed to evade 
the surrender, they will seek for it some pretext more 
plausible than one which involves a palpable geo 
graphical absurdity. Nor can we desire a better 
proof of the ignorance or disingenuousness of the 
objectors to the treaty, than their having contrived 
one of this nature. 

The general terms used were to be preferred, for 
the very reason that there was a doubt about the 
course of a part of the boundary line; for, if there 
should chance to exist any post now unknown, so 
near the line as to render it questionable, in the first 
instance, on which side it may fall, the moment the 
line is settled, the obligation to surrender will be 
settled with it. 

The second objection loses all force, when it is 
considered that the exception can only operate till 
the first of June next, the period for the surrender of 
the posts; and that, in the meantime, there is ample 
space for settlement, without coming to disputable 
ground. There was, besides, real difficulty in an 
accurate definition. What the precincts and juris 
dictions of the posts are, is a question of fact. In 
some instances, where, from there being no settle 
ments over which an actual jurisdiction had been 
exercised, a good rule might have been, the distance 
of gunshot from the fortifications, which might have 
been settled at a certain extent in miles, say three 
or four. But in some cases an actual jurisdiction 

Camillas 283 

has been exercised, under circumstances which cre 
ated obstacles to a precise definition. The case 
of Cald well's Manor, in the vicinity of Dutchman's 
Point, is an example. There, a mixed jurisdiction 
has been sometimes exercised by the British, and 
by the State of Vermont, connected with a disputed 
title to that manor; one party claiming under an 
ancient French grant, and the other under the State 
of Vermont. Detroit and its vicinity would also 
have occasioned embarrassment. From the situa 
tion of the settlements, and of a number of dispersed 
trading establishments, a latitude was likely to have 
been required, to which it might have been expe 
dient to give a sanction. In such situations, where 
a thing is to last but a short time, it is commonly 
the most eligible course, to avoid definition. It is 
obvious that no ill can result from the want of one, 
if the posts are surrendered at the time agreed; if 
not, it is equally plain that it can be of no conse 
quence, because the whole article will be void. 

The third objection becomes insignificant, the 
moment the real state of things is adverted to. This 
has been described in a former number for another 
purpose, but will now be recapitulated, with one 
or two additional facts. The first posts, beginning 
eastward, are Point-au-Fer and Dutchman's Point, 
on Lake Champlain. The whole number of persons 
in this vicinity, over whom jurisdiction has been 
claimed by the British, may amount to a hundred 
families. But the claim of jurisdiction here has 
been only occasionally and feebly urged. And it is 
asserted, in addition, by well-informed persons, that 

284 Alexander Hamilton 

the above-mentioned families have been, for some 
time, regularly represented in the Legislature of 
Vermont; the ordinary civil jurisdiction of which 
State has, with little interruption, been extended 
over them. At neither of the other posts, to wit, 
Oswego, Niagara, the Miami, Detroit, Michilimacki- 
nac, is there any settlement, except at Detroit, 
where, and in the vicinity of which, there may be 
between two and three thousand persons, chiefly 
French Canadians and their descendants. It will 
be understood, that I do not consider as a settle 
ment two or three log houses for traders. 

It follows, that the number of persons who can 
be embraced by the privileges stipulated is too in- 
siderable to admit of attaching any political con 
sequences whatever to the stipulation. Of what 
importance can it possibly be to the United States, 
whether two or three thousand persons, men, women, 
and children, are permitted to reside within their 
limits, either as British or American subjects, at 
their option? If the thing was an object of desire to 
Great Britain, for the accommodation of the indi 
viduals concerned, could it have merited a moment's 
hesitation on our part? As to residence, it is at the 
courtesy of nations at peace to permit the residence 
of the citizens of each other within their respective 
territories. British subjects are now free, by our 
laws, to reside in all parts of the United States. As 
to the permission to become citizens, it has been the 
general policy and practice of our country to facili 
tate the naturalization of foreigners. And we may 
safely count on the interest of individuals, and on 

Camillas 285 

that desire to enjoy equal rights which is so deeply 
planted in the human breast, that all who resolve to 
make their permanent residence with us will become 
citizens. 

It is true, that there may be a few obnoxious 
characters (though I do not recollect to have heard 
of more than two or three) among the number of 
those who have acquired by the stipulation a right 
to become citizens of the United States. But would 
it ever have been worthy of the dignity of the na 
tional wrath, to have launched its thunders against 
the heads of two, or three, or half a dozen despicable 
individuals? Can we suppose that, without a stipu 
lation, it would have been thought worth the while 
to make a special exception of their cases out of the 
operation of our general laws of naturalization? 
And if this had not been done, would they not have 
found means, if they desired it, after the lapse of a 
short period, to acquire the rights of citizens? It is 
to be observed, that citizens of our own, who may 
have committed crimes against our laws, not re 
mitted by the treaty of peace, would find no protec 
tion under this article. 

Suppose the stipulation had not been made, what 
would have been the probable policy of the United 
States? Would it not have been to leave the hand 
ful of settlers undisturbed, in quiet enjoyment of 
their property, and at liberty, if British subjects, 
to continue such, or become American citizens, on 
the usual conditions? A system of depopulation, 
or of coercion to one allegiance or another, would 
have been little congenial with our modes of 

286 Alexander Hamilton 

thinking, and would not, I am persuaded, have 
been attempted. 

If, then, the treaty only stipulates in this respect 
what would have been the course of things without 
it, what cause for serious objection can there be on 
this account? 

The matter of the fourth objection can only derive 
a moment's importance from misapprehension. It 
seems to have been imagined, that there are large 
tracts of land, held under British grants, made since 
the peace, which are confirmed by the part of the 
article that gives the inhabitants the right of remov 
ing with, selling, or retaining their property. 

In the first place it is to be observed, that if such 
grants had been made, the stipulation could not be 
deemed to confirm them, because our laws must 
determine the question, what is the property of the 
inhabitants; and they would rightfully decide, that 
the British Government, since the treaty of peace, 
could make no valid grants of land within our limits. 
Upon the ground even of its own pretensions, it 
could not have made such grants. Nothing more 
was claimed, than the right to detain the posts as 
a hostage. The right to grant lands presupposes 
much more, a full right to sovereignty and territory. 

But, in the second place, it has always been under 
stood, and upon recent and careful inquiry is con 
firmed, that the British Government has never, since 
the peace, made a grant of lands within our limits. It 
appears, indeed, to have been its policy to prevent 
settlements in the vicinity of the posts. 

Hence the stipulation, as it affects lands, does 

Camillas 287 

nothing more than confirm the property of those 
which were holden at the treaty of peace ; neither is 
the quantity considerable ; and it chiefly, if not alto 
gether, depends on titles acquired under the French 
Government, while Canada was a province of France. 

In giving this confirmation, the treaty only pur 
sues what is a constant rule among civilized nations. 
When territory is ceded or yielded up by one nation 
to another, it is a common practice, if not a special 
condition, to leave the inhabitants in the enjoyment 
of their property. A contrary conduct would be dis 
graceful to a nation; nor is it very reputable to the 
objectors to the treaty, that they have levelled their 
battery against this part of it. It is a reflection upon 
them, too, that they employ for the purpose terms 
which import more than is true, even on their own 
supposition, and are, therefore, calculated to deceive; 
for the confirmation of property to individuals could 
be at most a cession only of the right of soil, and 
not of territory, which term has a technical sense, in 
cluding jurisdiction. 

Let it be added, that the treaty of peace, in the 
article which provides "that there should be no 
future confiscations nor prosecutions against any 
person or persons by reason of the part which he or 
they might have taken in the war, and that no person 
should, on that account, suffer any future loss or 
damage, either in his person, liberty, or property," 
did substantially what is made an objection to the 
treaty under consideration. It will not, I believe, 
be disputed, that it gave protection to all property 
antecedently owned, and not confiscated. Indeed, 
Alexander Hamilton 

it is a question whether the stipulations cited would 
not have affected, with regard to other rights than 
those of property, a great part of what is regulated 
by the last treaty. Its provisions in this particular 
were, perhaps, in the main, unnecessary, further than 
to obviate a doubt which might have arisen from the 
suspension of the treaty, by the withholding of the 
posts. 

Thus have I gone through every objection to the 
second article, which is in any degree colorable ; and 
I flatter myself have shown, not only that the 
acquisition made by it is of great and real value, but 
that it stands as well as circumstances permitted, 
and is defensible in its details. I have been the 
more particular in the examination, because the 
assailants of the treaty have exerted all their in 
genuity to discredit this article, from a consciousness, 
no doubt, that it is a very valuable item of the treaty, 
and that it was important to their cause to envelop 
it in as thick a cloud of objection as they were able 
to contrive. As an expedient of party, there is 
some merit in the artifice ; but a sensible people will 
see that it is merely artifice. It is a false calcula 
tion, that the people of this country can ever be 

ultimately deceived. 

CAMILLUS. 

NO. x 
The object of the third article is connected with 
that of the second. The surrender of the posts natu 
rally drew with it an arrangement with regard to 

Camillas 289 

inland trade and navigation. Such an arrangement, 
convenient in several respects, appears to be in 
some respects necessary. To restrain the Indians 
on either side of the line from trading with the one 
party or the other, at discretion, besides the question- 
ableness of the right, could not be attempted with 
out rendering them disgusted and hostile. The truth 
of this seems to have influenced the conduct of 
Great Britain and France, while the latter was in 
possession of Canada. The i5th article of the 
treaty of peace of Utrecht, in the year 1713, allows 
free liberty to the Indians on each side to resort for 
trade to the British and French colonies. It is to be 
observed, too, that the Indians not only insist on a 
right of going to trade with whom they please, but 
of permitting whom they please to come to trade 
with them, and also to reside among them for that 
purpose. Thus, the Southern and Southwestern 
Indians within our limits maintain a constant inter 
course with Spain, established on the basis of treaty, 
— nor has their right to do it been hitherto contested 
by the United States. Indeed, on what clear prin 
ciple of justice could this natural right of trade, of 
a people not subject to our ordinary jurisdiction, be 
disputed? This claim, on their part, gives a corre 
sponding claim to neighboring nations to trade with 
them. Spain would think the pretension to ex 
clude her inadmissible; and Great Britain would 
have thought the same, if she had found it her 
interest to assert the right of intercourse; — views 
which would always be seconded by the Indians 
from regard to their own interest and independence. 

VOL. V.— 19. 

290 Alexander Hamilton 

It was a point, therefore, which it much concerned 
the preservation of good understanding between the 
parties and with the Indians, to regulate on some 
equitable plan ; and the more liberal the plan, the 
more agreeable to a natural course of things, and to 
the free participation of mutual advantages, the 
more likely was it to promote and prolong that 
important benefit. 

In the second place, the expediency of some ar 
rangement was indicated by the circumstance of 
the boundary line between the parties, running for 
an extent of sixteen hundred miles through the mid 
dle of the same rivers, lakes, and waters. It may be 
deemed impossible, from the varying course of winds 
and currents, for the ships of one party to keep 
themselves constantly within their own limits, 
without passing or transgressing those of the other. 
How, indeed, was the precise middle line of those 
great lakes to be always known? 

It appears evident, that to render the navigation 
of these waters useful to, and safe for, both parties, 
it was requisite that they should become common. 
Without this, frequent forfeitures to enforce inter 
dictions of intercourse might be incurred, and there 
would be constant danger of interference and con 
troversy. It is probable, too, that when those 
waters are better explored in their whole extent, it 
will be found that the best navigation of those lakes 
is sometimes on the one side, sometimes on the 
other, and that common convenience will, in this 
respect, also be promoted by community of right. 

Again, it is almost always mutually beneficial for 

Camillas 291 

bordering territories to have free and friendly inter 
course with each other. This relates not only to 
the advantages of an interchange of commodities 
for the supply of mutual wants, and to those of the 
reciprocal creation of industry connected with that 
interchange, but also to those of avoiding jealousy, 
collision, and contest, of preserving friendship and 
harmony. Proximity of territory invites to trade; 
the bordering inhabitants, in spite of every prohibi 
tion, will endeavor to carry it on; if not allowed, 
illicit adventures take the place of the regular opera 
tions of legalized commerce — individual interest 
leads to collusions to evade restraining regulations — 
habits of infracting the laws are produced — morals 
are perverted — securities, necessarily great in pro 
portion as they counteract the natural course of 
things, lay the foundation of discontents and quar 
rels. Perhaps it may be safely affirmed, that freedom 
of intercourse, or violent hatred and enmity, is the 
alternative in every case of contiguity of territory. 
The maxims of the United States have hitherto 
favored a free intercourse with all the world. They 
have conceived that they had nothing to fear from 
the unrestrained competition of commercial enter 
prise, and have only desired to be admitted to it on 
equal terms. Hence, not only the communication 
by sea has been open with the adjacent territories on 
our continent as well as with more distant quarters 
of the globe: but two ports have been erected on 
Lake Champlain for the convenience of interior com 
merce with Canada ; and there is no restriction upon 
any nation, to come by the Mississippi to the only 

292 Alexander Hamilton 

port which has been established for that side of the 
Union. These arrangements have excited neither 
blame nor criticism. 

Our envoy, therefore, in agreeing to a liberal plan 
of intercourse with the British territories in our 
neighborhood, has conformed to the general spirit 
of our country, and to the general policy of our laws. 
Great Britain, in acceding to such a plan, departed 
from her system of colonial monopoly, a departure 
which ought to be one recommendation of the plan 
to us ; for every relaxation of that system paves the 
way for other and further relaxations. It might have 
been expected, also, that a spirit of jealousy might 
have proved an obstacle on the part of Great Britain ; 
since, especially if we consider the composition of 
those who inhabit and are likely to inhabit Canada, 
it is morally certain that there must be, as the result 
of a free intercourse, a far greater momentum of 
influence of the United States upon Canada, than of 
Canada upon the United States. It would not have 
been surprising, if this jealousy had sought to keep 
us at a distance, and had counteracted the wiser 
policy of limiting our desires by giving us possession 
of what is alone to us truly desirable, the advan 
tages of commerce, rather than of suffering our 
wishes to be stimulated and extended by privation 
and restraint. 

New ideas seem of late to have made their way 
among us. The extremes of commercial jealousy 
are inculcated. Regulation, restriction, exclusion, 
are now with many the favorite topics; instead of 
feeling pleasure that new avenues of trade are 

Camillas 293 

opened, a thousand dangers and mischiefs are por 
trayed when the occasion occurs. Free trade with 
all the world seems to have dwindled into trade with 
France and her dominions. The love-sick partisans 
of that country appear to regard her as the epitome 
of the universe; to have adopted for their motto, 
" All for love, and the world well lost." 

These new propensities towards commercial jeal 
ousy have been remarkably exemplified with respect 
to the article immediately under consideration. Truly 
estimated, it is a valuable ingredient in the treaty; 
and yet there is, perhaps, no part of it which has 
been more severely reprobated. It will be easy to 
show that it has been extremely misrepresented, and 
that what have been deemed very exceptionable 
features do not exist at all. 

We will first examine what the article really does 
contain, and afterwards what are the comparative 
advantages likely to result to the two countries. 

The main stipulation is, that "it shall at all times 
be free to his Majesty's subjects, and to the citizens 
of the United States, and also to the Indians dwelling 
on either side of the boundary line, freely to pass and 
repass, by land and inland navigation, into the re 
spective territories and countries of the two parties 
on the continent of America (the country within the 
limits of the Hudson's Bay Company only excepted), 
and to navigate all the lakes, rivers, and waters 
thereof, and freely to carry on trade and commerce 
with each other." 

The subject-matter of this stipulation is plainly 
inland trade and commerce, to be carried on by land 

294 Alexander Hamilton 

passage and inland navigation. This appears, first, 
from the terms of the article. The subjects and 
citizens of the two parties, and also the Indians 
dwelling on each side of the boundary line, are freely 
to pass and repass. In what manner? by land and 
inland navigation: to what places? into the respec 
tive territories and countries of the two parties, on 
the continent of America (the country of the Hud 
son's Bay Company only excepted). They are also 
to navigate all the lakes, rivers, and waters thereof, 
and freely to carry on trade and commerce with 
each other. This right to navigate lakes, rivers, and 
waters, must be understood with reference to inland 
navigation : because this gives it a sense conformable 
with the antecedent clause, with which it is im 
mediately connected, as part of a sentence ; because 
the right to pass and repass, being expressly re 
stricted to land and inland navigation, it would not 
be natural to extend it by implication, on the strength 
of an ambiguous term, to passage by sea, or by any 
thing more than inland navigation; because the 
lakes and rivers have direct reference to inland 
navigation, showing that to be the object in view; 
and the word " waters," from the order in which it 
stands, will, most consistently with propriety of 
composition, be understood as something less than 
lakes and rivers, as ponds, canals, and those amphi 
bious waters, to which it is scarcely possible to give 
a name; and because the waters mentioned are 
"waters thereof," that is, waters of the territories 
and countries of the two parties on the continent of 
America, — a description which cannot very aptly be 

Camillus 295 

applied to the sea, or be supposed to include navi 
gation by sea to the United States, or from them to 
the British territories. It is true, that nations, for 
various purposes, claim and exercise jurisdiction 
over the seas immediately adjacent to their coasts; 
yet this is subject to the common right of nations to 
the innocent use of those seas for navigation ; and it 
is not, prima jacie, presumable, that two nations, 
speaking of the waters of each other, would mean 
to give this appropriate denomination to waters in 
which both claimed some common right. The usual 
description of such waters in treaties is, "the seas 
near the countries," etc. But were it otherwise, 
still the navigating from the open sea into these 
waters could not be within the permission to navi 
gate those waters, and might be prohibited. 

The above construction is confirmed by the gen 
eral complexion of the treaty. It is the manifest 
province of the eighteen articles, which succeed the 
first ten, to regulate external commerce and navi 
gation. The regulations they contain are introduced 
thus, by the eleventh article: " It is agreed between 
his Majesty and the United States of America, that 
there shall be a reciprocal and entirely perfect lib 
erty of navigation and commerce between their re 
spective people, in the manner, under the limitations, 
and on the conditions specified in the following 
articles." Then follow articles which provide fully 
and distinctly for trade and navigation between the 
United States and the British West Indies, between 
the Asiatic dominions of Great Britain and the 
United States, and lastly, between the European 

296 Alexander Hamilton 

dominions of Great Britain and the United States. 
These eighteen articles properly constitute the 
treaty of commerce and navigation between the two 
countries. Their general scope, and some special 
provisions which they contain, prove that the object 
of the third article is local and partial; that it con 
templates, exclusively, an interior commerce by 
land and inland navigation (except as to the Missis 
sippi), and particularly that it does not reach at all 
our Atlantic ports. An instance of one of the special 
provisions alluded to will be cited in the further 
examination of this article. 

In opposition to this construction, much stress is 
laid upon the provisions which immediately succeed 
the clauses that have been quoted. They are in 
these words: " But it is understood, that this article 
does not extend to the admission of vessels of the 
United States into the seaports, harbors, bays, or 
creeks of his Majesty's said territories, nor into such 
parts of the rivers in his said territories as are between 
the mouth thereof and the highest port of entry 
from the sea, except in small vessels trading bona 
fide between Montreal and Quebec; nor to the ad 
mission of British vessels from the sea into the rivers 
of the United States, beyond the highest ports of 
entry for foreign vessels from the sea!" The last, 
it is said, contains an implication, that under this 
article, British vessels have a right to come to our 
highest ports of entry for foreign vessels from the 
sea, while we are excluded from the seaports of the 
British territories on this continent. 

But this is altogether an erroneous inference. The 

Camillas 297 

clauses last cited are inserted for greater caution, to 
guard expressly against any construction of the 
article by implications more or less remote ; con 
trary to the actual regulations of the parties, with 
regard to external commerce and navigation. Great 
Britain does not now permit a trade by sea to Nova 
Scotia and Canada. She therefore declares that 
the article shall not be deemed to contravene this 
regulation. The United States now permit foreign 
vessels to come to certain ports of entry from the 
sea, but exclude them from other more interior 
ports of entry, to which our own vessels may come.1 
It is therefore declared on their part, that the 
article shall not be construed to contravene this 
regulation. This was the more proper as the right 
of inland navigation might have given some color 
to the claim of going from an outer to an inner 
port of entry. But this negative of an implication, 
which might have found some color in the principal 
provision, can never be construed into an affirmative 
grant of a very important privilege, foreign to that 
principal provision. The main object of the article, 
it has been seen, is trade by land and inland navi 
gation. Trade and navigation by sea, with our sea 
ports, is an entirely different thing. To infer a 
positive grant of this privilege, from a clause which 
says, that the right of inland navigation shall not be 
construed to permit vessels coming from the sea, to 
go from the ports of entry, to which our laws now 

1 An example of this is found in the State of New York. Foreign 
vessels can only enter and unlade at the city of New York; vessels 
of the United States may enter at the city of Hudson, and unlade 
there and at Albany. 

298 Alexander Hamilton 

restrict them, to more interior ports, would be 
contrary to reason, and to every rule of sound con 
struction. Such a privilege could never be per 
mitted to be founded upon any thing less than a 
positive and explicit grant. It could never be sup 
ported by an implication drawn from an article 
relative to a local and partial object, much less by 
an implication drawn from the negative of another 
implication. The pretension, that all our ports were 
laid open to Great Britain by a covert and side-wind 
provision, and this without reciprocity, without a 
right of access to a single seaport of the other party 
in any part of the world, would be too monstrous to 
be tolerated for an instant. The principles of equity 
between nations, and the established rules of inter 
pretation, would unite to condemn so great an in 
equality, if another sense could possibly be found 
for the terms from which it might be pretended to 
be deduced. It would be in the present case the 
more inadmissible, because the object is embraced 
and regulated by other parts of the treaty on terms 
of reciprocity. 

The different mode of expression, in the clause 
last cited, when speaking of the British territories, 
and when speaking of the United States, has fur 
nished an argument for the inference which has been 
stated. But this difference is accounted for by the 
difference in the actual regulations of the parties, as 
described above. The object was on each side to 
oust an implication interfering with those regula 
tions. The expressions to effect it were commen 
surate with the state of the fact on each side ; and 

Camillus 299 

consequently do not warrant any collateral or special 
inference. 

The only positive effect of these clauses is to estab 
lish, that the navigation from Montreal to Quebec 
shall be carried on in what are called " small vessels, 
trading bona fide between Montreal and Quebec." 
In determining their sense, it merits some observa 
tion, that they do not profess to except from the 
operation of the general provisions of the article the 
seaports, etc., of the British territories; but declare, 
that it is understood that those provisions do not 
extend to them. This is more a declaration that the 
antecedent provisions were not so broad as to com 
prehend the cases, than an exception of the cases 
from the operation of those provisions. 

Those who are not familiar with laws and treaties, 
may feel some difficulty about the position, that 
particular clauses are introduced only for greater 
caution, without producing any new effect; but 
those who are familiar with such subjects, know, 
that there is scarcely a law or a treaty which does 
not offer examples of the use of similar clauses ; and 
it not unfrequently happens, that a clear meaning 
of the principal provision is rendered obscure by the 
excess of explanatory precaution. 

The next clause of this article is an exception to 
the general design of it, confirming the construction 
I have given. " The river Mississippi shall, however, 
according to the treaty of peace, be entirely open to 
both parties; and it is further agreed that all the 
ports and places on its eastern side, to whichsoever 
of the parties belonging, may freely be resorted to 

300 Alexander Hamilton 

and used by both parties, in as ample a manner as 
any of the Atlantic ports or places of the United 
States, or any of the ports or places of his majesty in 
Great Britain/' 

If the general provision gives access to all our 
ports, which must be the doctrine if it gives access 
to our Atlantic ports, then it would equally have 
this effect with regard to the Mississippi. But this 
clause clearly implies the contrary, not only by in 
troducing a special provision for the ports of the 
Mississippi, but by introducing it expressly, as a 
further or additional agreement; the words are: 
"it is further agreed, etc., and these ports are to be 
enjoyed by each party, in as ample a manner as any 
of the Atlantic ports or places of the United States, or 
any of the ports or places of his majesty in Great 
Britain. This reference to our Atlantic ports, 
coupling them with the ports of Great Britain, shows 
that the Mississippi ports are to be regulated by a 
rule or standard different from the ports for that 
inland navigation, which is the general object of the 
article; else, why that special reference? why not 
have stopped at the words " used by both parties "? If 
it be said, that the reference to our Atlantic ports im 
plies, that they are within the purview of the article, 
let it be observed, that the same argument would 
prove that the ports of Great Britain are also within 
its purview, which is plainly erroneous ; for the main 
provisions are expressly confined to the territories 
of the parties on this continent. The conclusion 
is that the reference is to a standard, out of the 
article, and depending on other parts of the treaty. 

Camillas 301 

It may be useful to observe here, that the Missis 
sippi ports being to be used only in as ample, and 
not in a more ample manner, than our Atlantic 
ports, and the ports of Great Britain, will be liable 
at all times to all the regulations, privileges, and re 
strictions of the ports with which they are assorted. 

The next clause is a still further refutation of the 
construction which I oppose. 

"All goods and merchandise, whose importation 
into his majesty's said territories in America shall not 
be entirely prohibited, may freely, for the purposes of 
commerce, be carried into the same, in the manner 
aforesaid, by the citizens of the United States; and 
such goods and merchandise shall be subject to no 
higher or other duties than would be payable by his 
majesty's subjects on the importation of the same from 
Europe, into the said territories: and in like manner, 
all goods and merchandise, whose importation into 
the United States shall not be wholly prohibited, may 
freely, for the purposes of commerce, be carried into 
the same, in the manner aforesaid, subject to no higher 
or other duties than would be payable by the citizens of 
the United States, on the importation of the same in 
American vessels into the Atlantic ports of the said 
States: and all goods not prohibited to be exported 
from the said territories respectively, may, in like 
manner, be carried out of the same by the two par 
ties respectively, paying duty as aforesaid." 

The words, "in the manner aforesaid," occur twice 
in these clauses, and their equivalent, " in like man 
ner," once. What is the meaning of this so often 
repeated phrase? it cannot be presumed, that it 

302 Alexander Hamilton 

would have been inserted so frequently without 
having to perform some office of consequence. I 
answer, that it is evidently the substitute for these 
other words of the main provision, " by land and in 
land navigation." This is "the manner aforesaid.'1 
This is the channel, through which goods and mer 
chandises passing would be subject to no other or 
higher duties than would be payable in the British 
territories by British subjects, if imported from 
Europe; or in the territories of the United States, 
by citizens of the United States, if brought by 
American vessels into our Atlantic ports. No other 
reasonable use can be found for the terms. If they 
are denied this sense, they had much better been 
omitted, as being not only useless but as giving 
cause to suppose a restriction of what, it is pretended, 
was designed to be general — a right of importing in 
every way, and into all parts of the United States, 
goods and merchandise, if not entirely prohibited, 
on the same duties as are payable by our own citi 
zens when brought in our own vessels. 

These words, " whose importation into the United 
States shall not be entirely prohibited," is a further 
key to the true sense of the article. They are equi 
valent to these other words : " whose importation into 
all parts of the United States shall not be prohibited. " 
The design of this clause is to prevent importation, 
through the particular channels contemplated by 
the article, being obstructed by a partial or by any 
other than a general prohibition. As long as certain 
goods may be introduced into the United States 
through the Atlantic ports, they may also be brought 

Camillus 
into them through the channels designated by this 
article — that is, by land and inland navigation. 
The making a prohibitipn in the given case to depend 
on a general prohibition, is conclusive to prove, that 
the article contemplates only particular channels. 
On any other supposition, the clause is nonsense. 
The true reading, then, of this part of the article, 
must be as follows : " Goods and merchandise, whose 
importation into all parts of the United States shall 
not be prohibited, may freely, for the purposes of 
commerce, be carried into the same, in manner 
aforesaid — that is, by land and inland navigation, 
from the territories of his majesty on the continent 
of America." 

There are still other expressions in the article, 
which are likewise an index to its meaning. They 
are these: "would be payable by the citizens of the 
United States, on the importation of the same in 
American vessels into the Atlantic ports of the said 
States.1' This reference to a rate of duties, which 
would be payable on importation into the Atlantic 
ports, as a rule or guide for the rate of duties, which 
is to prevail in the case meant to be comprehended 
in the article, is full evidence that importation in 
the Atlantic ports is not included in that case. The 
mention of importation in American vessels, con 
firms this conclusion, as it shows that the article 
itself contemplates, that the discrimination made by 
our existing laws may continue. 

But the matter is put out of all doubt by those 
parts of the fifteenth article which reserve to the 
British Government the right of imposing such duty 

304 Alexander Hamilton 

as may be adequate to countervail the difference of 
duty, now payable on the importation of European 
and Asiatic goods, when imported into the United 
States in British and American vessels; and which 
stipulate, that "the United States will not INCREASE 
the now subsisting difference between the duties pay 
able on the importation of any articles in British or 
American vessels." 

This is a demonstration that the treaty contem 
plates, as consistent with it, a continuance of the 
present difference of duties on importations in 
American and British vessels; and consequently, 
that the third article, which stipulates equal duties, 
as to the cases within it, does not extend to importa 
tions into our Atlantic ports, but is confined to im 
portations by land and inland navigation. Though 
this article be of temporary duration, yet as an 
evidence of the sense of the parties, it will always 
serve as a rule of construction for every part of the 
instrument. 

These different views of the article establish, be 
yond the possibility of doubt, that, except with 
regard to the Mississippi, inland trade and naviga 
tion are its sole objects — that it grants no right or 
privilege whatever in our Atlantic ports, — and that 
with regard to the ports of the Mississippi, it only 
establishes this principle: that Great Britain shall 
always enjoy there the same privileges which by 
treaty or law she is allowed to have in our Atlantic 
ports. 

I remark incidentally, for a purpose which will 
appear hereafter, that as far as this article is con- 

Camillas 305 

cerned, we are free to prohibit the importation into 
the United States at large, of any British article 
whatever, though we cannot prohibit its importation 
partially — that is, merely from her territories in our 
neighborhood, by land or inland navigation ; but we 
may prohibit the importation by sea from those 
territories ; nor is there any other part of the treaty by 
which this is prevented. 

The remaining clauses of this article establish the 
following points: "That no duty of entry shall be 
levied by either party on peltries brought by land or 
inland navigation, into the respective territories"; 
that Indians, passing and repassing with their own 
goods, shall pay no impost or duty upon them, but 
goods in bales, or other large packages, unusual 
among Indians, shall not be considered as their 
goods; that tolls and rates of ferriage shall be the 
same on both sides as are paid by natives; that 
no duties shall be paid by either party on the mere 
transit of goods across portages and carrying-places 
from one part to another of the territory of the same 
party; that the respective governments will pro 
mote friendship, good neighborhood, and amicable 
intercourse, by causing speedy and impartial jus 
tice to be done, and necessary protection to be ex 
tended to all who may be concerned therein. 

I shall conclude this paper with an observation or 
two on the meaning of the terms, inland navigation. 
These terms have no technical meaning defined in 
the laws of either country, nor have they any precise 
meaning assigned by the law of nations. They, 
however, ex vi termini, exclude navigation from the 

VOL. V. — 20. 

306 Alexander Hamilton 

sea; and as a general rule, I should say, that inland 
navigation begins there where sea navigation ends. 
Where is this ? I answer, at the ports of entry from 
the sea. By the laws of Great Britain and of the 
United States, all rivers are arms of the sea as far as 
the tides flow. It would be a consequence of this 
principle, that sea navigation would reach to the 
head of tide-water. But some more obvious and 
notorious rule ought to govern the interpretation 
of national compacts. The ports of entry from the 
sea are conceived to be the proper rule. 

In the case under consideration, the general spirit 
of the article may require, that all the waters which 
divide the territories of the parties should be in their 
whole extent common to both. As to other com 
municating waters, accessible under the article, the 
reciprocal limit of the right will be the ports of entry 
from the sea. This is to be understood with the 
exception of the Mississippi, to the ports of which, 
access from the sea is granted under the qualifica 
tion which has been pointed out. 

CAMILLUS. 

NO. XI 

1795- 

The foregoing analysis of the third article, by fix 
ing its true meaning, enables us to detect some gross 
errors, which have been principal sources of pre 
judice against it. One of these is, that the article 
gives to the other party a right of access to all our 
ports, while it excludes us from the ports of the 

Camillas 307 

British territories in our neighborhood. It has been 
clearly shown that it gives no right of access to any 
one of our Atlantic ports, and that it gives only a 
qualified and conditional access to the ports which 
we may have on the Mississippi, to be regulated by 
the privileges at any time allowed by law or com 
pact in our Atlantic ports, and liable to cease with 
the cessation of those privileges. The charge, there 
fore, of want of reciprocity in this particular, van 
ishes, and with it all the exceptionable consequences 
which have been the fruit of the error. Such is the 
assertion of DECIUS, that a British trader may set 
out from Canada, traverse our lakes, rivers, and 
waters to New York, and thence to Philadelphia, 
while we are precluded from the navigation of the 
St. Lawrence, and other British rivers lower than 
the highest ports of entry from the sea. It would 
be an indulgent construction of the article, not to 
stop the British trader at Hudson, as the highest 
port of entry from the sea, and the boundary of in 
land navigation; but he could certainly have no 
claim of right under it, to go from New York to 
Philadelphia, because he must necessarily go by 
sea to arrive at the first place, and no such permis 
sion is stipulated by the article. Such, also, is the 
assertion of CATO, that Great Britain is admitted to 
all the advantages of which our Atlantic rivers are 
susceptible. The rivers, upon which no part of 
their territory borders, and which their vessels can 
only approach by sea, are certainly excepted. 

Another of the errors referred to is this, that 
goods and merchandise may, under this article, be 

308 Alexander Hamilton 

imported into any part of the United States upon the 
same duties which are now payable when imported 
by citizens of the United States and in vessels of the 
United States. It has been clearly proved that 
there is no pretence for this position, and that 
equality of duties only applies to importations from 
the British territories, in our neighborhood, by land 
and inland navigation. 

CATO, • DECIUS, and other writers against the 
treaty have fallen into this strange error, and have 
founded upon it much angry declamation. The 
first, however, embarrassed in his construction by 
the provision which reserves to Great Britain the 
right of laying countervailing duties, endeavors to 
escape from it by distinguishing goods imported for 
the Indian trade and those imported for other uses. 
Whatever may be the case with regard to the latter, 
the former, he is convinced, are certainly entitled to 
admission into our Atlantic ports on the privileged 
rights of duty, though he is very naturally perplexed 
to see how the discrimination could be maintained 
in practice. But where does he find room for this 
distinction? Not in the provision respecting coun 
tervailing duties, for that is general — not in the 
clause of the third article, to which he gives the in 
terpretation, for that is directly against his distinc 
tion. The goods and merchandise, for the privileged 
importation of which it provides, are restricted to 
no particular object — have no special reference to 
Indian more than to other trade: on the contrary, 
they are expressly to be imported for " the purposes 
of commerce*' at large; so that in the cases in which 

Camillas 309 

they are privileged, they are equally so, whether it 
be for a trade with our citizens or with Indians. The 
distinction, therefore, only proves the embarrass 
ment of its inventor, without solving the difficulty. 
A curious assertion has been made on this article of 
duties. It has been said that, while we are obliged 
to admit British goods on the same duties with those 
paid by our own citizens, or importation in our own 
vessels, Great Britain, under the right to lay counter 
vailing duties, may incumber us with an additional 
ten per cent. Can any thing be more absurd than 
the position that the right to lay countervailing 
duties exists in a case where there is no difference 
of duty to countervail? The term is manifestly a 
relative one, and can only operate where there 
is something on our side to be countervailed or 
counterbalanced, and in an exact ratio to it. If it 
be true that a very high law character is the writer 
of CATO, we cannot but be surprised at such ex 
treme inaccuracy. 

Other errors, no less considerable, will appear in 
the progress of the examination ; but it will facilitate 
the detection of these, and tend to a more thorough 
understanding of the article, to state in this place 
some general facts, which are material in a com 
parison of the advantages and disadvantages of the 
article, to the respective parties. 

i st. The fur trade within our limits is to the fur 
trade within the British limits as one to seven, nearly 
— that is, the trade with the Indians on the British 
side of the boundary line is about seven times greater 
than the same trade on our side of that line. This 

310 Alexander Hamilton 

fact is stated as the result of repeated inquiry from 
well-informed persons for several years past. It will 
not appear extraordinary to those who recollect how 
much the Indians on our side are circumscribed in 
their hunting-grounds, and to what a degree they 
are reduced in numbers by the frequent wars in 
which they have been engaged with us; while the 
tribes on the British side of the line are not only far 
more numerous, but enjoy an immense undisturbed 
range of wilderness. The more rapid progress of 
settlement on our side than on the other will fast in 
crease the existing disparity. 

2d. Our communication with the sea is more 
easy, safe, and expeditious than that of Canada by 
the St. Lawrence. Accordingly, while our vessels 
ordinarily make two voyages in a year, to and from 
Europe, the British vessels, in the Canada trade, are, 
from the course of the seasons and the nature of the 
navigation, confined to one voyage in a year. Though 
hitherto, from temporary circumstances, this differ 
ence has not made any sensible difference in the 
price of transportation; yet in its permanent opera 
tion it is hardly possible that it should not give us a 
material advantage in the competition for the sup 
ply of European goods to a large part of Canada, es 
pecially that which is denominated Upper Canada. 
The city of Hudson, distant 124 miles from the city 
of New York, is as near to the junction of the river 
Cataraquy and Lake Ontario as Montreal, which 
last is near 400 miles distant from the mouth of 
the St. Lawrence. When the canals now in rapid 
execution are completed there will be a water com- 

Camillus 311 

munication the whole way from the city of Hudson 
to Ontario. 

3d. The supply of East India goods to Canada, is 
likely to be always easier and cheaper through us, 
than in any other way. According to the present 
British system, Canada is supplied through Britain. 
It is obvious how much the charges of this double 
voyage must enhance the prices of the articles, when 
delivered in Canada. A direct trade between the 
East Indies and Canada would suppose a change in 
the British system, to which there are great obstacles ; 
and even then, there are circumstances which would 
secure to us an advantageous competition. It is 
a fact which serves to illustrate our advantages, 
that East India articles, including teas, are, upon 
an average, cheaper in the United States than in 
England. 

The facts demonstrate that a trade between us 
and the British territories in our neighborhood, upon 
equal terms as to privilege, must afford a balance of 
advantages on our side. As to the fur trade, for a par 
ticipation in one eighth of the whole, which we con 
cede, we gain a participation in seven eighths, which 
is conceded to us. As to the European and East In 
dia trade, we acquire the right of competition upon 
equal terms of privilege, with real and considerable 
advantages of situation. 

The stipulation with regard to equal duties was 
essential to the preservation of our superiority of 
advantages in this trade, while it would not interfere 
with the general policy of our regulation concerning 
the difference of duties on goods imported in our own 

312 Alexander Hamilton 

and in foreign bottoms; because the supplies which 
can come to us through Canada, for the reasons al 
ready given, must be inconsiderable; because, also, 
distance would soon countervail, in expenses of trans 
portation, the effect of the difference of duties in our 
market; and because, in the last place, this differ 
ence is not very sensible, owing to the large propor 
tion of goods which are imported in the names of our 
own citizens. I say nothing here of the practicabil 
ity, on general grounds, of long maintaining with 
effect this regulation. 

Is it not wonderful, considering the real state of 
the trade, as depending on locality, that the treaty 
should be charged with sacrificing the fur trade to 
the British? If there be any sacrifice, is it not on 
their side; when the fact is that the quantity of 
trade in which they admit us to equal privileges is 
seven times greater than that in which we admit 
them to equal privileges? 

The arguments against the treaty on this point are 
not only full of falsity, but they are in contradiction 
with each other. 

On the one hand it is argued that our communica 
tion from the sea, with the Indian country, being 
much easier than by the St. Lawrence, we could 
furnish English goods cheaper, and of course could 
have continued the Indian trade in its usual channel, 
even from the British side of the lakes; nor could 
they have prevented it without giving such disgust 
to the Indians, as would have made them dangerous 
neighbors. On the other hand, it is argued that from 
superiority of capital, better knowledge of the trade, 

Camillas 313 

a better established connection of customers, the 
British will be able to supplant us, even in our own 
territories, and to acquire a monopoly of the whole 
fur trade. 

Propositions so opposite cannot all be true. Either 
the supposed faculty of supplying English goods 
cheaper, which, it is said, would give us a command 
of the Indian trade, even on the British side of the 
lakes, not in the power of the British to prevent, 
overbalances the advantages which are specified on 
the other side, or it does not. If it does not, then it 
is not true that it could draw to us the trade from the 
British side of the lakes. If it does then it is not true 
that the British can supplant us in the trade on either 
side of the lakes; much less that they can obtain a 
monopoly of it on both sides. 

Besides, if it be true that the British could not 
prevent our trading with the Indians on their side, 
without giving them such disgust as to make them 
dangerous to their neighbors, why is it not equally 
true, that we could not prevent their trading with 
the Indians on our side, without producing a similar 
effect? And if they have really a superiority of ad 
vantages, why would they not, on the principle of 
this argument, attract and divert the trade from us, 
though a mutual right to trade with the Indians in 
each other's territories had not been stipulated? 

The difficulty of restraining the Indians from 
trading at pleasure, is an idea well founded, as has 
been admitted in another place. But there result 
from it strong arguments in favor of reciprocation of 
privileges in the Indian trade, by treaty. One of 

3H Alexander Hamilton 

them, its tendency to preserve peace and good under 
standing, has been already noticed; another arises 
from the consideration, that it will probably be the 
policy of the British to maintain larger military 
establishments on their frontier than we shall think 
eligible on ours, which will render it proportionably 
more easy to them to restrain their Indians, than it 
will be to us to restrain ours. This greater difficulty 
of executing restraints on our side, is a powerful 
reason for us to agree, mutually, to throw open the 
door. 

It will not be surprising if, upon some other occa 
sion, the adversaries of the treaty should abandon 
their own ground, and instead of saying the treaty is 
faulty, for what it stipulates on this point, should 
affirm merely that it has no merit on this account, 
since it only does what the disposition of the Indians 
would have brought about without it. But it is 
always a merit to divest an advantageous thing of 
cause of dispute, and to fix, by amicable agreement, 
a benefit which otherwise would be liable to litigation, 
opposition, and interruption. 

As to relative advantages for carrying on trade, 
the comparison ought to be made with caution. That 
which has been stated on our side, namely, greater 
facility in conveying the materials of the trade from 
Europe to the scene where it is to be carried on, is a 
real one, and in process of time may be expected to 
make itself to be felt; yet hitherto, as before ob 
served, it has had no sensible effect. 

Of the advantages which have been stated as be 
longing to the other side, there is but one which has 

Camillus 315 

substance, and this is previous possession of the 
ground. But even this, from the very nature of it, 
is temporary. With our usual enterprise and in 
dustry, it will be astonishing if we do not speedily 
share the ground to the full extent of our relative 
advantages. 

As to superiority of capital, it amounts to nothing 
It has been seen that the capital requisite for the 
whole trade is small. From a hundred to a hundred 
and fifty thousand pounds sterling would be a high 
statement. The whole of this, if we were to mono 
polize the entire trade, could not create a moment's 
embarrassment to find it, in the opinion of any man 
who attends to the great pecuniary operations which 
are daily going on in our country. But that very 
capital which is represented as our rival, could be 
brought into action for our benefit in this very trade. 
The solution is simple. Our credit will command it 
in obtaining the foreign articles necessary for the 
trade, upon as good terms as the British merchants 
who now carry it on. The same objection of superi 
ority of capital may with as much reason be applied 
to any other branch of trade between us and Great 
Britain. Why does it not give her a monopoly of 
the direct trade between her European dominions 
and the United States? The argument, if valid, 
would prove that we ought to have no commerce, 
not only with Great Britain, but with any nation 
which has more commercial capital than ourselves. 

As to superior knowledge of the particular branch 
of business, there is still less force in that argument. 
It is not a case of abstruse science or complicated 

316 Alexander Hamilton 

combination. And we are in no want of persons 
among us who are experimentally acquainted with 
the subject. 

As to customers for the proceeds of the trade, we 
should stand upon as good a footing as the British 
merchants. What we did not want for our own 
consumption, might be sent upon equal terms to the 
very markets to which they send theirs; and to 
others which might be found preferable, because less 
well supplied with the kind of articles. 

As to whatever may depend on enterprise, we need 
not fear to be outdone by any people on earth. It 
may almost be said, that enterprise is our element. 

It has been alleged that our trade with the Indians 
would be interrupted by bad seasons and occasional 
wars, while that of Great Britain would be steady 
and uniform. As to the casualties of seasons, it is 
evident they must fall upon Great Britain as much 
as upon us, unless we suppose the elements in con 
spiracy against us ; and as to wars, the possession of 
the posts would essentially change our situation, and 
render it peculiarly advantageous for preventing or 
repressing hostilities; so that with equally good 
management, our territories would not be more 
exposed than the British. 

But the intrigues of the British traders residing 
among our Indians, would excite them to hostility. 
It could not be the private interest of the traders to 
do this; because, besides being amenable to punish 
ment, if discovered, — besides that both the traders 
and the Indians within our limits, by the possession 
of the posts, would be under our control — wars in- 

Camillas 317 

terrupt, of course, the hunting of the Indians, and 
so destroy their means of trading. 

As to Great Britain, she never could have had but 
one interest to prompt Indian hostilities — that was, 
to induce the United States to relinquish a part of 
their boundary. The restitution of the posts will put 
an end to this project. In regard to trade, she and 
her traders will have a common interest with us, and 
our traders, to keep all the Indians at peace, for the 
reason assigned above. This interest will be the 
stronger, because the best communication even with 
her own Indians, will be partly through our territory ; 
and it would be impossible that it should not be 
impeded and interrupted by the operations of war 
between us and the Indians. In fact, under the cir 
cumstance of common privileges, there is every pos 
sible link of common interest between us and Great 
Britain in the preservation of peace with the Indians. 

In this question of danger to our peace by the 
British participation in the trade with our Indians, 
the difficulty of restraining the Indians from trading 
with whom they please (which is admitted by the 
argument of both sides) is a very material considera 
tion. Would there not be greater hazard to our 
peace from the attempts of the British to participate 
in a trade from which we endeavored to exclude 
them, seconded by the discontents of the Indians, 
than from any dispositions to supplant us, when 
allowed a free competition, when no cause of dis 
satisfaction was given to the Indians, and when it 
was certain, that war must interfere with their 
means of carrying on the trade? The security for 

318 Alexander Hamilton 

our peace appears to be much greater in the latter 
than in the former state of things. 

A suspicion is also suggested, that Great Britain, 
without exciting war, will indirectly trammel and 
obstruct our trade. To objections which suppose a 
want of fair dealing in the other party, it is very 
difficult to answer. All that a treaty can do, is to 
establish principles which are likely to operate well, 
if well executed. It is no objection to its merits, 
that the benefits aimed at may be frustrated by ill 
faith. The utility of any compact between nations 
must presume a sincere execution. The reverse 
may disappoint the best-conceived plan; and the 
security against it must be the mutual interest to 
perform, and the power of retaliation. If Great 
Britain acts with infidelity or chicanery towards 
us, we must retract the privileges granted on our 
side. 

Another objection which is made, is, that while the 
British would have a right to reside among us, to hire 
houses and warehouses, and to enjoy every conven 
ience for prosecuting the trade systematically, we 
should not be entitled to similar privileges with them, 
having only a right to pass "like pedlars with our 
shops upon our backs." These are the expressions 
of Cato. 

The position is founded on that clause of the 
British act of navigation, which forbids any but a 
natural-born or naturalized subject to exercise the 
occupation of a merchant or factor, in any of the 
British dominions in Asia, Africa, and America. 

In the first place, it is to be observed, that as far 

Camillas 319 

as the article under discussion is singly concerned, 
there is no pretence to say that one party has greater 
rights as to residence than the other. If, there 
fore, Great Britain can prevent our citizens residing 
in their territories in our neighborhood, we are free 
by this article to apply to them a similar exclu 
sion. And any right of residence which may be 
claimed under any other part of the treaty, will be 
temporary. 

In the second place, the prohibition of residence in 
the act of navigation, proceeds on the ground of ex 
cluding foreigners from carrying on trade in the 
territories to which it extends. But the third 
article expressly gives us a right freely to carry on 
trade and commerce with the British territories on 
this continent, a right which necessarily includes the 
privilege of residing as merchants and factors. For 
wherever an END is granted, the usual and proper 
means of enjoying it are implied in the grant. Resi 
dence is a usual and necessary means of freely carry 
ing on trade. Without it, the right of trade becomes 
essentially nugatory. This reasoning has peculiar 
force in relation to inland trade. And it agrees with 
decisions at common law, and with the opinion of 
Lord Coke, who tells us that "of a house for habita 
tion an alien merchant may take a lease for years, as 
incident to commerce; for without habitation he cannot 
merchandise or trade." This, among other things, 
he informs us, was resolved by all the judges assem 
bled for that purpose, in the case of Sir James Croft, 
in the reign of Queen Elizabeth ; and we learn from 
it that the right to hire houses and warehouses is 

320 Alexander Hamilton 

derived from the right to trade, as its incident. The 
same principle, in toto, has been recognized in other 
cases. 

The whole of the article is an innovation upon the 
British act of navigation. Being abrogated as to 
the principal thing, there is no difficulty in sup 
posing it so as to incidents; on the other hand, to 
pretend to exclude us from the right of residence, 
could not be deemed a fair execution of the article. 
Hence we find, that the want of reciprocity in this 
particular also fails, and with it the supposed dis 
advantage on our side in the supposed competition 
for the trade. 

CAMILLUS. 

NO. XII 

1795. 

The remaining allegations in disparagement of the 
third article, are to this effect: i. That the exception 
of the country of the Hudson's Bay company, owing 
to its undefined limits, renders the stipulations in our 
favor, in a great measure, nugatory. 2. That the 
privileges granted to Great Britain in our Mississippi 
ports, are impolitic, because without reciprocity. 3. 
That the agreement to forbear to lay duties of entry 
on peltries, is the surrender, without equivalent, of a 
valuable item of revenue, and will give the British 
the facility of carrying on their fur trade through us, 
with the use of our advantages. 4. That the arti 
cles which will be brought from Europe into Can 
ada coming duty free, can be afforded cheaper than 

Camillus 321 

the same articles going thither from us charged with 
a heavy duty on their importation into the United 
States, and with the expense of a long transporta 
tion by land, and inland navigation. 5. That the 
population of Canada, which, by a census of 1784, 
amounted only to 123,082 souls, is too small to ren 
der the supply of European and Asiatic commodities, 
through us, of so much importance as to bear any 
comparison with the loss by the sacrifice of the fur 
trade. 6. That the intercourse to be permitted 
with the British territories, will facilitate smuggling 
to the injury of our revenue. 7. That the much 
greater extent of the United States than of the 
British territories destroys real reciprocity in the 
privileges granted by this article, giving, in fact, 
far greater advantages than are received. These 
suggestions will be discussed in the order in which 
they are here stated. 

i. It is true, that the country of the Hudson's Bay 
company is not well defined. Their charter, granted 
in 1670, gives them " the sole trade and commerce of 
and to all the seas, bays, straights, creeks, lakes, 
rivers, and sounds, in whatsoever latitude they 
shall be, that lie within the entrance of the streights 
commonly called Hudson's Streights, together with 
all the lands, countries, and territories, upon the 
coasts and confines of the said seas, straights, bays, 
etc., which are now actually possessed by any of our 
subjects, or by the subjects of any other Christian prince 
or State " 

To ascertain their territorial limits, according to 
charter, it would be necessary to know what portion 

VOL. V.— 21. 

322 Alexander Hamilton 

of country, at the time of the grant, was actually 
possessed by the subjects of Great Britain, or of some 
other Christian prince or State; but though this be 
not known, the general history of the country, as to 
settlement, will demonstrate that it could not have 
extended far westward, certainly not to that region 
which is the scene of trade in furs, commonly called 
the Northwest trade, carried on by the Canada com 
pany from Canada; the possession of which, as far 
as possession exists, is recent. We learn from a 
traveller who has lately visited that region, that one 
of this company's establishments is in lat. 56, 9, N. 
long. 117, 43, W., that is, about 20 degrees of longi 
tude westward of the Lake of the Woods; and it is 
generally understood, that the entire scene of the 
trade of this company is westward of the limits of 
the Hudson's Bay company. 

Canada, on the north, is bounded by the territories 
of the Hudson's Bay company. This is admitted by 
the treaty of Utrecht, and established by the act of 
parliament in 1774, commonly called the Quebec 
act. The treaty of Utrecht provides for the settle 
ment of the boundaries by commissioners. I have 
not been able to trace whether the line was ever 
actually so settled; but several maps lay down a 
line as the one settled by the treaty of Utrecht, 
which runs north of the Lake of the Woods. 

In a case thus situated, the United States will 
justly claim, under the article, access to all that 
country the trade of which is now carried on through 
Canada. This will result both from the certainty 
that there were no actual possessions at the date of 

Camillus 323 

the charter so far interior, and from the fact of the 
trade being carried on through a different channel, 
by a different company, under the superintendence 
and protection of a different government, that of 
Canada. It may be asked, Why was the article em 
barrassed by the exception of the country of the 
Hudson's Bay company? The answer is this, That 
the charter of this company gives to it a monopoly 
within its limits, and, therefore, a right to trade 
there could not have been granted, with propriety, 
to a foreign power, by treaty. It is true that it has 
been questioned whether this monopoly was valid 
against British subjects, seeing that the charter had 
not been confirmed by acts of parliament. But be 
sides that this doubt has been confined to British 
subjects, it would appear, that, in fact, the com 
pany has enjoyed the monopoly granted by its 
charter, even against them, and with at least the 
implied approbation of parliament. In the year 
1749, petitions were preferred to the House of Com 
mons, by different trading towns in England, for 
rescinding the monopoly and opening the trade. 
An inquiry was instituted by the House. The re 
port of its committee was favorable to the conduct 
and pretensions of the company, and against the 
expediency of opening the trade; and the business 
terminated there. 

This circumstance of there being a monopoly, 
confirms the argument drawn from the fact, that 
the Northwest trade is carried on through Canada 
by the Canada company; a decisive presumption, 
that the scene of that trade is not within the country 

324 Alexander Hamilton 

of the Hudson's Bay company, and is, consequently, 
within the operation of the privilege granted to us. 

Though it will be partly a digression, I cannot 
forbear, in this place, to notice some observations of 
Cato, in his loth number. After stating, that in 
1784 the peltry from Canada sold in London for 
^230,000 sterling, he proceeds to observe that, ex 
cluding the territories of the Hudson's Bay company, 
nine tenths of this trade is within the limits of the 
United States; and, though with studied ambiguity 
of expression, he endeavors to have it understood 
that nine tenths of the trade which yielded the peltry 
that sold for ^230,000 sterling in 1784, was within 
our territories. It is natural to ask, how he has 
ascertained the limits of the Hudson's Bay company 
(which at other times is asserted, by way of objection 
to the article, to be altogether indefinite) with so 
much exactness as to be able to pronounce what 
proportion, if any, of the trade carried on through 
Canada may have come from that country, towards 
the calculation which has led to the conclusion that 
nine tenths of the whole lies within our limits ? The 
truth is indubitably and notoriously, that whether 
any or whatever part of the peltry exported from 
Canada may come from the country of the Hudson's 
Bay company, seven eighths l of the whole trade 
which furnishes that peltry, has its source on the 
British side of the boundary line. It follows, that 
if it were even true that only one tenth of the whole 
lay in that part of the British territory which is not 
of the Hudson's Bay's company, inasmuch as only 

1 Some statements rate it between six eighths and seven eighths. 

Camillas 325 

one seventh of it lies within our limits, the result 
would be, that the trade, in which we granted an 
equal privilege, was to that in which a like privilege 
is granted to us, as one seventh to one tenth, and 
not, according to Cato, as nine to one. This leger 
demain in argument and calculation, is really too 
frivolous for so serious a subject. Or, to speak more 
properly, it is too shocking, by the spirit of decep 
tion which it betrays. Cato has a further observa 
tion with regard to the trade with the Indians in the 
vicinity of the Mississippi, and from that river into 
the Spanish territories. The product of all this 
trade, he says, must go down the Mississippi, and, 
but for the stipulation of the third article, would 
have been exclusively ours; because, "by the treaty 
of Paris, though the British might navigate the Mis 
sissippi, yet they did not own a foot of land upon 
either of its banks; whereas the United States pos 
sessing all the Indian country in the vicinity of that 
river and the east bank for many hundred miles, 
could, when they pleased, establish factories and 
monopolize that commerce." This assertion, with 
regard to the treaty of Paris, is in every sense in 
correct; for the seventh article of that treaty, es 
tablishes as a boundary between the dominions of 
France and his Britannic Majesty, "a line drawn 
along the middle of the river Mississippi, from its 
source to the river Iberville, and from thence by a 
line drawn along the middle of this river and the 
lakes Maurepas and Pontchartrain to the sea," and 
cedes to his Britannic Majesty all the country on the 
east side of the Mississippi. By the treaty of Paris 

326 Alexander Hamilton 

then, his Britannic Majesty owned all the territory, 
except the town and island of New Orleans, on the 
east side of the Mississippi, instead of not having a 
foot of land there. 

What part of this territory does not still belong to 
him, is a point not yet settled. The treaty of peace 
between the United States and Great Britain, sup 
poses that part will remain to Great Britain ; for one 
line of boundary between us and her, designated by 
that treaty, is a line due west from the Lake of the 
Woods to the Mississippi. If, in fact, this river runs 
far enough north to be intersected by such a line, 
according to the supposition of the last-mentioned 
treaty, so much of that river, and the land upon it as 
shall be north of the line of intersection, will continue 
to be of the dominion of Great Britain. The lately- 
made treaty, not abandoning the possibility of this 
being the case, provides for a survey to ascertain 
the fact ; and in every event, the intent of the treaty 
of peace will require, that some closing line, more or 
less direct, shall be drawn from the Lake of the 
Woods to the Mississippi. The position, therefore, 
that Great Britain had no land or ports on the Mis 
sissippi, takes for granted what is not ascertained, 
and of which the contrary is presumed by the treaty 
of peace. 

The trade with the Indian country on our side of 
the Mississippi, from the Ohio to the Lake of the 
Woods (if that river extends so far north), some 
fragments excepted, has its present direction through 
Detroit and Michilimackinac, and is included in 
many calculations, heretofore stated, of the propor- 

Camillas 327 

tion which the Indian trade within our limits, bears 
to that within the British limits. Its estimated 
amount is even understood to embrace the proceeds 
of a clandestine trade with the Spanish territories; 
so that the new scene suddenly explored by Cato is 
old and trodden ground, the special reference to 
which cannot vary the results that have been pre 
sented. It is still unquestionably and notoriously 
true that the fur trade within our limits bears no 
proportion to that within the British limits. As to 
a contingent traffic with the territories of Spain, each 
party will be free to pursue it according to right 
and opportunity; each would have, independent of 
the treaty, the facility of bordering territories. The 
geography of the best regions of the fur trade in the 
Spanish territories is too little known to be much 
reasoned upon; and if the Spaniards, according to 
their usual policy, incline to exclude their neighbors, 
their precautions along the Mississippi will render 
the access to it circuitous — a circumstance which 
makes it problematical, whether the possession of 
the opposite bank is, as to that object, an advantage 
or not, and whether we may not find it convenient 
to be able, under the treaty, to take a circuit through 
the British territories. 

2. It is upon the suggestion of Great Britain hav 
ing no ports on the Mississippi, that the charge of 
want of reciprocity in the privileges granted with 
regard to the use of that river, is founded. The 
suggestion has been shown to be more peremptory 
than is justified by facts. Yet it is still true that the 
ports on our side bear no proportion to any that can 

3 28 Alexander Hamilton 

exist on the part of the British, according to the 
present state of territory. It will be examined, in 
a subsequent place, how far this disproportion is a 
proper rule in the estimate of reciprocity. But let 
it be observed, in the meantime, that in judging of 
the reciprocity of an article, it is to be taken collect 
ively. If, upon the whole, the privileges obtained 
are as valuable as those granted, there is a sub 
stantial reciprocity; and to this test, upon full and 
fair examination of the article, I freely refer the 
decision. Besides, if the situation of Great Britain 
did not permit, in this particular, a precise equi 
valent, it will not follow that the grant on our part 
was improper, unless it can be shown that it was 
attended with some inconvenience, injury, or loss to 
us; a thing which has not been, and I believe cannot 
be shown. Perhaps there is a very importantly 
beneficial side to this question. The treaty of peace 
established between us and Great Britain, a com 
mon interest in the Mississippi; the present treaty 
strengthens that common interest. Every body 
knows that the use of the river is denied to us by 
Spain, and that it is an indispensable outlet to our 
western country. Is it an inconvenient thing to us 
that the interest of Great Britain has, in this par 
ticular, been more completely separated from that 
of Spain and more closely connected with ours? 

3. The agreement to forbear to lay duties of entry 
on peltries is completely defensible on the following 
grounds, viz. : It is the general policy of commercial 
nations to exempt raw materials from duty. This 
has likewise been the uniform policy of the United 

Camillas 329 

States; and it has particularly embraced the article 
of peltries, which, by our existing laws, may be im 
ported into any part of the United States free from 
duty. The object of this regulation is the encourage 
ment of manufactures, by facilitating a cheap sup 
ply of raw materials. A duty of entry, therefore, as 
to such part of the article as might be worked up at 
home would be prejudicial to our manufacturing in 
terest; as to such parts as might be exported, if the 
duty was not drawn back, it would injure our com 
mercial interest. But it is the general policy of our 
laws, in conformity with the practice of other com 
mercial countries, to draw back and return the duties 
which are charged upon the importation of foreign 
commodities. This has reference to the advance 
ment of the export trade of the country; so that, 
with regard to such peltries as should be re-exported, 
there would be no advantage to our revenue from 
having laid a duty of entry. Such a duty, then, 
being contrary to our established system and to true 
principles, there can be no objection to a stipulation 
against it. As to its having the effect of making our 
country the channel of the British trade in peltries, 
this, if true, and it is indeed probable, could not but 
promote our interest. A large proportion of the 
profits would then necessarily remain with us, to 
compensate for transportation and agencies. It is 
likely, too, that to secure the fidelity of agents, as is 
usual, copartnerships would be formed, of which 
British capital would be the principal instrument, 
and which would throw a still greater proportion of 
the profits into our hands. The more we can make 

33° Alexander Hamilton 

our country the entrepot, the emporium of the trade 
of foreigners, the more we shall profit. There is no 
commercial principle more obvious than this, more 
universally agreed, or more generally practised upon, 
in countries where commerce is well understood. 

4. The fourth of the above-enumerated suggestions 
is answered, in its principal point, by the practice 
just stated, of drawing back the duties on importa 
tion, when articles are re-exported. This would 
place the articles, which we should send into the 
British territories, exactly upon the same footing, as 
to duties, with the same articles imported there from 
Europe. With regard to the additional expense of 
transportation, this is another instance of the con 
tradiction of an argument, which has been relied 
upon by both sides, which is, that taking the voyage 
from Europe in conjunction with the interior trans 
portation, the advantage, upon the whole, is likely 
to be in our favor. And it is upon this aggregate 
transportation that the calculation ought to be made. 
With respect to India or Asiatic articles, there is the 
circumstance of a double voyage. 

5. As to the small population of Canada, which is 
urged to depreciate the advantages of the trade with 
the white inhabitants of those countries, it is to be 
observed that this population is not stationary. If 
the date of the census be rightly quoted, it was taken 
eleven years ago, when there were already 123,082 
souls. It is presumable that this number will soon 
be doubled; for it is notorious that settlement has 
proceeded for some years with considerable rapidity 
in Upper Canada ; and there is no reason to believe 

Camillus 331 

that the future progress will be slow. In time to 
come the trade may grow into real magnitude; but 
be it more or less beneficial, it is so much gained by 
the article ; and so much clear gain, since it has been 
shown not to be true that it is counterbalanced by a 
sacrifice in the fur trade. 

6. With regard to the supposed danger of smug 
gling, in the intercourse permitted by this article, it 
is very probable it will be found less than if it were 
prohibited. Entirely to prevent trade between bor 
dering territories is a very arduous, perhaps an im 
practicable, task. If not authorized, so much as is 
carried on must be illicit ; and it may be reasonably 
presumed that the extent of illicit trade will be much 
greater in that case than where an intercourse is per 
mitted under the usual regulations and guards. In 
the last case the inducement to it is less, and such as 
will only influence persons of little character or prin 
ciple, while every fair trader is, from private interest, 
a sentinel to the laws; in the other case, all are in 
terested to break through the barriers of a rigorous 
and apparently unkind prohibition. This considera 
tion has probably had its weight with our govern 
ment in opening a communication through Lake 
Champlain with Canada, of the principle of which 
regulation the treaty is only an extension. 

7. The pretended inequality of the article, as aris 
ing from the greater extent of the United States than 
of the British territories, is one of those fanciful posi 
tions which are so apt to haunt the brains of visionary 
politicians. Traced through all its consequences, 
it would terminate in this, that a great empire could 

33 2 Alexander Hamilton 

never form a treaty of commerce with a small one; 
for, to equalize advantages according to the scale of 
territory, the small state must compensate for its de 
ficiency in extent by a greater quantum of positive 
privilege, in proportion to the difference of extent, 
which would give the larger State the monopoly of 
its trade. According to this principle, what wretched 
treaties have we made with France, Sweden, Prus 
sia, and Holland! For our territories exceed in ex 
tent those of either of these Powers. How immense 
the sacrifice in the case of Holland! for the United 
States are one hundred times larger than the United 
Provinces. 

But how are we sure that the extent of the United 
States is greater than the territories of Great Britain 
on our continent? We know that she has preten 
sions to extend to the Pacific Ocean, and to embrace 
a vast wilderness, incomparably larger than the 
United States, and we are told, as already men 
tioned, that her trading establishments now actually 
extend beyond the 56th degree of north latitude, and 
iiyth degree of west longitude. 

Shall we be told (shifting the original ground) that 
not extent of territory, but extent of population, is 
the measure? Then how great is the advantage 
which we gain in this particular by the treaty at 
large ? The population of Great Britain is to that of 
the United States about two and a half to one, and 
the comparative concession by her in the trade 
between her European dominions and the United 
States must be in the same ratio. When we add to 
this the great population of her East India posses- 

Camillus 333 

sions, in which privileges are granted to us, without 
any return, how prodigiously will the value of the 
treaty be enhanced, according to this new and extra 
ordinary rule? 

But the rule is, in fact, an absurd one, and only 
merits the notice which has been taken of it to 
exhibit the weak grounds of the opposition to the 
treaty. The great standard of reciprocity is equal 
privilege. The adventitious circumstances, which 
may render it more beneficial to one party than the 
other, can seldom be taken into the account, be 
cause they can seldom be estimated with certainty; 
the relative extent of country or population is, of all 
others, a most fallacious guide. 

The comparative resources and facilities for mutual 
supply, regulate the relative utility of a commer 
cial privilege; and as far as population is con 
cerned, it may be laid down, as a general rule, that 
the smallest population graduates the scale of the 
trade on both sides, since it is at once the principal 
measure of what the smaller State can furnish to the 
greater, and of what it can take from the greater; 
or, in other words, of what the greater State can find 
a demand for in the smaller State. But this rule, 
too, like most general ones, admits of numerous 
exceptions. 

In case of a trade by land and inland navigation, 
the sphere of the operation of any privilege can only 
extend a certain distance. When the distance to a 
given point, through a particular channel, is such 
that the expense of transportation would render 
an article dearer than it could be brought through 

334 Alexander Hamilton 

another channel to the same point, the privilege to 
carry the article through that particular channel to 
such point becomes of no avail. Thus the privilege 
of trading by land or inland navigation from the 
British territories on this continent can procure to 
that country no advantage of trade with Princeton 
in New Jersey, because supplies can come to it on 
better terms from other quarters. Whence we per 
ceive, that the absolute extent of territory or popu 
lation of the United States is no measure of the 
relative value of the privileges reciprocally granted 
by the article under consideration, and, consequently, 
no criterion of the real reciprocity of the article. 

The objectors to the treaty have marshalled 
against this article a quaint figure, of which, from 
the use of it in different quarters, it is presumable 
they are not a little enamoured ; it is this, that the 
article enables Great Britain to draw a line of cir- 
cumvallation round the United States. They hope 
to excite prejudice by presenting to the mind the 
image of a siege, or investment of the country. If 
trade be war, they have chosen a most apt figure; 
and we cannot but wonder how the unfortunate 
island of Great Britain has been able so long to 
maintain her independence amidst the beleaguering 
efforts of the number of nations with whom she has 
been imprudent enough to form treaties of com 
merce ; and who, from her insular situation, have it 
in their power to beset and hem her in on all sides. 
How lucky it is for the United States, that at least 
one side is covered by Spain, and that this formid 
able line of circumvallation cannot be completely 

Camillus 335 

perfected ! or rather how hard driven must those be 
who are obliged to call to their aid auxiliaries so 
preposterous ! 

Can any good reason be given why one side of a 
country should not be accessible to foreigners, for 
purposes of trade, equally with another? Might not 
the cultivators on the side from which they were 
excluded, have cause to complain that the carriage 
of their productions was subject to an increased 
charge, by a monopoly of the national navigation; 
while the cultivators in other quarters enjoyed the 
benefit of a competition between that and foreign 
navigation? And might not all the inhabitants 
have a right to demand a reason, why their com 
merce should be less open and free, than that of 
other parts of the country? Will privileges of trade 
extend the line of territorial circumvallation ? Will 
not the extent of contiguous British territory remain 
the same, whether the communications of trade are 
open or shut ? By opening them may we not rather 
be said to make so many breaches in the wall, or in- 
trenchment of this newly-invented circumvallation? 
if indeed it be not enchanted! 

The argument upon this article has hitherto 
turned, as to the trade with the white inhabitants 
of the British territories, on European and East 
India goods. But there can be no doubt that a 
mutually-beneficial commerce in native commodi 
ties ought to be included in the catalogue of ad 
vantages. Already there is a useful interchange of 
certain commodities, which time and the progress of 
settlement and resources cannot fail to extend. It 

336 Alexander Hamilton 

is most probable, too, that a considerable part of the 
productions of the British territories will find the 
most convenient channel to foreign markets through 
us; which, as far as it regards the interest of exter 
nal commerce, will yield little less advantage than if 
they proceeded from our own soil or industry. It is 
evident, in particular, that as far as this shall be the 
case, it will prevent a great part of the competition 
with our commodities which would exist if those 
productions took other routes to foreign markets. 

In considering the subject, on the side of a trade 
in home commodities, it is an important reflection 
that the United States are much more advanced in 
industrial improvement than the British territories. 
This will give us a material and growing advantage. 
While their articles of exchange with us will essen 
tially consist in the products of agriculture and of 
mines, we shall add to these manufactures of vari 
ous and multiplying kinds, serving to increase the 
balance in our favor. 

In proportion as the article is viewed on an en 
larged plan and permanent scale, its importance 
to us magnifies. Who can say how far British 
colonization may spread southward and down the 
west side of the Mississippi, northward and westward 
into the vast interior regions towards the Pacific 
Ocean? Can we view it as a matter of indifference, 
that this new world eventually is laid open to our 
enterprise, to an enterprise seconded by the im 
mense advantage already mentioned, of a more im 
proved state of industry? Can we be insensible 
that the precedent furnishes us with a cogent and 

Camillus 337 

persuasive argument to bring Spain to a similar 
arrangement? And can we be blind to the great 
interest we have in obtaining a free communication 
with all the territories that environ our country, 
from the St. Mary's to the St. Croix? 

In this large view of the subject, the fur trade 
which has made a very prominent figure in the dis 
cussion, becomes a point scarcely visible. Objects 
of great variety and magnitude start up in per 
spective, eclipsing the little atoms of the day, and 
promising to grow and mature with time. 

The result of the whole is, that the United States 
make, by the third article of the treaty, a good bar 
gain ; that with regard to the fur trade, with equality 
of privileges and superior advantages of situation, 
we stake one against seven, or at most one against 
six; that as to the trade in European and East In 
dian goods and in home productions, we make an 
equal stake with some advantages of situation ; that 
we open an immense field of future enterprise ; that 
we avoid embarrassments and dangers ever attend 
ant on an artificial and prohibitory policy, which, 
in reference to the Indian nations, was particularly 
difficult and hazardous; and that we secure those 
of a natural and liberal policy, and give the fairest 
chances for good neighborhood between the United 
States and the bordering British territories, and 
consequently of good understanding with Great 
Britain, conducing to the security of our peace. 
Experience, no doubt, will demonstrate that the 
horrid spectres which have been conjured up are 
fictions ; and if it should even be slow to realize the 

VOL. V.— 22. 

338 Alexander Hamilton 

predicted benefits, — for time will be requisite to give 
permanent causes their due effect in controlling 
temporary circumstances — it will at last prove that 
the predicted evils are chimeras and cheats. 

CAMILLUS. 

NO. XIII 

1795- 

The fourth and fifth articles of the treaty, from 
similarity of object, will naturally be considered to 
gether. The fourth, reciting a doubt, "whether the 
river Mississippi extends so far northwestward as to 
be intersected by a line drawn due west from the 
Lake of the Woods, in the manner mentioned by 
the treaty of peace," agrees that measures shall be 
taken in concert between the two governments, to 
make a joint survey of that river, from a degree of 
latitude below the falls of St. Anthony, to the prin 
cipal source or sources thereof, and of the parts ad 
jacent thereto; and that if in the result it should 
appear that the said river would not be intersected 
by such a line as above mentioned, the two parties 
will proceed by amicable negotiation to regulate the 
boundary line in that quarter, as well as all other 
points to be adjusted between them, according to 
justice and mutual convenience, and the intent of 
the treaty of peace. The fifth, reciting that doubts 
have arisen, what river was truly intended under 
the name of the river St. Croix, mentioned in the 
treaty of peace, and forming a part of the boundary 
therein described, provides that the ascertainment 

Camillas 339 

of the point shall be referred to three commissioners, 
to be appointed thus: One to be named by his 
Britannic Majesty, another by the President of the 
United States, with the advice and consent of the 
Senate, the third by these two, if they can agree in 
the choice; but if they cannot agree, then each of 
them to name a person, and out of the persons named, 
one drawn by lot in their presence to be the third 
commissioner. These commissioners are to meet at 
Halifax, with power to adjourn to any place or 
places they may think proper; are to be sworn to 
examine and decide the question according to the 
evidence which shall be laid before them by both 
parties ; and are to pronounce their decision, which 
is to be conclusive, by a written declaration under 
their hands and seals, containing a description of 
the river, and particularly the latitude and longitude 
of its mouth and of its source. 

These articles, though they have been adjusted 
with critical propriety, have not escaped censure. 
They have even in one instance been severely repro 
bated, as bringing into question things about which 
there was no room for any — and which a bare in 
spection of the map was sufficient to settle. 

With regard to the Mississippi, there is no satis 
factory evidence that it has ever been explored to 
its source. It is even asserted that it has never been 
ascended beyond the 45th degree of north latitude, 
about a degree above the falls of St. Anthony. 
Fadeus's map, in 1793, will serve as a specimen of 
the great uncertainty which attends this matter. It 
notes that the river had not been ascended beyond 

34° Alexander Hamilton 

the degree of latitude just mentioned, and exhibits 
three streams, one connected with the Marshy Lake 
in that latitude, another with the White Bear Lake 
near the 46th degree, and the third with the Red 
Lake in the 47th degree; denominating each of the 
two first, "the Mississippi by conjecture," and the 
last, "Red Lake River, or Lahontan's Mississippi," 
—all of them falling considerably short, in their 
northern extent, of the Lake of the Woods, which 
is placed as high as the 5oth degree of north latitude. 
Thus stands this very clear and certain point, which, 
we are told, it was disgraceful on the part of our 
envoy to have suffered to be brought into question. 

There is, however, a specific topic of blame of 
the article which has greater plausibility. It is this : 
that it does not finally settle the question, but refers 
the adjustment of the closing line to future negotia 
tion, in case it should turn out that the river does 
not stretch far enough north to be intersected by an 
east and west line from the Lake of the Woods. I 
answer, that the arrangement is precisely such as it 
ought to have been. It would have been prema 
ture to provide a substitute till it was ascertained 
that it was necessary. This could only be done by 
an actual survey. A survey is therefore provided 
for, and will be made at the joint expense of the two 
countries. 

That survey will not only determine whether a 
substitute be requisite or not, but it will furnish data 
for judging what substitute is proper and most con 
formable to the true intent of the treaty. Without 
the data which it will afford, any thing that could 

Camillas 341 

have been done would have been too much a leap in 
the dark. National acts, especially on the import 
ant subject of boundary, ought to be bottomed on 
a competent knowledge of circumstances. It ought 
to be clearly understood how much is retained, how 
much is relinquished. Had our envoy proceeded 
on a different principle, if what he had agreed to 
had turned out well, it would have been regarded as 
the lucky result of an act of supererogation. If it 
had proved disadvantageous, it would have been 
stigmatized as an act of improvidence and im 
prudence. 

The strong argument for having settled an alter 
native is the avoiding of future dispute. But what 
alternative could have been agreed upon, which 
might not have bred controversy? The closing line 
must go directly or indirectly to the Mississippi — 
which of the streams reputed or conjectured to be 
such, above the falls of St. Anthony, is best en 
titled to be so considered? To what known point 
was the line to be directed ? How was that point to 
be identified with adequate certainty? The diffi 
culty of answering these questions will evince that 
the danger of controversy might have been in 
creased by an impatience to avoid it, and by antici 
pating, without the necessary lights, an adjustment 
which they ought to direct. 

The facts with regard to the river St. Croix are 
these : the question is, which of two rivers is the true 
St. Croix? The dispute concerning it is as old as 
the French possession of Nova Scotia. France set 
up one river; Great Britain another. The point 

34 2 Alexander Hamilton 

was undecided when the surrender of Nova Scotia 
by the former to the latter put an end to the question 
as between those parties. It was afterward renewed 
between the colonies of Nova Scotia and Massa 
chusetts Bay, which last, in the year 1762, ap 
pointed commissioners to ascertain, in conjunction 
with commissioners which might be appointed by 
the province of Nova Scotia, the true river, but no 
final settlement of the matter ensued. 

The treaty of peace gives us for one boundary, the 
river St. Croix, but without designating it. Hence 
it has happened that not long after the peace was 
concluded, the question, which had been before 
agitated between France and Great Britain, and 
between the provinces of Massachusetts and Nova 
Scotia, was revived between the State of Massa 
chusetts and that province, and it has ever since 
continued a subject of debate. 

A mode of settling the dispute was under the con 
sideration of Congress in the year 1785; and powers 
were given to our then Minister at the Court of 
London, to adjust the affair, but nothing was con 
cluded. And we learn from a letter of Mr. Jefferson 
to Mr. Hammond, dated the i5th December, 1784, 
that it then also engaged the attention of our govern 
ment; that the ascertaining of the point in dispute 
was deemed a matter of " present urgency," and 
that it had before been the subject of application 
from the United States to the Government of Great 
Britain. 

It is natural to suppose, that a dispute of such 
antiquity between such different parties, is not with- 

Camillas 343 

out colorable foundation on either side ; at any rate, 
it was essential to the preservation of peace that it 
should be adjusted. 

If one party could not convince the other by argu 
ment, of the superior solidity of its pretensions, I 
know of no alternative but arbitration or war. Will 
any one pretend that honor required us in such a 
case to go to war, or that the object was of a nature 
to make it our interest to refer it to that solemn, 
calamitous, and precarious issue ? No rational man 
will answer this question in the affirmative. It fol 
lows, that an arbitration was the proper course, and 
that our envoy acted rightly in acceding to this 
expedient. It is one, too, not without precedent 
among nations, though it were to be wished, for 
the credit of human moderation, that it was more 
frequent. 

Is there any good objection to the mode of 
the arbitration? It seems impossible that any one 
more convenient or fair could have been devised, 
and it is recommended by its analogy to what is 
common among individuals. 

What the mode is, has been already detailed, and 
need not be repeated here. It is objected, that too 
much has been left to chance ; but no substitute has 
been offered which would have been attended with 
less casuality. The fact is, that none such can be 
offered. Conscious of this, those who make the ob 
jection have not thought fit to give an opportunity 
of comparison by proposing a substitute. What is 
left to chance? Not that there shall be a final de 
cision ; for this is most effectually provided for. It 

344 Alexander Hamilton 

is not only positively stipulated that commissioners, 
with full and definitive power, shall be appointed, 
but an ultimate choice is secured, by referring, in 
the last resort, to a decision by lot, what it might not 
be practicable to decide by agreement. This is the 
ne plus ultra of precaution. Is it that this reference 
to lot leaves it too uncertain of what character or 
disposition the third commissioner may be ? If this 
be not rather a recommendation of the fairness of 
the plan, how was it to be remedied? Could it have 
been expected of either of the parties, to leave the 
nomination to the other? Certainly not. Would 
it have been advisable to have referred the ultimate 
choice to some other state or government? Where 
would one have been found, in the opinion of both 
parties, sufficiently impartial? On which side would 
there have been the greatest danger of a successful 
employment of undue influence? Is it not evident 
that this expedient would have added to equal un 
certainty, as to character and disposition, other 
casualities and more delay? Should it have been 
left to the two commissioners appointed by the 
parties to agree at all events? It might have been 
impossible for them to come to an agreement, and 
then the whole plan of settlement would have been 
frustrated. Would the sword have been a more 
certain arbiter? Of all uncertain things, the issues 
of war are the most uncertain. What do objections 
of this kind prove, but that there are persons re 
solved to object at all events? 

The submission of this question to arbitration has 
been represented as an eventual dismemberment of 

Camillus 345 

empire, which, it has been said, cannot rightly be 
agreed to, but in a case of extreme necessity. This 
rule of extreme necessity is manifestly only applica 
ble to a cession or relinquishment of a part of a 
country, held by a clear and acknowledged title ; not 
to a case of disputed boundary. 

It would be a horrid and destructive principle that 
nations could not terminate a dispute about the title 
to a particular parcel of territory, by amicable agree 
ment, or by submission to arbitration as its substi 
tute ; but would be under an indispensable obligation 
to prosecute the dispute by arms, till real danger to 
the existence of one of the parties should justify, 
by the plea of extreme necessity, a surrender of its 
pretensions. 

Besides, the terms in which writers lay down the 
rule, and the reason of it, will instruct us that where 
it does apply, it relates not to territory as such, but 
to those who inhabit it, on the principle that the 
social compact entitles all the members of the society 
to be protected and maintained by the common 
strength in their rights and relations as members. It 
is understood that the territory between the two 
rivers in dispute is either uninhabited, or inhabited 
only by settlers under the British. If this be so, it 
obviates all shadow of difficulty on our side. But 
be it as it may, it would be an abuse of the rule, to 
oppose it to the amicable adjustment of an ancient 
controversy, about the title to a particular tract of 
country, depending on a question of fact, whether 
this or that river be the one truly intended by former 
treaties between the parties. The question is not, 

346 Alexander Hamilton 

in this case, Shall we cede a part of our country 
to another power? It is this — To whom does this 
tract of country truly belong ? Should the weight of 
evidence be on the British side, our faith, pledged by 
the treaty, would demand from us an acquiescence 
in their claim. Not being able to agree in opinion 
on this point, it was most equitable and most agree 
able to good faith to submit it to an impartial 
arbitration. 

It has been asked, among other things, whether 
the United States were competent to the adjustment 
of the matter without the special consent of the 
State of Massachusetts. Reserving a more particular 
solution of this question to a separate discussion of 
the constitutionality of the treaty here. I shall con 
tent myself with remarking that our treaty of peace 
with Great Britain, by settling the boundaries of 
the United States without the specific consent or 
authority of any State, assumes the principle that the 
Government of the United States was of itself com 
petent to the regulation of boundary with foreign 
powers — that the actual government of the Union 
has even more plenary authority with regard to 
treaties than was possessed under the confederation, 
and that acts, both of the former and of the present 
government, presuppose the competency of the 
national authority to decide the question in the very 
instance under consideration. I am informed, also, 
that the State of Massachusetts has, by repeated 
acts, manifested a corresponding sense on the subject. 

A reflection not unimportant occurs here. It was, 
perhaps, in another sense than has been hitherto 

Camillus 347 

noticed, a point of prudence in both governments to 
refer the matter in dispute to arbitration. If one 
had yielded to the pretensions of the other, it could 
hardly have failed to draw upon itself complaints, 
and censures, more or less extensive, from quarters 
immediately interested or affected. 

CAMILLUS. 

(From the Argus.) 
NO. XIV 

1795- 

The sixth article stipulates compensation to 
British creditors for losses and damages which may 
have been sustained by them, in consequence of cer 
tain legal impediments, which, since the treaty of 
peace with Great Britain, are alleged to have ob 
structed the recovery of debts bona fide contracted 
with them before the peace. 

To a man who has a due sense of the sacred ob 
ligation of a just debt, a proper conception of the 
pernicious influence of laws which infringe the rights 
of creditors, upon morals, upon the general security 
of property, upon public as well as private credit, 
upon the spirit and principles of good government; 
who has an adequate idea of the sanctity of the 
national faith, explicitly pledged — of the ignominy 
attendant upon a violation of it in so delicate a 
particular as that of private pecuniary contracts — of 
the evil tendency of a precedent of this kind to the 
political and commercial interests of the nation 
generally — every law which has existed in this 

348 Alexander Hamilton 

country, interfering with the recovery of the debts 
in question, must have afforded matter of seri 
ous regret and real affliction. To such a man, it 
must be among the most welcome features of the 
present treaty, that it stipulates reparation for the 
injuries which laws of that description may have 
occasioned to individuals, and that, as far as is now 
practicable, it wipes away from the national reputa 
tion the stain which they have cast upon it. He will 
regard it as a precious tribute to justice, and as a 
valuable pledge for the more strict future observance 
of our public engagements ; and he would deplore as 
an ill-omened symptom of the depravation of public 
opinion, the success of the attempts which are mak 
ing to render the article unacceptable to the people 
of the United States. But of this there can be no 
danger. The spontaneous sentiments of equity, of a 
moral and intelligent people, will not fail to sanction, 
with their approbation, a measure which could not 
have been resisted without inflicting a new wound 
upon the honor and character of the country. 

Let those men who have manifested by their 
actions, a willing disregard of their own obligations 
as debtors — those who secretly hoard, or openly or 
unblushingly riot on the spoils of plundered creditors, 
let such men enjoy the exclusive and undivided 
satisfaction of arraigning and condemning an act of 
national justice, in which they may read the severest 
reproach of their iniquitous principles and guilty 
acquisitions. But let not the people of America 
tarnish their honor by participating in that con 
demnation, or by shielding, with their favorable 

Camillas 349 

opinion, the meretricious apologies which are offered 
for the measures that produce the necessity of re 
paration. 

The recapitulation of some facts will contribute to 
a right judgment of this part of the treaty. 

It is an established principle of the laws of nations, 
that, on the return of peace between nations which 
have been at war, a free and undisturbed course 
shall be given to the recovery of private debts on 
both sides.1 In conformity to this principle, the 4th 
article of the treaty of peace between the United 
States and Great Britain expressly stipulates, 
"that creditors on either side shall meet with no 
lawful impediment to the recovery of the full value 
in sterling money of all bona-fide debts theretofore 
contracted." 

Two instances of the violation of this article have 
been already noticed, with a view to another point; 
one relating to certain laws of the State of Virginia, 
passed prior to the peace, which, for several years 
after it, appears to have operated to prevent the 
legal pursuit of their claims by British creditors. 
Another, relating to a law of the State of South 
Carolina, which suspended the recovery of the debts 
for nine months, and after that period permitted the 
recovery only in four years' instalments. 

But these were not all the instances; there were 
other laws of South Carolina prolonging the instal 
ments, and obliging the creditors to receive in pay 
ment the property of debtors at appraised values; 
and there were laws of Rhode Island, New Jersey, 

1 Grotius, B. III., ch. xx., s. xvi. 

35° Alexander Hamilton 

North Carolina, and Georgia, making paper money 
a legal tender for the debts of those creditors ; which, 
it is known, sustained a very great depreciation 
in every one of those States. These very serious 
and compulsory interferences with the rights of the 
creditors, have received from Decius, the soft ap 
pellation of a modification of the recovery of British 
debts. Does he expect to make us believe, by this 
smooth phrase, that the right to recover the full 
value of a debt in sterling money, is satisfied by the 
obligation to take as a substitute, one half, one 
third, or one fourth of the real value in paper? 

It must necessarily have happened, that British 
creditors have sustained, from the operation of the 
different acts alluded to, losses more or less extensive, 
which the mere removal of the legal impediments 
which occasioned them could not repair. In many 
instances, the losses must have actually accrued and 
taken their full effect; in others, where no proceed 
ings may have been had, the lapse of so many years 
must have created inabilities to pay, in debtors who 
were originally competent, who might have been 
made to pay, had there been a free course of justice. 

The removal of the impediments, therefore, by 
opening of the courts of justice, was not an adequate 
satisfaction. It could not supersede the obligation 
of compensation for losses which had irretrievably 
accrued by the operation of the legal impediments, 
while they continued in force. The claim for this 
was still open on the part of Great Britain, and still 
to be adjusted between the two nations. 

The excuse that these laws were retaliations for 

Camillus 351 

prior infractions of treaty by Great Britain, was in 
no view an answer to the claim.1 

In the first place, as has already been proved, the 
fact of such prior infractions was too doubtful to 
be finally insisted upon, and was, after a fruitless 
effort to obtain the acquiescence of the other party, 
properly and necessarily waived; so that it could 
not serve as a plea against reparation. 

In the second place, if that fact had been indubi 
table, the species of retaliation was unwarrantable. 
It will be shown, when we come to discuss the zoth 
article, that the debts of private individuals are in 
no case proper objects of reprisals ; that independent 
of the treaty, the meddling with them was a violation 
of the public faith and integrity; and that, conse 
quently, it was due as much to our own public faith 
and integrity as to the individuals who had suffered, 
to make reparation. It was an act demanded by the 
justice, probity, and magnanimity of the nation. 

In the third place, it was essential to reciprocity in 
the adjustment of the disputes which had existed 
concerning the treaty of peace. When we claimed 
the reinstatement and execution of the article with 
regard to the posts, it was just that we should 

1 It may not be improper to observe, that this excuse implies a 
palpable violation of the then Constitution of the United States. The 
confederation vested the powers of war and of the treaty in the Union. 
It therefore lay exclusively with Congress to pronounce whether the 
treaty was or was not violated by Great Britain, and what should be 
the satisfaction. No State, individually, had the least right to meddle 
with the question, and the having done it was an usurpation on the 
constitutional authority of the United States. 

It might be shown, on a similar principle, that all confiscations or 
sequestrations of British debts, by particular States, during the war, 
were also unconstitutional. 

35 2 Alexander Hamilton 

consent to the reinstatement and execution of the ar 
ticle with regard to debts. If the obstruction of the 
recovery of debts was the equivalent by way of re 
taliation for the detention of the posts, we could not 
expect to have restitution of the thing withheld and 
to retain the equivalent for it likewise. The dilemma 
was to be content with the equivalent and abandon 
the thing, or to recover the thing and abandon the 
equivalent; to have both was more than we could 
rightly pretend. The reinstatement of the article, 
with regard to the debts, necessarily included two 
things: the removal of legal impediments as to the 
future recovery; compensation for past losses by 
reason of those impediments. The first had been 
effected by the new Constitution of the United 
States ; the last is promised by the treaty. 

Did our envoy reply that the reinstatement of the 
article with regard to the posts included likewise 
compensation for their detention ? Was it an answer 
to this, destitute of reason, that our loss, by the 
detention of the posts, which resolved itself essen 
tially into the uncertain profits of a trade that might 
have been carried on, admitted of no satisfactory 
rule of computation; while the principal and interest 
of private debts afforded a familiar standard for the 
computation of losses upon them ; that, nevertheless, 
while this was the usual, and must be the admitted 
standard, it is an adequate one in cases where pay 
ment is protracted beyond the allowed term of 
credit — since the mere interest of money does not 
countervail among merchants, the profits of its em 
ployment in trade, and still less the derangements 

Camillus 353 

of credit and fortune, which frequently result to 
creditors, from procrastinations of payment — and 
that the final damage to Great Britain, in these two 
particulars, for which no provision could be made, 
might well exceed any losses to us by the detention 
of the posts? 

In the last place, the compensation stipulated was 
a sine qua non with Great Britain, of the surrender 
of the posts, and the adjustment of the controversy 
which had subsisted between the two countries. The 
making it such may be conceived to have been dic 
tated more by the importance of the precedent, than 
by the quantum of the sum in question. We shall 
easily understand this, if we consider how much the 
commercial capital of Great Britain is spread over 
the world. The vast credits she is in the habit of 
extending to foreign countries, renders it to her an 
essential point to protect those credits by all the 
sanctions in her power. She cannot forbear to con 
tend at every hazard against precedents of the in 
vasion of the rights of her merchants, and for 
retribution where any happen. Hence, it is always 
to be expected, that she will be peculiarly inflexible 
on this point; and that nothing short of extreme 
necessity can bring her to relax in an article of 
policy, which, perhaps not less than any other, is a 
necessary prop of the whole system of her political 
economy. 

It was, therefore, to have been foreseen that 
whenever our controversy with Great Britain was 
adjusted, compensation for obstructions to the re 
covery of debts would make a part of the adjustment. 

VOL. V.— 23. 

354 Alexander Hamilton 

The option lay between compensation, relinquish- 
ment of the posts, or war. Our envoy is entitled 
to the applause of all good men, for preferring 
the first. The extent of the compensation can, 
on no possible scale, compare with the immense 
permanent value of the posts, or with the expenses 
of war. The sphere of the interferences has been 
too partial to make the sum of the compensation, in 
any event, a very serious object ; and as to a war, a 
conscientious or virtuous mind could never endure 
the thoughts of seeing the country involved in its 
calamities, to get rid of an act of justice to individu 
als, whose rights, in contempt of public faith, had 
been violated. 

Having reviewed the general considerations which 
justify the stipulation of compensation, it will be 
proper to examine if the plan upon which it is to 
be made, is unexceptionable. 

This plan contains the following features: i. The 
cases provided for are those " where losses and dam 
ages occasioned by the operation of lawful impedi 
ments (which since the peace have delayed the full 
recovery of British debts, bona fide contracted before 
the peace, and still owing to the creditors, and have 
impaired and lessened the value and security thereof) 
cannot now, for whatever reason, be actually obtained 
-in the ordinary course of justice." 2. There is an ex- j 
press exception out of this provision, of all the cases 
in which losses and damages have been occasioned 
by such insolvency of the debtors, or other causes, as 
would equally have operated to produce them, if no 
legal impediment had existed, or by the manifest delay, 

Camillus 355 

or negligence ,. or wilful omission, of the claimants. 3. 
The amount of the losses and damages, for which 
compensation is to be made, is to be ascertained by 
five commissioners to be appointed as follows: two 
by his Britannic Majesty, two by the President with 
the advice and consent of the Senate, the fifth by 
the unanimous voice of these four, if they can agree ; 
if they cannot agree, then to be taken by lot out 
of two persons, one of whom to be named by the 
two British commissioners, the other by the two 
American commissioners. 4. These five commis 
sioners, thus appointed, are, before they proceed to 
the execution of their trust, to take an oath for its 
faithful discharge. Three of them to constitute a 
board ; but there must be present one of the two com 
missioners named on each side, and the fifth commis 
sioner. Decisions to be made by majority of voices 
of those present. They are first to meet at Phil 
adelphia, but may adjourn from place to place as 
they see cause. 5. Eighteen months after the com 
missioners make a board, are assigned for receiving 
applications; but the commissioners, in particular 
cases, may extend the term for any other term, not 
exceeding six months. 6. The commissioners are 
empowered to take into consideration all claims, 
whether of principal or interest, or balances of princi 
pal or interest, and to determine them according 
to the merits and circumstances thereof, and as 
justice and equity shall appear to them to require ; 
to examine persons on oath or affirmation, and to 
receive in evidence, depositions, books, papers, or 
copies, or extracts thereof, either according to the 

356 Alexander Hamilton 

legal forms existing in the two countries, or accord 
ing to a mode to be devised by them. 7. Their 
award is to be conclusive; and the United States 
are to cause the sum awarded in each case to be paid 
in specie to the creditor without deduction, and at 
such time and place as shall have been awarded; but 
no payment to be required sooner than twelve months 
from the day of the exchange of the ratifications of 
the treaty. 

This provision for ascertaining the compensation 
to be made, while it is ample, is also well guarded. 

It is confined to debts contracted before the peace, 
and still owing to the creditors. It embraces only 
the cases of loss or damage in consequence of legal 
impediments to the recovery of those debts which 
will exclude all cases of voluntary compromise, and 
can include none, where the laws have allotted a 
free course to justice. It can operate in no instance 
where, at present, the ordinary course of justice is 
competent to full relief, and the debtor is solvent; 
nor in any where insolvency or other cause would 
have operated to produce the loss or damage if no 
legal impediment had existed, or where it had been 
occasioned by the wilful delay, negligence, or omission 
of the creditor. 

If it be said that the commissioners have never 
theless much latitude of discretion, and that in the 
exercise of it they may transgress the limits in 
tended, the answer is that the United States, though 
bound to perform what they have stipulated with 
good faith, would not be bound to submit to a mani 
fest abuse of authority by the commissioners. Should 

Camillas 357 

they palpably exceed their commission, or abuse 
their trust, the United States may justifiably, though 
at their peril, refuse compliance. For example, if 
they should undertake to award upon a debt con 
tracted since the peace, there could be no doubt that 
their award would be a nullity. So likewise there 
may be other plain cases of misconduct, which, in 
honor and conscience, would exonerate the United 
States from performance. It is only incumbent 
upon them to act, bona fide, and as they act at their 
peril, to examine well the soundness of the ground 
on which they proceed. 

With regard to the reference to commissioners to 
settle the quantum of the compensation to be made, 
this course was dictated by the nature of the case. 
The tribunals of neither country were competent to 
retrospective adjustment of losses and damages, in 
many cases which might require it. It is for this 
very reason of the incompetency of the ordinary 
tribunals to do complete justice, that a special stipu 
lation of compensation, and a special mode of 
obtaining it, became necessary. In constructing a 
tribunal to liquidate the quantum of reparation, in 
the case of a breach of treaty, it was natural and just 
to devise one likely to be more certainly impartial 
than the established courts of either party. With 
out impeaching the integrity of those courts, it was 
morally impossible that they should not feel a bias 
towards the nation to which they belonged, and for 
that very reason they were unfit arbitrators. In the 
case of the spoliations of our property, we should 
undoubtedly have been unwilling to leave the 

35 8 Alexander Hamilton 

adjustment in the last resort to the British courts; 
and by parity of reason, they could not be expected 
to refer the liquidation of compensation in the case 
of the debts to our courts. To have pressed this 
would have been to weaken our argument for a dif 
ferent course in regard to the spoliations. We should 
have been puzzled to find a substantial principle of 
discrimination . 

If a special and extraordinary tribunal was to be 
constituted, it was impracticable to contrive a more 
fair and equitable plan for it than that which has 
been adopted. The remarks on the mode of deter 
mining the question respecting the river St. Croix, 
apply in full force here, and would render a par 
ticular comment superfluous. 

To the objection of the Charleston committee, that 
the article erects a tribunal unknown to our Con 
stitution, and transfers to commissioners the cog 
nizance of matters appertaining to American courts 
and juries, the answer is simple and conclusive. The 
tribunals established by the Constitution do not con 
template a case between nation and nation arising 
upon a breach of treaty, and are inadequate to the 
cognizance of it. Could either of them hold plea of 
a suit of Great Britain, plaintiff, against the United 
States, defendant? The case, therefore, required the 
erection or constitution of a new tribunal; and it 
was most likely to promote equity to pass by the 
courts of both the parties. 

The same principle contradicts the position that 
there has been any transfer of jurisdiction from 
American coui ts and juries to commissioners. It is 

Camillas 359 

a question not between individual and individual, 
or between our Government and individuals, but 
between our Government and the British Govern 
ment; of course, one in which our courts and juries 
have no jurisdiction. There was a necessity for an 
extraordinary tribunal to supply the defect of ordi 
nary jurisdiction; and so far is the article from 
making the transfer imputed to it, that it expressly 
excepts the cases in which effectual relief can be ob 
tained in the ordinary course of justice. 

Nations acknowledging no common judge on earth, 
when they are willing to submit the question be 
tween them to a judicial decision, must of necessity 
constitute a special tribunal for the purpose. The 
mode by commissioners, as being the most unex 
ceptionable, has been repeatedly adopted. 

I proceed to reply to some other objections which 
have been made against the provision contained in 
this article. 

It is charged with affixing a stigma on the national 
character, by providing reparation for an infraction, 
which, if it ever did exist, has been done away, there 
being now a free course to the recovery of British 
debts in the courts of the United States. 

An answer to this objection has been anticipated 
by some observations heretofore made. The giving 
a free course to justice in favor of British creditors, 
which has been effected by the new Constitution of 
the United States, though it obviates the future 
operation of legal impediment, does not retrospect 
ively repair the losses and damages which may have 
resulted from their past operation. In this respect, 

360 Alexander Hamilton 

the effects continued, and reparation was due. To 
promise it, could fix no stigma on our national 
character. That was done by the acts which created 
the cause for reparation. To make it, was as far as 
possible to remove the stigma. 

It has been said that the promise of compensation 
produces injustice to those States which interposed 
no legal impediments to the recovery of debts, by 
saddling them with a part of the burden arising from 
the delinquencies of the transgressing States. But 
the burden was before assumed by the treaty of 
peace. The article of that treaty, which engaged 
that there should be no lawful impediments to the 
recovery of debts, was a guaranty by the United 
States of justice to the British creditors. It charged 
them with the duty of taking care that there was no 
legal obstacle to the recovery of the debts of those 
creditors, and consequently with a responsibility for 
any such obstacle which should happen, and with the 
obligation of making reparation for it. We must, 
therefore, refer to the treaty of peace, not to the last 
treaty, the common charge which has been incurred 
by interference in the recovery of British debts. The 
latter only carries into execution the promise made 
by the former. It may be added that it is a condition 
of the social compact that the nation at large shall 
make retribution to foreign nations for injuries done 
to them by its members. 

It has been observed, that Mr. Jefferson has clearly 
shown, that interest in cases like that of British debts, 
is liable, during the period of the war, to equitable 
abatements and deductions; and that, therefore, the 

Camillus 361 

discretion given to the commissioners on this head 
ought not to have been as large as it appears in the 
article. 

Mr. Jefferson has no doubt offered arguments of 
real weight to establish the position that juries have, 
and exercise, a degree of discretion in any article of 
interest ; and that the circumstances of our war with 
Great Britain afford strong reasons for abatements 
of interest. But it was foreign to his purpose, and 
accordingly he has not attempted to particularize the 
rules which ought to govern in the application of this 
principle to the variety of cases in which the question 
may arise; and he has himself noted that the prac 
tice in different States and in different courts, has 
been attended with great diversity. Indeed, admit 
ting the right to abate interest under special circum 
stances, in cases in which it is the general rule to 
allow it, the circumstances of each case, are, perhaps, 
the only true criterion of the propriety of an excep 
tion. The particular nature of the contract, the cir 
cumstances under which it was entered into, the 
relative situation of parties, the possibility or not of 
mutual access, — these and other things would guide 
and vary the exercise of the discretion to abate. It 
was, therefore, right to leave the commissioners, as 
they are left, in the same situation with judges and 
juries : — to act according to the true equity of the 
several cases or of the several classes of cases. 

Let it be remembered that the Government of 
Great Britain has to consult the interests and opin 
ions of its citizens, as well as the Government of 
the United States those of their citizens. The only 

362 Alexander Hamilton 

satisfactory course which the former could pursue, in 
reference to its merchants, was to turn over the whole 
question of interest as well as principal to the com 
missioners. And as this was truly equitable, the 
Government of the United States could make no 
well-founded opposition to it. 

CAMILLUS. 

NO. XV 

It is the business of the seventh article of the 
treaty, to provide for two objects : one, compensation 
to our citizens for injuries to their property, by ir 
regular, or illegal captures, or condemnations; the 
other, compensation to British citizens for captures 
of their property within the limits and jurisdiction of 
the United States, or elsewhere, by vessels originally 
armed in our ports, in the cases in which the captured 
property having come within our posts and power, there 
was a neglect to make restitution. 

The first object is thus provided for: i. It is 
agreed, that in all cases of irregular or illegal captures 
or condemnations of the vessels and other property 
of citizens of the United States, under color of au 
thority or commissions from his Britannic Majesty, 
in which adequate compensation for the losses and 
damages sustained, cannot, for whatever reason, be 
actually obtained in the ordinary course of justice, 
full and complete compensation for the same will be 
made by the British Government to the claimants— 
except where the loss or damage may have been occa 
sioned by the manifest delay or negligence, or wilful 

Camillas 363 

omission of those claimants. 2. The amount of the 
losses and damages to be compensated, is to be ascer 
tained by five commissioners, who are to be ap 
pointed in exactly the same manner as those for 
liquidating the compensation to British creditors. 

3. These commissioners are to take a similar oath, 
and to exercise similar powers for the investigation of 
claims with those other commissioners ; and they are 
to decide according to the merits of the several 
cases, and to justice, equity, and the laws of nations. 

4. The same term of eighteen months is allowed for 
the reception of claims, with a like discretion to ex 
tend the term, as in the case of British debts. 5. 
The award of these commissioners, or of three of 
them, under the like guards as in that case, is to be 
final and conclusive, both as to the justice of the 
claims and to the amount of the compensation. And, 
lastly, his Britannic Majesty is to cause the compen 
sation awarded to be paid to the claimants in specie, 
without deduction, at such times and places, and 
upon the condition of such releases or assignments, 
as the commissioners shall prescribe. 

Mutually and dispassionately examined, it is im 
possible not to be convinced, that this provision is 
ample, and ought to be satisfactory. The course of 
the discussion will exhibit various proofs of the disin- 
genuousness of the clamors against it ; but it will be 
pertinent to introduce here one or two samples of it. 

It has been alleged, that while the article preced 
ing, and this article, provide effectually for every de 
mand of Great Britain against the United States, the 
provision for this important and urgent claim of ours 

364 Alexander Hamilton 

is neither explicit nor efficient, nor co-extensive with 
the object, nor bears any proportion to the summary 
method adopted for the satisfying of British claims. 

This suggestion is every way unfortunate. The 
plan for satisfying our claim, except as to the descrip 
tion of the subject which varies with it, is an exact 
copy of that for making compensation to British 
creditors. Whoever will take the pains to compare, 
will find, that in the leading points, literal conformity 
is studied; and that in others, the provisions are 
assimilated by direct references; and will discover 
also this important distinction in favor of the effi 
ciency and summariness of the provision for our claim 
— that while the commissioners are expressly re 
stricted from awarding payment to British creditors, 
to be made sooner than one year after the exchange 
of ratifications of the treaty, they are free to award it 
to be made the very day of their decision, for the 
spoliations of our property. As to compensation for 
British property, captured within our limits, or by 
vessels originally armed within our ports and not re 
stored, which is the only other British claim that has 
been provided for, it happens that this, forming a 
part of the very article we are considering, is sub 
mitted to the identical mode of relief which is insti 
tuted for making satisfaction to us. 

So far, then, is it from being true, that a compari 
son of the modes of redress provided by the treaty, 
for the complaints of the respective parties, turns to 
our disadvantage, that the real state of the case ex 
hibits a substantial similitude, with only one material 
difference, and that in our favor; and, that a strong 

Camillas 365 

argument for the equity of the provisions on each 
side, is to be drawn from their close resemblance to 
each other. 

The other objection alluded to, and which has been 
shamelessly reiterated, is that Denmark and Sweden, 
by pursuing a more spirited conduct, had obtained 
better terms than the United States. It is even pre 
tended, that one or both of them had actually re 
ceived from Great Britain a gross sum on account — 
in anticipation of an ultimate liquidation. In my 
second number, the erroneousness of the supposition 
that those Powers had obtained more than the 
United States, was intimated; but the subsequent 
repetition of the idea, more covertly in print, and 
very openly and confidently in conversation, renders 
expedient an explicit and peremptory denial of the 
fact. There never has appeared a particle of evi 
dence to support it ; and after challenging the assert- 
ors of it to produce their proof, I aver, that careful 
inquiry at sources of information at least as direct 
and authentic as theirs, has satisfied me that the sug 
gestion is wholly unfounded, and that at the time of 
the conclusion of our treaty with Great Britain, both 
Denmark and Sweden were behind us in the effect of 
their measures for obtaining reparation. 

What are we to think of attempts like these, to 
dupe and irritate the public mind? Will any pru 
dent citizen still consent to follow such blind or such 
treacherous guides? 

Let us now, under the influence of a calm and 
candid temper, without which truth eludes our re 
searches, by a close scrutiny of the provision, satisfy 
Alexander Hamilton 

ourselves, whether it be not really a reasonable and 
proper one. But previous to this it is requisite to 
advert to a collateral measure, which was also a fruit 
of the mission to Great Britain, and which ought to 
be taken in conjunction with the stipulations of this 
article. I refer to the order of the British king in 
council, of the 6th of August, 1794, by which order 
the door, before shut by lapse of time, is opened to ap 
peals from the British West India courts of admiralty, 
to be brought at any time which shall be judged rea 
sonable by the lords commissioners of appeals in prize 
cases. This, of itself, was no inconsiderable step 
towards the redress of our grievances ; and it may be 
hoped, that with the aid which the Government of 
the United States has given to facilitate appeals, 
much relief may ensue from this measure. It will 
not be wonderful, if it should comport with the pride 
and policy of the British Government, by promoting 
justice in their courts, to leave as little as possible to 
be done by the commissioners. 

I proceed now to examine the characteristics of the 
supplementary provision made by the article, in con 
nection with the objections to it. 

i st. It admits fully and explicitly the principle, 
that compensation is to be made for the losses and 
damages sustained by our citizens, by irregular or 
illegal captures, or condemnations of their vessels and 
other property, under color of authority (which in 
cludes governmental orders and instructions) or of 
commissions of his Britannic Majesty. It is to be 
observed, that the causes of the losses and damages 
are mentioned in the disjunctive, " captures or con- 

Camillus 367 

demnations " ; so that damages by captures, which 
were not followed by condemnations, are provided 
for as well as those where condemnations did follow. 

A cavil has been raised on the meaning of the 
word color, which, it is pretended, would not reach 
the cases designed to be embraced; because the 
spoliations complained of were made, not merely by 
color, but actually by virtue of instructions from the 
British Government. 

For the very reason that this subtle and artificial 
meaning ascribed to the term, would tend to defeat 
the manifest general intent of the main provision of 
the article — which is plainly to give reparation for 
irregular or illegal captures or condemnations of 
American property, contrary to the laws of nations — 
that meaning must be deemed inadmissible. 

But in fact, the expression is the most accurate 
that could have been used to signify the real intent of 
the article. When we say a thing was done by color 
of an authority or commission, we mean one of three 
things : that it was done on the pretence of a sufficient 
authority or commission not validly imparted, or on 
the pretence of such an authority or commission 
validly imparted but abused or misapplied, or on the 
pretence of an insufficient authority or commission, 
regularly, as to form, imparted and exercised. It 
denotes a defect of rightful and just authority, 
whether emanating from a wrong source, or im 
properly from a right source ; whereas the phrase " by 
virtue of," is most properly applied to the valid ex 
ercise of a valid authority. But the two phrases 
are not unfrequently used as synonymous. Thus, 

in a proclamation of a British king, of the 25th of 
May, 1792, he, among other things, forbids all his 
subjects, by virtue or tinder color of any foreign 
commission or letters of reprisals, to disturb, infest, 
or damage the subjects of France. 

In whose mouths does the article put the expres 
sion? In those of citizens of the United States. 
What must they be presumed to have meant? 
Clearly this: that by color of instructions or com 
missions of his Britannic Majesty, either exercised 
erroneously, or issued erroneously, as being contrary 
to the laws of nations, the citizens of the United 
States had suffered loss and damage by irregular or 
illegal captures or condemnations of their property. 
What is the standard appealed to, to decide the ir 
regularity or illegality to be redressed? Expressly 
the laws of nations. The commissioners are to de 
cide " according to the merits of the several cases, to 
justice, equity, and the laws of nations." Wherever 
these laws, as received and practised among nations, 
pronounce a capture or condemnation of neutral 
property to have been irregular or illegal, though by 
color of an authority or commission of his Britannic 
Majesty, it would be the duty of the commissioners to 
award compensation. 

The criticism, however, fails on its own principle, 
when tested by the fact. The great source of griev 
ance, intended to be redressed by the article, pro 
ceeded from the instruction of the 6th of November, 
1793. That instruction directs the commanders of 
ships of war and privateers to stop and detain all 
ships laden with goods, the produce of any colony be- 

Camillas 369 

longing to France, or carrying provisions and other 
supplies for the use of such colony, and to bring the 
same, with their cargoes, to legal adjudication in the 
British courts of admiralty. These terms, "legal 
adjudication,'1 were certainly not equivalent, upon 
any rational construction, to condemnation. Adjudi 
cation means simply, a judicial decision, which 
might be either to acquit or condemn. Yet the 
British West India courts of admiralty appear to 
have generally acted upon the term as synonymous 
with condemnation. In doing this, they may be 
truly said, even in the sense of the objection, to have 
acted by color, only, of the instruction. 

The British Cabinet have disavowed this con 
struction of the West Indian courts, and have, as we 
have seen, by a special act of interference, opened a 
door which was before shut to a reversal of their sen 
tences, by appeal to the courts in England. We find, 
also, that the term adjudication is used in the seven 
teenth article of our late treaty as synonymous only 
with judicial decision, according to its true import. 
This, if any thing were wanting, would render it im 
possible for the commissioners to refuse redress on 
the ground of the condemnations, if otherwise illegal, 
being warranted by the pretended sense of the words 
legal adjudication. But in reality, as before observed, 
their commission will be to award compensation in 
all cases in which they are of opinion that, according 
to the established laws of nations, captures or con 
demnations were irregular or illegal, however other 
wise authorized ; and this in contempt of the quibbling 
criticism which has been so cunningly devised. 

370 Alexander Hamilton 

2d. The provision under consideration obliges the 
British Government, in all cases of illegal capture 
or condemnation in which adequate compensation 
cannot, for whatever reason, be actually had in the 
ordinary course of justice, to make full and complete 
compensation to the claimants, which is to be paid 
in specie to themselves, without deduction, at such 
times and places as shall be awarded. 

They are not sent for redress to the captors, or 
obliged to take any circuitous course for their pay 
ment, but are to receive it immediately from the 
treasury of Great Britain. 

3d. The amount of the compensation in each case is 
to be fixed by five commissioners, — two appointed by 
the United States, two by Great Britain ; the fifth by 
these four, or in case of disagreement, by lot. These 
commissioners to meet and act in London. 

It seems impossible, as has been observed and 
shown in the analogous cases, to imagine a plan for 
organizing a tribunal more completely equitable and 
impartial than this ; while it is the exact counterpart 
of the one which is to decide on the claims of British 
creditors. Could it have been believed that so palpa 
ble an error could have been imposed on a town 
meeting, in the face of so plain a provision, as to in 
duce it to charge against this article, that in a national 
concern of the United States, redress was left to 
British courts of admiralty? Yet, strange as it may 
appear, this did happen even in the truly enlightened 
town of Boston. The just pride of that town will not 
quickly forget that it has been so compromitted. 

The truth is, that, according to the common usage 

Camillus 371 

of nations, the courts of admiralty of the belligerent 
parties are the channels through which the redress of 
injuries to neutrals is sought. But Great Britain has 
been brought to agree to refer all the cases in which 
justice cannot be obtained through those channels to 
an extraordinary tribunal; in other words, to arbi 
trators mutually appointed. 

It is here that we find the reparation of the national 
wrong which we had suffered. In admitting the 
principle of compensation by the government itself, 
in agreeing to an extraordinary tribunal, in the con 
stitution of which the parties have an equal voice, to 
liquidate that compensation, Great Britain has vir 
tually and effectually acknowledged the injury which 
has been done to our neutral rights, and has con 
sented to make satisfaction for it. This was an 
apology in fact, whatever it may be in form. 

As regards our honor, this is an adequate, and the 
only species usual in similar cases between nations; 
pecuniary compensation is the true reparation in such 
cases — governments are not apt to go upon their 
knees to ask pardon of other governments — Great 
Britain, in the recent instance of the dispute with 
Spain about Nootka Sound, was glad to accept of a 
like reparation. It merits remark, incidentally, that 
the instrument, which settles this dispute, expressly 
waives, like our treaty, reference to the merits of the 
complaints and pretensions of the respective parties. 
Is our situation such as to authorize us to pretend to 
impose humiliating conditions on other nations ? 

It is necessary to distinguish between injuries and 
insults, which we are too apt to confound. The 

372 Alexander Hamilton 

seizures and spoliations of our property fall most truly 
under the former head. The acts which produce them, 
embraced all the neutral Powers, were not particu 
larly levelled at us, bore no mark of an intention to 
humble us by any peculiar indignity or outrage. 

These acts were of June 8th, and of November 6th, 
1793. The seizure of our vessels going with pro 
visions to the dominions of France, under the first, 
was put on the double ground of a war extraordinary 
in its principle,1 and of a construction of the laws of 
nations, which, it was said, permitted that seizure ; a 
construction not destitute of color, and apparently 
supported by the authority of Vatel, though, in my 
opinion, ill founded. It was accomplished also by 
compensation for what was taken, and other circum 
stances, that evinced a desire to smooth the act. The 
indiscriminate confiscation of our property, upon the 
order of the 6th of November, which was the truly 
flagrant injury, was certainly unwarranted by that 
order (and no secret one has appeared), and the 
matter has been so explained by the British Govern 
ment. It is clear that evils suffered under acts so cir 
cumstanced, are injuries rather than insults, and are 
so much the more manageable as to the species and 
measures of redress. It would be Quixotism to assert 
that we might not honorably accept in such a case, 
the pecuniary reparation which has been stipulated. 

But it is alleged, in point of interest, it is unsatis 
factory — tedious in the process, uncertain in the 

1 Though this country has viewed the principle of the war favorably, 
it is certain that Europe generally, the neutral Powers not wholly 
excepted, has viewed it in a different light, so that this was not a mere 
pretence. 

Camillas 373 

event — that there ought to have been actual and 
immediate indemnifications, or at least, a payment 
upon account. 

A little calm reflection will convince us that neither 
of the two last things was to be expected. There was 
absolutely no criterion, either for a full indemnifica 
tion or for an advance upon account. The value of 
the property seized and condemned (lay out of the 
case damages upon captures where condemnation had 
not ensued) was not ascertained, even to our own 
government, with any tolerable accuracy. Every 
well-informed man will think it probable, that of this, 
a proportion was covered French property. There 
were, therefore, no adequate data, upon which our 
government could demand, or the British Govern 
ment pay, a determined sum. Both governments 
must have acted essentially by guess. Ours could 
not in honor or conscience have made even an esti 
mate but upon evidence. It might have happened, 
that a sum which appeared upon the evidence that 
had been collected, sufficient, might have proved on 
further evidence insufficient. Too little, as well as 
too much, might have been demanded and paid. 
But it will perhaps be said, that some gross estimate 
might have been formed; and that of this, such a 
part might have been advanced upon account, as 
was within the narrowest probable limit, liable to 
eventual adjustment. Let us for a moment suppose 
this done — what good end would it have answered? 
How could the United States have distributed this 
money among the sufferers, till it was ascertained 
which of them was truly entitled, and to how much ? 

374 Alexander Hamilton 

Is it not evident, that if they had made any distribu 
tion, before the final and perfect investigation of the 
right of each claimant, it would be at the risk of mak 
ing mispayments, and of being obliged to replace the 
sums mispaid, perhaps at a loss to the United States, 
for the benefit of those who should be found to be 
better entitled ? Would it have been expedient for our 
government to have incurred this risk to its constitu 
ents ? And if the money was to be held undistributed 
till an investigation of claims was completed, to what 
purpose the haste about an advance? 

On the other hand, is it in this loose, gross way, that 
nations transact affairs with each other? Do even 
individuals make indemnifications to one another 
in so lumping a manner? Could it be expected of 
Great Britain, that she would pay, till it was fairly 
ascertained what was to be paid; especially when 
she had too much cause to suspect, that a material 
proportion of the property claimed, might turn out 
to be French? Would it have been justifiable on our 
part, to make her compliance with such a demand, 
the sine qua non of accommodation and peace? 
Whoever will believe that she would have complied 
with so humiliating a requisition, must be persuaded 
that we were in a condition to dictate, and she in a 
condition to be obliged to receive any terms that we 
might think fit to prescribe! The person who can 
believe this, must be, in my opinion, under the in 
fluence of a delirium, for which there is no cure in the 
resources of reason and argument. 

It must be admitted, that it was a matter of ne 
cessity, that investigation should precede payment; 

Camillas 375 

then I see not what more summary mode could 
have been devised. Who more capable of proceeding 
with dispatch, than arbitrators untrammelled with 
legal forms; vested with powers to examine parties 
and others, on oath, and to command and receive all 
evidence in their own way? Here are all the means 
of expedition divested of every clog. 

Eighteen months are allowed for preferring claims, 
but the commissioners are at liberty to adjust them 
as fast as they are preferred. In every case in which 
it appears to them bona fide, that the ordinary course 
of justice is inadequate to relief, they may forthwith 
proceed to examine and decide. There is no im 
pediment, no cause of delay whatever, more than the 
nature of a due investigation always requires. 

The meeting of the commissioners at London, was 
recommended by the circumstance that the admiralty 
courts were likely to concentre there a considerable 
part of the evidence on which they were to proceed ; 
which, upon the whole, might favor dispatch as well 
as more complete justice. In many cases the de 
cisions of those courts may come under their review. 

As to the uncertainty of the event, this, as far as it 
may be true, was inseparable from any plan, bot 
tomed on the idea of a previous investigation of 
claims ; and it has been shown that some such plan 
was reasonable and inevitable. 

It may also be added, that the plan affords a moral 
certainty of substantial justice, which is all that can 
rationally be expected in similar affairs; compensa 
tion, where due, is explicitly stipulated. A fair and 
adequate mode of deciding and liquidating it has 

376 Alexander Hamilton 

been settled. All the arguments which were adduced 
to prove the probability of good faith, in regard to 
the posts, apply equally to this subject. The interest 
which every nation has in the preservation of char 
acter, and which the most profligate dare not entirely 
disregard; the consideration of defeating the fulfil 
ment of the stipulations on our part ; the size of the 
object, certainly not of great magnitude; the very 
discouraging situation for replunging suddenly into a 
new war, in which the present war will in every event 
leave Great Britain; — these are reasons which afford 
solid ground of assurances that there will be no 
evasion of performance. 

As to the commissioners, two of the five will be of 
our choice, a third may be so likewise ; but should it 
prove otherwise, it will be surprising if one of the 
other three, all acting under oath, and having char 
acter at stake, shall not be disposed to do us reason 
able justice. 

4th. While their power is coextensive with all 
losses and damages from irregular or legal captures 
or condemnations, their sentence in each case is to be 
conclusive, and the rules which are to govern it, as 
prescribed by the article, are the merits of each case, 
justice, equity, and the law of nations. What 
greater latitude could have been desired to be given? 
What greater latitude could have been given ? What 
else in the case was there to have been provided for? 
What is meant by the assertion, that the provision 
is not commensurate with the object? 

The general and unqualified reference to the laws 
of nations, dismisses all pretence to substitute the 

Camillus 377 

arbitrary regulations of Great Britain as rules of de 
cision. Her instructions or orders, if incompatible 
with those laws, are nullities. 

Thus the treaty unfetters the question between us 
and her, from the commencement of the war, and 
with her own consent, commits them at large to a 
tribunal to be constituted by mutual choice. 

Will any man of candor and equity say that a 
better provision ought to have been expected than 
has been accomplished? 

The alternative was immediate indemnification, by 
actual payment in whole or in part, without examina 
tion of the extent or justice of claims; or future in 
demnification, after a due investigation of both in 
some equitable and effectual mode. The first was 
attended with difficulties on our side, and with solid 
objections on the other side. The last was therefore 
the truly reasonable course, and it has been pursued 
on a very proper plan. The causes of loss and dam 
age are fully embraced. They are referred to the de 
cision of an unexceptionable tribunal, to be guided by 
unexceptionable rules, and the indemnification which 
may be awarded, is to be paid fully, immediately, and 
without detour by the British Government itself. Say, 
ye impartial and enlightened, if all this be not as it 

ought to have been! 

CAMILLUS. 

NO. XVI 

1795. 

The second object of the seventh article, as stated 
in my last number, is " compensation to British 

378 Alexander Hamilton 

citizens, for captures of their property within the 
limits and jurisdiction of the United States, or else 
where, by vessels originally armed in our ports, in the 
cases in which the captured property having come within 
our power, there was a neglect to make restitution." 

This precise view of the thing stipulated, is calcu 
lated to place the whole subject at once before the 
mind, in its true shape ; to evince the reasonableness 
of it, and to dismiss the objections which have been 
made, as being foreign to the real state of the case. 
These objections are, in substance, that the com 
pensation promised is of great extent and amount; 
that an enormous expense is likely to be incurred; 
and that it is difficult to prove that a neutral 
nation is under an obligation to go the lengths of 
the stipulation. 

These remarks obviously turn upon the supposi 
tion, erroneously entertained or disingenuously af 
fected, that compensation is to be made for all 
captures within our limits or jurisdiction, or elsewhere, 
by vessels originally armed in our ports, where resti 
tution has not, in fact, been made. Did the stipula 
tion stand on this broad basis, it would be justly 
liable to the criticism which has been applied to it. 
But the truth is, that its basis is far more narrow,— 
that instead of extending to all those captures, it is 
confined to the particular cases of them only, in which 
the captured property came, or was, after the cap 
ture, within our power, so as to have admitted of 
restitution by us but restitution was not made, 
through the omission or neglect of our Government. 
It does not extend to a single case, where the prop- 

Camillas 379 

erty, if taken within our jurisdiction, was immediately 
carried out of our reach — or where, if taken within 
our jurisdiction, it was never brought within our 
reach, or where, if at any time within our reach, 
due means were employed without success to effect 
restitution. 

It will follow from this, that the cases within the 
purview of the article, must be very few — for, except 
with regard to three prizes, made in the first instance, 
where special considerations restrained the Govern 
ment from interposing, there has been a regular and 
constant effort of the executive, in which our courts 
have efficaciously cooperated, to restore prizes made 
within our jurisdiction, or by vessels armed in our 
ports. The extent or amount, therefore, of the com 
pensation to be made, can by no possible means be 
considerable. 

Let us, however, examine if the construction I give 
to the clause be the true one. 

It is in these words: " It is agreed that in all such 
cases where restitution shall not have been made 
agreeably to the tenor of the letter from Mr. Jefferson 
to Mr. Hammond, dated September 5, 1793, a copy 
of which is annexed to this treaty, the complaints of 
the parties shall be and are hereby referred to the 
commissioners to be appointed by virtue of this 
article, who are hereby authorized and required to 
proceed in the like manner relative to these as to the 
other cases committed to them; and the United 
States undertake to pay to the complainants in 
specie; without deduction, the amount of such sums 
as shall be awarded to them respectively," etc. 

380 Alexander Hamilton 

The letter of Mr. Jefferson, by this reference to it, 
and its annexation to the treaty, is made virtually a 
part of the treaty. The cases in which compensa 
tion is promised, are expressly those in which restitu 
tion has not been made agreeably to the tenor of that 
letter. 

An analysis of the letter will of course unfold the 
cases intended. 

1. It recapitulates an assurance before given by a 
letter of the yth August, to the British Minister, that 
measures were taken for excluding from further 
asylum in our ports, vessels armed in them to cruise 
on nations with which we were at peace, and for the 
restoration of the prizes the Lovely Lass, Prince 
William Henry, and the Jane of Dublin; and that, 
should the measures of restitution fail in their effect, 
the President considered it as incumbent on the United 
States to make compensation for the vessels. These 
vessels had been captured by French privateers, 
originally armed in our ports, and had been after 
wards brought within our ports. 

2. It states that we are bound by our treaties with 
three of the belligerent nations,1 by all the means in 
our power, to protect and defend their vessels and 
effects in our ports or waters, or on the seas near our 
shore, and to recover and restore the same to the 
right owners, when taken from them; adding, that 
if all the means in our power are used, and fail in their 
effect, we are not bound by our treaties to make com 
pensation. It further states, that though we have 

1 France, Holland, and Prussia, and our treaty with Sweden includes 
a like proviso. 

Camillas 381 

no similar treaty with Great Britain, it was the opin 
ion of the President, that we should use towards that 
nation the same rule which was to govern us with 
those other nations, and even to extend it to captures 
made on the high seas and brought into our ports, if 
done by vessels which had been armed within them. 

3. It then draws this conclusion, that having, for 
particular reasons, forborne to use all means in our 
power for the restitution of the three vessels men 
tioned in the letter of the yth of August, the Presi 
dent thought it incumbent upon the United States to 
make compensation for them; and though nothing 
was said in that letter, of other vessels, taken under 
like circumstances and brought in after the 5th of 
June, and before the date of that letter, yet when the 
same forbearance had taken place, it was his opinion 
that compensation would be equally due. The cases, 
then, here described, are those in which illegal prizes 
are made and brought into our ports prior to the 7th 
of August, 1793, and in which we had forborne to use 
all the means in our power for restitution. Two 
characters are made essential to the cases in which 
the compensation is to be made : one, that the prizes 
were brought within our ports — the other, that we for 
bore to use all the means in our power to restore them. 

4. The letter proceeds to observe, that, as to 
prizes made under the same circumstances, and 
brought in after the date of that letter, the President 
had determined that all means in our power should be 
used for their restitution; that if these failed, as we 
should not be bound to make compensation to the 
other powers, in the analogous case, he did not mean 

382 Alexander Hamilton 

to give an opinion that it ought to be done to Great 
Britain. But still, if any case shall arise subsequent 
to that date, circumstances of which shall place them 
on a similar ground with those before it, the President 
would think compensation incumbent on the United 
States. The additional cases of which an expecta 
tion of compensation is given in this part of the let 
ter, must stand on similar ground with those before 
described — that is, they must be characterized by the 
two circumstances of a bringing within our ports, 
and a neglect to use all the means in our power for 
their restitution. Everywhere the idea of compensa 
tion is negatived where the prizes have not come 
within our power, or where we have not forborne to 
use the proper means to restore them. 

The residue of the letter merely contains sugges 
tions for giving effect to the foregoing assurances. 

This analysis leaves no doubt that the true con 
struction is such as I have stated. Can there be 
any greater doubt that the expectations given by 
the President, in the first instance, and which have 
been only ratified by the treaty, were in themselves 
proper, and have been properly ratified? 

The laws of nations, as dictated by reason, as 
received and practised upon among nations, as recog 
nized by writers, establish these principles for regu 
lating the conduct of neutral Powers. 

A neutral nation (except as to points to which it is 
clearly obliged by antecedent treaties) whatever may 
be its opinion of the justice or injustice of the war 
on either side, cannot, without departing from its 
neutrality, favor one of two belligerent parties more 

Camillas 383 

than the other — benefit one, to the prejudice of the 
other — furnish or permit the furnishing to either, the 
instruments of acts of hostility, or any warlike succor 
or aid whatever, especially without extending the 
same advantage to the other ; cannot suffer any force 
to be exerted, or warlike enterprise to be carried on 
from its territory, by one party against the other, or 
the preparation or organization there of the means 
of annoyance; has a right and is bound to prevent 
acts of hostility within its jurisdiction; and, if they 
happen against its will, to restore any property which 
may have been taken in exercising them. These 
positions will all be found supported in the letter or 
spirit of the following authorities: Barbeyrac's note 
on Puffendorff, B. VIII. , Ch. VI., f. 7. Grotius, B. 
III., Ch. XVIL, f. 3. Bynkershoeck, B. I., Ch. VIII., 
p. 61-65. Chap. XI., p. 69, 70. Vatel, B. III., Ch. 
VII. Bynkershoeck cites examples of restitution in 
the case mentioned. 

Every treaty we have made with foreign Powers 
promises protection within our jurisdiction, and the 
restoration of property taken there. A similar stipu 
lation is, indeed, a general formula in treaties, giving 
an express sanction to the rule of the laws of nations 
in this particular. 

An act of Congress of the 5th of June, 1794, which 
is expressly a declaratory act, recognizes at large the 
foregoing principles of the laws of nations, providing, 
among other things, for the punishment of any per 
son who, within the United States, fits out and arms, 
or attempts to fit out and arm, or procures to be 
fitted out and armed, or is knowingly concerned in 

Alexander Hamilton 

furnishing, fitting out, or arming, any ship or vessel, 
with intent to be employed in the service of a foreign 
state, to cruise or commit hostilities upon the sub 
jects or citizens of another foreign state, with which 
the United States are at peace ; or issues or delivers a 
commission for any such ship or vessel, or increases 
or augments, or procures to be increased or aug 
mented, or is knowingly concerned in increasing or 
augmenting the force of any ship of war, cruiser, or 
other armed vessel, in the service of a foreign state 
at war with another foreign state, with which the 
United States are at peace; or within the territory 
of the United States, begins or sets on foot, or pro 
vides or prepares the means of any military expedi 
tion or enterprise, to be carried on from thence 
against the dominions of any foreign state, with 
which the United States are at peace. 

And our courts have adopted, in its fullest latitude, 
as conformable, in their opinion, with those laws, 
the principle of restitution of property, when either 
captured within our jurisdiction, or elsewhere, by 
vessels armed in our ports. The Supreme Court of 
the United States has given to this doctrine, by 
solemn decisions, the most complete and compre 
hensive sanction. 

It is, therefore, undoubtedly the law of the land, 
determined by the proper constitutional tribunal, in 
the last resort, that restitution is due in the above- 
mentioned cases. 

And it is a direct and necessary consequence from 
this, that where it is not made by reason of the 
neglect of the government, to use the means in its 

Camillas 385 

power for the purpose, there results an obligation to 
make reparation. For, between nations, as between 
individuals, wherever there exists a perfect obliga 
tion to do a thing, there is a concomitant obligation 
to make reparation for omissions and neglects. 

The President was, therefore, most strictly justifia 
ble, upon principle, in the opinion which he com 
municated, that, in the cases of such omissions or 
neglects, compensation ought to be made. And in 
point of policy, nothing could be wiser; for had he 
not done it, there is the highest probability that war 
would have ensued. 

Our treaty with France forbids us expressly to 
permit the privateers of the enemy to arm in our 
ports, or to bring or sell there the prizes which they 
have made upon her. We could not, for that reason, 
have made the privilege of arming in our ports, if it 
had been allowed to France, reciprocal. The allow 
ance of it to her would, consequently, have been a 
clear violation of neutrality, in the double sense of 
permitting a military aid, and of permitting it to the 
one and refusing it to the other. Had we suffered 
France to equip privateers in our ports, to cruise 
thence upon her enemies, and to bring back and 
vend there the spoils or prizes taken, we should have 
become by this the most mischievous foe they could 
have. For, while all our naval resources might have 
augmented the force of France, our neutrality, if 
tolerated, would, in a great degree, have sheltered 
and protected her cruisers. Such a state of things 
no nation at war could have acquiesced in. And, as 
well to the efficacy of our endeavors to prevent 

VOL. V.— 25- 

386 Alexander Hamilton 

equipments in our ports as to the proof of the sin 
cerity of those endeavors, it was essential that we 
should restore the prizes which came within our 
reach, made by vessels armed in our ports. It is 
known that, notwithstanding the utmost efforts of 
the Government to prevent it, French privateers 
have been clandestinely equipped in some of our 
ports, subsequent to the assurances which were given 
that the practice would be discountenanced. If 
prizes made by such vessels were suffered to be 
brought into our ports, and sold there, this would 
be not only a very great encouragement to the prac 
tice, but it would be impossible that it should be re 
garded in any other light than as a connivance. 

In such circumstances, can we blame our Chief 
Magistrate? Can we even deny him praise, for hav 
ing diverted an imminent danger to our peace, by in 
curring the responsibility of giving an expectation of 
compensation ? The conjuncture we may remember 
was critical and urgent. Congress were at the time 
in recess. A due notice to convene them in so ex 
tensive a country, can hardly be rated at less than 
three months. 

In this situation our envoy found the business. It 
is not true, in the sense in which it has been ad 
vanced, that he was to be governed by the fitness of 
the thing, unmindful of the opinion of the President. 
An opinion of the chief magistrate of the Union, 
was to a diplomatic agent an authority and a guide, 
which he could not justifiably have disregarded. 
The claim of compensation, on the other side, was 
greatly fortified by this opinion. Nor was it a mat- 

Camillus 387 

ter of indifference to our national delicacy and dig 
nity, that the expectation given by it should be 
fulfilled. It would have been indecent in our envoy 
to have resisted it. It was proper in him, by acced 
ing to it, to refer the matter to the ultimate decision 
of that authority, which, by our Constitution, is 
charged with the power of making treaties. It was 
the more proper, because the thing was intrinsically 
right. Every candid man, every good citizen, will 
rejoice that the President acted as he did in the first 
instance — that our envoy acted as he did in the 
second, and that the conduct of both has received 
the final constitutional sanction. 

The opinions of Mr. Jefferson, when they can be 
turned to the discredit of the treaty, are with its 
adversaries oracular truths. When they are to sup 
port it, they lose all their weight. The presumption, 
that the letter referred to had the concurrence of the 
judgment of that officer, results from a fact, generally 
understood and believed — namely: that the pro 
ceedings of the President, at the period when it was 
written, in relation to the war, were conformable 
with the unanimous advice of the heads of the 
executive departments. 

This case of British property captured by priva 
teers originally armed in our ports, falsifies the 
assertion of the adversaries of the treaty, that the 
pretensions of Great Britain have been fully provided 
for. She had a colorable ground to claim compensa 
tion for all captures made by vessels armed in our 
ports, 'whithersoever carried in, or howsoever dis 
posed of, especially where their equipment had been 

388 Alexander Hamilton 

tolerated by our Government. This toleration was 
to be inferred, as well from a forbearance to suppress 
those vessels when they came within our power, as 
from an original permission. Had compensation 
been stipulated on this scale, it is not certain that it 
would not have amounted to as much more than 
that which has been promised, as would counter 
balance our claims for negroes carried away, and 
for the detention of the posts. But instead of this, 
it is narrowed down by the treaty to such prizes of 
those vessels as were brought within our ports, and 
in respect to which we forbore to use all the means 
in our power for restitution. Here, then, is a set- 
off against doubtful and questionable claims relin 
quished on our side. Here, also, is another proof 
how much the antagonists of the treaty are in the 
habit of making random assertions. But can we 
wonder at it, when we reflect that they have under 
taken to become the instructors of their fellow- 
citizens on a subject, in the examination of which 
they unite a very superficial knowledge with the 
most perverse dispositions? 

CAMILLUS. 

NO. XVII 

1795- 

The eighth article provides merely, that the com 
missioners to be appointed in the three preceding 
articles, shall be paid in such manner as shall be 
agreed between the parties, at the time of the ex- 

Camillas 389 

change of the ratification of the treaty; and that 
all other expenses attending the commissions, shall 
be defrayed jointly by the two parties, the same 
being previously ascertained and allowed by a ma 
jority of the commissioners; and that in case of 
death, sickness, or necessary absence of a commis 
sioner, his place shall be supplied in the same man 
ner as he was first appointed — the new commissioner 
to take the same oath or affirmation, and to perform 
the same duties as his predecessor. 

Could it have been imagined, that even this simple 
and equitable provision was destined not to escape 
uncensured? As if it was predetermined that not 
a single line of the treaty should pass without the 
imputation of guilt; nothing less than an infraction 
of the Constitution of the United States has been 
charged upon this article. It attempts, we are told, 
a disposition of the public money, unwarranted by 
and contrary to the Constitution. The examination 
of this wonderful, sagacious objection, with others 
of a similar complexion, must be reserved for the 
separate discussion which has been promised of the 
constitutionality of the treaty. 

Let us proceed, for the present, to the gth article. 

This article agrees that British subjects who now 
hold lands in the territories of the United States, and 
American citizens who now hold lands in the domin 
ions of his Britannic Majesty, shall continue to hold 
them, according to the nature and tenure of their re 
spective estates and titles therein; and may grant, sell, 
or devise the same to whom they please, in like man 
ner as if they were natives; and that neither they, 

39° Alexander Hamilton 

nor their heirs or assigns, so far as may respect the 
said lands, and the legal remedies incidental thereto, 
shall be regarded as aliens. 

The misapprehension of this article, which was 
first ushered into public view in a very incorrect and 
insidious shape, and was conceived to amount in the 
grant of an indefinite and permanent right to British 
subjects to hold lands in the United States, did 
more, it is believed, to excite prejudices against the 
treaty than any thing that is really contained in it. 
And yet when truly understood, it is found to be 
nothing more than a confirmation of those rights to 
lands, which, prior to the treaty, the laws of the 
several States allowed British subjects to hold ; with 
this inconsiderable addition, perhaps, that the heirs 
and assigns of those persons, though aliens, may hold 
the same lands: but no right whatever is given to 
lands of which our laws did not permit and legalize 
the acquisition. 

These propositions will now be elucidated. 

The term " hold ' ' in the legal code of Great Britain 
and of these States has the same and that a precise 
technical sense. It imports a capacity legally and 
rightfully to have and enjoy real estate, and is contra 
distinguished from the mere capacity of taking or 
purchasing, which is sometimes applicable to the 
acquisition of a thing, that is forfeited by the very 
act of acquisition. Thus an alien may take real 
estate by purchase, but he cannot hold it. Holding 
is synonymous with tenure, which, in the feudal sys 
tem, implies fealty, of which an alien is incapable. 
Land, therefore, is forfeited to the Government the 

Camillus 391 

instant it passes to an alien. The Roman law 
nullifies the contract entirely, so that nothing passes 
by the grant of land to an alien; but our law, de 
rived from that of England, permits the land to pass 
for the purpose of forfeiture to the State. This is 
not the case with regard to descent, because the 
succession or transmission there, being an act of law, 
and the alien being disqualified to hold, the law, con 
sistent with itself, casts no estate upon him. 

The following legal authorities, selected from an 
infinite number of similar ones, establish the 
above positions, viz.: Coke on Littleton, pages 2, 3: 
"Some men have capacity to purchase, but not 
ability to hold. Some capacity to purchase and ability 
to hold or not to hold, at the election of themselves 
and others. Some, capacity to take and to hold. 
Some, neither capacity to take nor to hold. And 
some are specially disabled to take some particular 
thing. If an alien, Christian or infidel, purchase 
houses, lands, tenements, or hereditaments to him 
or his aliens, albeit he can have no heirs, yet he is of 
capacity to take a fee simple, but not to hold.1' The 
same, page 8: " If a man seized of land in fee, hath 
issue an alien, he cannot be heir, propter defectum 
subjectionis." Blackstone's Commentaries, Book II., 
Chap. XVIII., § 2 : " Alienation to an alien is a cause 
of forfeiture to the crown of the lands so alienated, 
not only on account of his incapacity to hold them, 
but likewise on account of his presumption in at 
tempting, by an act of his own, to acquire real 
property/' Idem., Chap. XIX., § i.: "The case of 
an alien born, is also peculiar; for he may purchase 

392 Alexander Hamilton 

a thing; but, after purchase, he can hold nothing, ex 
cept a lease for years of a house, for the convenience 
of merchandise." 

Thus it is evident, that by the laws of England, 
which it will not be denied, agree in principle with 
ours, an ALIEN may take but cannot hold lands. 

It is equally clear, the laws of both countries 
agreeing in this particular, that the word hold, used 
in the article under consideration, must be under 
stood according to those laws, and therefore can only 
apply to those cases in which there was a legal 
capacity to hold — in other words, those in which our 
laws permitted the subjects and citizens of the two 
parties to hold lands in the territories of each other. 
Some of these cases existed prior to the treaty of 
peace ; and where confiscations had not taken place, 
there has never been a doubt, that the property was 
effectually protected by that treaty. Others have 
arisen since that treaty, under special statutes of 
particular States. Whether there are any others 
depending on the principles of the common law, need 
not be inquired into here, since the late treaty will 
neither strengthen nor impair the operation of those 
principles. 

Whatever lands, therefore, may have been pur 
chased by any British subject, since the treaty of 
peace, which the laws of the State wherein they 
were purchased did not permit him to acquire and 
hold, are entirely out of the protection of the article 
under consideration; the purchase will not avail 
him; the forfeiture, which was incurred by it, is still 
in full force. As to those lands which the laws of 

Camillus 393 

a State allowed him to purchase and hold, he owes 
his title to them, not to the treaty. 

Let us recur to the words of the article: " British 
subjects, who now hold lands, shall continue to hold 
them according to the nature and tenure of their re 
spective estates and titles therein." But it has been 
seen, that to hold lands is to own them in a legal and 
competent capacity, and that an alien has no such 
capacity. The lands, therefore, which, by reason of 
the alienage of a British subject, he could not, prior 
to the treaty, legally purchase and hold — he cannot, 
under the treaty, continue to hold. As if it was 
designed to render this conclusion palpable, the pro 
vision goes on to say, " According to the nature and 
tenure of their respective estates and titles therein.'* 
This is equivalent to saying, they shall continue to 
hold as they before held. If they had no valid estate 
or title before, they will of course continue to have 
none — the expressions neither give any new, nor 
enlarge any old estate. 

The succeeding clauses relate only to descents or 
alienations of the land originally legally holden. 
Here the disability of alienage is taken away from 
the heirs and assigns of the primitive proprietors. 
While this will conduce to private justice, by en 
abling the families and friends of individuals to enjoy 
their property by descent or devise, which, it is pre 
sumable was the main object of the provision, there 
is no consideration of national policy that weighs 
against it. If we admit the whole force of the argu 
ment, ' which opposes the expediency of permitting 
aliens to hold lands (and concerning which I shall 

394 Alexander Hamilton 

barely remark here, that it is contrary to the practice 
of several of the States, and to a practice from which 
some of them have hitherto derived material advan 
tages) the extent to which the principle is affected by 
the present treaty is too limited to be felt, and in the 
rapid mutations of property, it will every day dimin 
ish. Every alienation of a parcel of the privileged 
land to a citizen of the United States, will, as to that 
land, by interrupting the chain, put an end to the 
future operations of the privilege; and the lapse of 
no great number of years may be expected to make 
an entire revolution in the property, so as to divest 
the whole of the privilege. 

To manifest the unreasonableness of the loud and 
virulent clamor, which was incited against this article, 
it has been observed by the friends of the instru 
ment, that our treaty with France not only grants a 
much larger privilege to the citizens of France, but 
goes the full length of removing universally and 
perpetually from them the disability of alienism, as 
to the ownership of lands. This position has been 
flatly denied by some of the writers on the other side. 
Decius in particular, after taking pains to show that 
it is erroneous — that the terms "goods movable and 
immovable," in the article of our treaty with France, 
mean only chattels real and personal in the sense of 
our law, and exclude a right to the freehold and in 
heritance of lands, triumphantly plumes himself on 
the detection of a fallacy of the writer of certain 
"candid remarks on the treaty," who gives the in 
terpretation above stated to that article. 

The error of Decius 's interpretation, proceeds 

Camillus 395 

from a misunderstanding of the term goods, in the 
English translation of the article, to which he an 
nexes the meaning assigned to that term in our law, 
instead of resorting, as he ought to have done, to the 
French laws for the true meaning of the correspondent 
term biens, which is that used in the French original. 
Goods, in our law, no doubt, mean chattel interests; 
but goods or "biens" in the French law, mean all 
kinds of property, real as well as personal. It is 
equivalent to, and derived from, the term bona, in 
the Roman law, answering most nearly to " estates ' ' in 
our law, and embracing inheritances in land, cor 
poreal and incorporeal hereditaments, as well as 
property in movable things. 

When it is necessary to distinguish one species 
from another, it is done by an adjective — "biens 
meubles et immeubles," answering to bona or res mo- 
bilia, or immobilia, things movable and immovable, 
estates real and personal. The authorities at foot r 
will show the analogy of these different terms in the 
three different languages; but for fixing the precise 
sense of those used in the treaty, I have selected 
and shall quote two authorities from French books, 
which are clear and conclusive on the point. One 
will be found in the work of a French lawyer, en 
titled, Collection de Decisions Nouvelles, et de Notions 
Relatives a la Jurisprudence Actuelle, under the article 
BIENS, 2 and is in these words, viz. : " The word bien 
has a general signification, and comprehends all 

1 Justinian's Institutes, lib. iii., tit. 10, n, 12, 13; lib. iv., tit. 2. 
Domat's>Cwt7 and Public Law. Prel. Book, tit. 3, sees, i, a; book 
iv., sec. i. 

2 Biens. Le mot, bien, a tine signification generale, & comprend 

396 Alexander Hamilton 

sorts of possessions as movables, immovables, pur 
chases, acquisitions by marriage, inheritance, etc. It 
is distinguished into these particulars: movables, 
immovables, purchases, and inheritances; subdivid 
ing inheritances into paternal and maternal, old 
and new. Movable biens are those which may be 
moved and transported from one place to another, 
as wares, merchandises, and current money, plate, 
beasts, household utensils, etc. Immovable biens 
are those which cannot be moved from one place 
to another, as inheritances, houses, etc. Biens are 
distinguished again into corporeal and incorporeal." 
Another x is drawn from the celebrated institutes of 
the French law, by Mr. Argou, and is in these words : 
" Biens — This is in general whatever composes our 
riches. There are two sorts of biens, movable and 

toutes sortes de possessions, comme meubles, immeubles, acquSts, 
conquSts, propres, etc. 

On distingue dans les biens des particuliers, les meubles & les im 
meubles, les acquSts & les propres; & entre les propres, les paternels 
& les maternels, les anciens & les naissans. Les biens meubles sont 
ceux qui peuvent se mouvoir & se transporter d'un lieu en un autre, 
comme des denrees, des marchandises, de deniers comptans, de la 
vaisselle d' argent, des bestiaux, des utensiles d'hotel. Les biens im 
meubles sont ceux qui ne peuvent se mouvoir ou se transporter d'un 
lieu dans un autre, comme des heritages, des maisons, etc. 

1 Biens. — C'est en generale tout ce qui compose nos richesses; il y a 
deux sortes de biens, les meubles & les immeubles; meubles, tout ce 
qui peut etre transport^ d'un lieu a un autre: immeubles — biens en 
fonds, ou qui sont presum6 avoir la nature de fonds — On distingue 
deux sortes d'immeubles,les re"els, &les fictifs; les immeubles reels sont 
non settlement la substance meme de la terre qui est ce qu'on appelle 
le fond, mais tout ce qui est adherent & sa surface, soit par la nature, 
comme les arbres, soit par la main des hommes, comme les maisons & 
autres batiments — On a appelle" 1'autre espece d'immeubles, immeubles 
fictifs; parce qu'ils ne sont telles que par fiction; de ce nombre sont 
les offices venaux, casuels, & les rentes constitutes. 

Camillus 397 

immovable. Movable, all that may be transported 
from one place to another. Immovable, lands or 
what is presumed to have the nature of land. They 
are distinguished into two kinds, real and fictitious. 
Real are not only the substance of the earth, which is 
called fond; but all that adheres to its surface, 
whether from nature, as trees, or from the hand of 
man, as houses and other buildings. The others 
are called fictitious, because they are only real by 
fiction, as offices which are vendible, and subject to 
fiscal reversion, rent-charges, etc.'' The significa 
tion of bo na in the Roman law, corresponds, as was 
observed above, with that of biens in the French. 
" Bonorum appellatio universitatem quandem, et non 
singulas res demonstrat"; which may be rendered, 
uThe appellation of BONA designates the totality of 
property or estate, and not particular things ' ' — -and 
hence it is, that the cessio bonorum of a debtor is the 
surrender of his whole fortune. 

Both these terms, "bona" and "biens" are indis 
criminately translated goods, estates, effects, property.1 
In our treaty with France they are translated 
"goods"; but it is evidently a great mistake to 
understand the expression in the limited sense of 
our law. Being a mere word of translation, it must 
be understood according to the meaning of the 
French text; for it is declared in the conclusion of 
the treaty that it was originally composed and con 
cluded in the French tongue. Moreover, the term 

1 See authorities before cited. See also Puffendorff, Book VIII., ch. 
v., sec. 8; Grotius, Book III., ch. v., sec. n, 12; Vatel, Book I., ch. 
xx., sec. 245, 246, 247. 

39$ Alexander Hamilton 

goods, when used in our language as the equivalent 
of the term bona, or biens, is always understood in 
the large sense of the original term ; in other words, 
as comprehending real and personal estate, inherit 
ances as well as chattel interests. 

Having now established the true meaning of the 
terms " goods movable and immovable," let us pro 
ceed with this guide to a review of the article. 

Its first and principal feature is: "that the sub 
jects and inhabitants of the United States, or any 
of them, shall not be reputed AUBAINS in France." 
This is the same as if it had been said: "they shall 
not be reputed ALIENS." For the definition of AU 
BAINS, as given in the work before first cited, is this: 
" AUBAINS are persons not born under the dominion 
of the king," the exact equivalent of the definition 
of ALIEN in the English law. If our citizens are not 
to be reputed aliens in France, it follows that they 
must be exempted from alien disabilities, and must 
have the same rights with natives, as to acquiring, 
conveying, and succeeding to real and other estate. 
Accordingly the article, having pronounced that our 
citizens shall not be reputed aliens in France, pro 
ceeds to draw certain consequences. The first is, 
that they shall not be subject to the droit d' aubaine. 
The droit d' aubaine was, under the monarchy, one 
of the regalia; it was the right of the prince to 
succeed to all estates or property situate in the king 
dom belonging to foreigners who died without legiti 
mate children, born in the kingdom. 

It is to be observed that the laws of France per 
mitted foreigners to acquire and hold even real es- 

Camillus 399 

tates, subject to the right of the sovereign, in case 
of demise without issue born under his allegiance. 
But this right of the sovereign, as to American citi 
zens, is abrogated by the treaty; so that their legal 
representatives, wherever born, may succeed to all 
the property, real or personal, which they may have 
acquired in France. 

And, in conformity to this, it is further declared 
that they may, by testament, donation, or otherwise? 
dispose of their goods, movable and immovable (that 
is, as we have seen, their estates, real and personal) 
in favor of such persons as to them shall appear 
good; so that their heirs, subjects of the United 
States, whether residing in France or elsewhere, may 
succeed to them, ab intestato, without being obliged 
to obtain letters of naturalization. 

These are the stipulations on the part of France; 
and they amount to a removal from the citizens of 
the United States of alien disabilities in that country 
as to property. I say as to property, because, as to 
civil and ecclesiastical employments, it seems to have 
been a principle of the French law that the incapacity 
of foreigners could only be removed by special dis 
pensations, directed to the particular object. 

What are the correlative stipulations on the part of 
the United States? They are in these terms: "The 
subjects of the most Christian king shall enjoy, on 
their part, in all the dominions of the said States, an 
entire and perfect reciprocity, relative to the stipula 
tions contained in this article. But it is at the same 
time agreed that its contents shall not affect the laws 
made, or that may be made hereafter in France, 

4OO Alexander Hamilton 

against emigrations, which shall remain in all their 
force and vigor; and the United States, on their part, 
or any of them, shall be at liberty to enact such laws 
relative to that matter as to them shall appear 
proper. " 

Since, then, the article removes from our citizens 
the disabilities of aliens as to property in France, 
and stipulates for her citizens an entire and perfect 
reciprocity in the United States, it follows that 
Frenchmen are equally exempt in the United States 
from the like disabilities. They may, therefore, hold, 
succeed to, and dispose of real estates. 

It appears that the sense both of the French and 
of the American Government has corresponded with 
this construction. 

In the year 1786, the Marquis Bellegarde and the 
Chevalier Meziere, sons of the two sisters of General 
Oglethorpe, represented to the Count de Vergennes, 
the French minister for foreign affairs, that they met 
with impediments to their claims from the laws of 
Georgia, prohibiting aliens to hold lands. M. de 
Vergennes communicated their complaint to Mr. 
Jefferson, our then minister in France, observing, 
that the alien disabilities of the complainants having, 
in common with those of all Frenchmen, been removed 
by the treaty between the two countries, they ought 
to experience no impediments on that account, in the 
succession to the estate of their uncle, and that the 
interfering laws of Georgia ought to be repealed so as 
to agree with the treaty. 

Mr. Jefferson, in reply, states the case of the com 
plainants, proving that they were precluded from the 

Camillus 401 

succession for other reasons than that of alienism; 
and then adds, that as the treaty with France having 
placed the subjects of France in the United States on 
a footing with natives, as to conveyances and descents 
of property, there is no necessity for the assemblies to 
pass laws on the subject, the treaty being a law, as he 
conceives, superior to those of particular assemblies, 
and repealing them when they stand in the way of its 
operation. 

Where now, DECIUS, is thy mighty triumph? 
Where the trophies of thy fancied victory? Learn 
that in political, as well as other science, 

"Shallow draughts intoxicate the brain, 
And drinking largely, sobers us again." 

The fixing the true sense of the article in the treaty 
with Great Britain, is alone a refutation of most of 
the objections which have been made to it, by show 
ing, that they apply not to what really exists, but to 
a quite different thing. It may be useful, however, 
to pass them briefly in review with some cursory 
remarks. 

The article, it is said, infringes the rights of the 
States, and impairs the obligation of private con 
tracts, permits aliens to hold real estates against the 
fundamental policy of our laws, and at the hazard 
of introducing a dangerous foreign influence ; is un 
equal, because no American has been hardy enough, 
since the peace, to purchase lands in England, while 
millions of acres have been purchased by British sub 
jects in our country, with knowledge of the risk — is 
not warranted by the example of any other treaty 

VOL. V. — 26. 

402 Alexander Hamilton 

we have made ; for if even that of France should con 
tain a similar provision (which is denied) still the 
difference of circumstances would make it an in 
apposite precedent; since this was a treaty made, 
flagrante bello, in a situation which justified sacrifices. 

These objections have been formally and explicitly 
urged. One writer, afraid of risking a direct asser 
tion, but insidiously endeavoring to insinuate mis 
conception, contents himself with putting a question. 
What (says he) will be the effect of this article as to 
the revival of the claims of British subjects, traitors, 
or exiles? 

As to the infraction of the rights of the States, this, 
it is presumed, must relate to the depriving them of 
forfeitures of alien property. But as the article gives 
no right to a British subject to hold any lands which 
the laws of the State did not previously authorize 
him to hold, it prevents no forfeiture to which he was 
subject by them, and, consequently, deprives no 
State of the benefit of any such forfeiture. With 
regard to escheats for want of qualified heirs, it de 
pended on every proprietor to avoid them by aliena 
tions to citizens. 

As to impairing the obligation of private contracts, 
it is difficult to understand what is meant. Since 
land, purchased by an alien, passes from the former 
proprietor, and becomes forfeited to the State, can it 
be afterwards the subject of a valid private contract? 
If the effect of the article was to confirm a defective 
title derived from the alien, how could this impair the 
obligation of any other private contract concerning 
it? But whatever may be intended, it is enough to 

Camillas 403 

say, that the article does not confirm the title to any 
land which was not before good. So that the ground 
of the objection fails. 

As to permitting aliens to hold land, contrary to the 
policy of our laws, it has been shown, that on a true 
construction, it only applies to the very limited case 
of the alien heirs and assigns of persons who before 
rightfully held lands, and is confined to the identical 
lands so previously holden; that its greatest effect 
must be insignificant; and that this effect will con 
tinually decrease. 

As to the millions of acres, said to have been pur 
chased by British subjects since the peace, it has been 
shown, that if by the laws of the States in which the 
purchases were made, they were illegally acquired, 
they still remain in the situation in which they were 
before the treaty. 

As to there being no precedent of a similar stipula 
tion with any other country, it has been proved that, 
with France, we have one much broader. The idea 
that this was a sacrifice to the necessity of our situa 
tion, ftagrante bello, is new. Are we then to under 
stand that we in this instance gave to France, as the 
price of her assistance, a privilege in our country, 
which leads to the introduction of a foreign influence, 
dangerous to our independence and prosperity? For 
to this result tends the argument concerning the 
policy of the exclusion of aliens. Or is it that no 
privilege granted to France can be dangerous? 

Those who are not orthodox enough to adopt this 
last position may, nevertheless, tranquillize them 
selves about the consequences. This is not the 

4°4 Alexander Hamilton 

channel through which a dangerous foreign influence 
can assail us. Notwithstanding all that has been 
said, it may, perhaps, bear a serious argument, 
whether the permission to foreigners to hold lands in 
our country might not, by the operation of private 
interest, give us more influence upon foreign countries 
than they will ever acquire upon us from the holding 
of those lands. Be this as it may, could we not ap 
peal to some good patriots, as they style themselves, 
by way of eminence, for the truth of the observation 
that foreign governments have more direct and pow 
erful means of influence than can ever result from the 
right in question? 

Moreover, there was a peculiar reason for the pro 
vision which has been made in our last treaty, not 
applicable to any treaty with another country. The 
former relative situation of the United States and 
Great Britain led to the possession of lands by the 
citizens of each in the respective territories. It was 
natural and just to secure by treaty their free trans 
mission to the heirs and assigns of the parties. 

As to the revival of the claims of traitors or exiles, 
if property, confiscated and taken away, is property 
holden by those who have been deprived of it, then 
there may be ground for alarm on this score. How 
painful is it to behold such gross attempts to deceive 
a whole people on so momentous a question! How 
afflicting, that imposture and fraud should be so 
often able to assume with success the garb of patriot 
ism? And that this sublime virtue should be so fre 
quently discredited by the usurpation and abuse of 
its name! CAMILLUS. 

Camillus 405 

NO. XVIII 

1795- 

It is provided by the tenth article of the treaty that 
" neither debts due from individuals of one nation 
to individuals of the other, nor shares, nor moneys, 
which they may have in the public funds, or in the 
public or private banks, shall ever in any event of 
war, or national difference, be sequestered or con 
fiscated ; it being unjust and impolitic, that debts and 
engagements contracted and made by individuals, 
having confidence in each other, and in their respect 
ive governments, should ever be destroyed or im 
paired by national authority on account of national 
differences and discontents." 

The virulence with which this article has been 
attacked cannot fail to excite very painful sensations 
in every mind duly impressed with the sanctity of 
public faith, and with the importance of national 
credit and character; at the same time that it fur 
nishes the most cogent reasons to desire that the 
preservation of peace may obviate the pretext and 
the temptation to sully the honor and wound the 
interests of the country by a measure which the truly 
enlightened of every nation would condemn. 

I acknowledge, without reserve, that in proportion 
to the vehemence of the opposition against this part 
of the treaty, is the satisfaction I derive from its ex 
istence, as an obstacle the more to the perpetration 
of a thing, which, in my opinion, besides deeply injur 
ing our real and permanent interest, would cover us 
with ignominy. No powers of language at my com 
mand can express the abhorrence I feel at the idea of 

406 Alexander Hamilton 

violating the property of individuals, which, in an 
authorized intercourse, in time of peace, has been 
confided to the faith of our Government and laws, 
on account of controversies between nation and 
nation. In my view, every moral and every political 
sentiment unite to consign it to execration. 

Neither will I dissemble, that the dread of the 
effects of the spirit which patronizes that idea, has 
ever been with me one of the most persuasive argu 
ments for a pacific policy on the part of the United 
States. Serious as the evil of war has appeared, at 
the present stage of our affairs, the manner in which 
it was to be apprehended it might be carried on, was 
still more formidable, in my eyes, than the thing 
itself. It was to be feared, that in the fermentation 
of certain wild opinions, those wise, just, and tem 
perate maxims, which will for ever constitute the 
true security and felicity of a state, would be over 
ruled; and that a war upon credit, eventually upon 
property, and upon the general principles of public 
order, might aggravate and embitter the ordinary 
calamities of foreign war. The confiscation of debts 
due to the enemy, might have been the first step 
of this destructive process. From one violation of 
justice to another, the passage is easy. Invasions of 
right, still more fatal to credit, might have followed; 
and this, by extinguishing the resources which that 
could have afforded, might have paved the way to 
more comprehensive and more enormous depreda 
tions for a substitute. Terrible examples were before 
us ; and there were too many not sufficiently remote 
from a disposition to admire and imitate them. 

Camillus 407 

The earnest and extensive clamors against the part 
of the treaty under consideration, confirm that antici 
pation; and while they enhance the merit of the 
provision, they also inspire a wish, that some more 
effectual barrier had been erected against the possi 
bility of a contrary practice being ever, at any ill- 
fated moment, obtruded upon our public councils. 
It would have been an inestimable gem in our na 
tional Constitution, had it contained a positive pro 
hibition against such a practice, except, perhaps, by 
way of reprisal for the identical injury on the part of 
another nation. 

Analogous to this is that liberal and excellent pro 
vision, in the British Magna Charta, which declares, 
that " if the merchants of a country at war with Eng 
land, are found there in the beginning of the war, 
they shall be attached without harm of body or effects, 
until it is known in what manner English merchants 
are treated in the enemy's country; and if they are 
safe, that the foreign merchants shall also be safe." x 
The learned Lord Coke pronounces this to be jus belli 
or law of war. And the elegant and the enlightened 
Montesquieu, speaking of the same provision, breaks 
out into this exclamation : " It is noble that the Eng 
lish nation have made this one of the articles of its 
liberty." 2 How much it is to be regretted, that our 
magna charta is not unequivocally decorated with a 

1 Si Mercatores sint de terra contra nos guerrira, et tales inveniantur 
in terra nostra in principle guerrae, attachientur sine damno corporum 
suorum vel rerum, donee sciatur a nobis vel a capitali justiciario nostro 
quo modo mercatores terrae nostrae tractantur qui tune inveniantur in 
terra ilia contra nos guerrira; et si nostri salvi sint ibi, alii salvi sint 
in terra nostra. Magna Charta, cap. xxx. 

2 Spirit of Laws, Book XX., chap. xiii. 

408 Alexander Hamilton 

like feature; and that, in this instance, we, who have 
given so many splendid examples to mankind, are 
excelled in constitutional precautions for the main 
tenance of justice ! 

There is, indeed, ground to assert, that the con 
trary principle would be repugnant to that article of 
our Constitution, which provides, that "no State 
shall pass any law impairing the obligation of con 
tracts/' The spirit of this clause, though the letter 
of it be restricted to the States individually, must, on 
fair construction, be considered as a rule for the 
United States; and if so, could not easily be recon 
ciled with the confiscation or sequestration of private 
debts in time of war. But it is a pity, that so im 
portant a principle should have been left to inference 
and implication, and should not have received an 
express and direct sanction. 

This position must appear a frightful heresy in the 
eyes of those who represent the confiscation or seques 
tration of debts, as our best means of retaliation and 
coercion, as our most powerful, sometimes as our only, 
means of defence. 

But so degrading an idea will be rejected with 
disdain, by every man who feels a true and well- 
informed national pride; by every man who recol 
lects and glories, that in a state of still greater 
immaturity, we achieved independence without the 
aid of this dishonorable expedient ' ; that even in a 

1 The federal government never resorted to it ; and a few only of the 
State Governments stained themselves with it. It may, perhaps, be 
said, that the Federal Government had no power on the subject ; but 
the reverse of this is truly the case. The Federal Government alone 
had power. The State Governments had none, though some of them 

Camillus 409 

revolutionary war, a war of liberty against usurpa 
tion, our national councils were too magnanimous to 
be provoked or tempted to depart so widely from the 
path of rectitude ; by every man, in fine, who, though 
careful not to exaggerate, for rash and extravagant 
projects, can nevertheless fairly estimate the real 
resources of the country, for meeting dangers which 
prudence cannot avert. 

Such a man will never endure the base doctrine, 
that our security is to depend on the tricks of a 
swindler. He will look for it in the courage and con 
stancy of a free, brave, and virtuous people — in the 
riches of a fertile soil — an extended and progressive 
industry — in the wisdom and energy of a well-con 
stituted and well-administered government — in the 
resources of a solid, if well-supported, national credit 
— in the armies, which, if requisite could be raised— 
in the means of maritime annoyance, which if neces 
sary, could be organized, and with which we could 
inflict deep wounds on the commerce of a hostile 
nation. He will indulge an animating consciousness t 
that while our situation is not such as to justify our 
courting imprudent enterprises neither is it such as 
to oblige us, in any event, to stoop to dishonorable 
means of security, or to substitute a crooked and 
piratical policy, for the manly energies of fair and 
open war. 

That is the consequence of the favorite doctrine 
that the confiscation or sequestration of private debts 

undertook to exercise it. This position is founded on the solid ground 
that the confiscation or sequestration of the debts of an enemy is a 
high act of reprisal and war, necessarily and exclusively incident to 
the power of making war, which was always in the Federal Government. 

410 Alexander Hamilton 

is our most powerful, if not our only, weapon of de 
fence ; Great Britain is the sole power against whom 
we could wield it, since it is to her citizens alone, 
that we are largely indebted. What are we to do, 
then, against any other nation which might think fit 
to menace us ? Are we, for want of adequate means 
of defence, to crouch beneath the uplifted rod, and, 
with abject despondency, sue for mercy? Or has 
Providence guaranteed us especially against the 
malice or ambition of every power on earth, except 
Great Britain? 

It is at once curious and instructive to mark the 
inconsistencies of the disorganizing sect. Is the 
question, to discard a spirit of accommodation, and 
rush into war with Great Britain ? Columns are filled 
with the most absurd exaggerations, to prove that 
we are able to meet her, not only on equal, but su 
perior terms. Is the question, whether a stipulation 
against the confiscation or sequestration of private 
debts ought to have been admitted into the treaty ? 
Then are we a people destitute of the means of war, 
with neither arms, nor fleets, nor magazines — then is 
our best, if not our only, weapon of defence, the 
power of confiscating or sequestrating the debts 
which are due to the subjects of Great Britain; in 
other words, the power of committing fraud, of vio 
lating the public faith, of sacrificing the principles 
of commerce, of prostrating credit. Is the question, 
whether free ships shall make free goods, whether 
naval stores shall or shall not be deemed contraband? 
Then is the appeal to what is called the modern law 
of nations; then is the cry, that recent usage has 

Camillas 411 

changed and mitigated the rigor of ancient maxims. 
But is the question, whether private debts can be 
rightfully confiscated or sequestered? Then ought 
the utmost rigor of the ancient doctrine to govern, 
and modern usage and opinion to be discarded. The 
old rule or the new is to be adopted or rejected, just 
as may suit their convenience. 

An inconsistency of another kind, but not less 
curious, is observable in positions, repeatedly heard 
from the same quarter, namely, that the sequestra 
tion of debts is the only peaceable means of doing our 
selves justice and avoiding war. If we trace the 
origin of the pretended right to confiscate or sequester 
debts, we find it, in the very authority, principally 
relied on to prove it, to be this (Bynkershoeck, Qu&s- 
tiones Juris Publici, I. s. 2) : " Since it is the condition 
of WAR, that ENEMIES may be deprived of all their 
rights, it is reasonable, that everything of an enemy's, 
found among his enemies, should change its owner, 
and go to the treasury." Hence it is manifest, that 
the right itself, if it exist, presupposes, as the con 
dition of its exercise, an actual state of war, the rela 
tion of enemy to enemy. Yet we are fastidiously 
and hypocritically told, that this high and explicit 
mode of war, is a peaceable means of doing our 
selves justice and avoiding war. Why are we 
thus told? Why is this strange paradox attempted 
to be imposed upon us? Why, but that it is the 
policy of the conspirators against our peace, to en 
deavor to disguise the hostilities, into which they 
wish to plunge us, with a specious outside, and 
to precipitate us down the precipice of war, while 

412 Alexander Hamilton 

we imagine we are quietly and securely walking along 
its summit. 

Away with these absurd and incongruous soph 
isms! Blush, ye apostles of temerity, of meanness, 
and of deception! Cease to beckon us to war, and 
at the same time to freeze our courage by the 
cowardly declaration that we have no resource but in 
fraud! Cease to attempt to persuade us that peace 
may be obtained by means which are unequivocal 
acts of war. Cease to tell us that war is preferable 
to dishonor, and yet, as our first step, to urge us into 
irretrievable dishonor. A magnanimous, a sensible 
people cannot listen to your crude conceptions. 
Why will ye persevere in accumulating ridicule and 
contempt upon your own heads? 

In the further observations which I shall offer on 
this article, I hope to satisfy, not the determined 
leaders or instruments of faction, but all discerning 
men, all good citizens, that, instead of being a 
blemish, it is an ornament to the instrument in 
which it is contained; that it is as consistent with 
true policy as with substantial justice; that it is, 
in substance, not without precedent in our other 
treaties, and that the objections to it are futile. 

CAMILLUS. 

NO. XIX 

1795. 

The objects protected by the tenth article are 
classed under four heads: i, Debts of individuals to 
individuals; 2, property of individuals in the public 
funds; 3, property of individuals in public banks; 

Camillas 413 

4, property of individuals in private banks. These, 
if analyzed, resolve themselves, in principle, into 
two discriminations, viz. : private debts, and private 
property in public funds. The character of private 
property prevails throughout. No property of either 
government is protected from confiscation or seques 
tration by the other. This last circumstance merits 
attention, because it marks the true boundary. 

The propriety of the stipulation will be examined 
under these several aspects: the right to confiscate 
or sequestrate private debts or private property in 
public funds, on the ground of reason and principle ; 
the right as depending on the opinions of jurists and 
on usage ; the policy and expediency of the practice ; 
the analogy of the stipulation with stipulations in 
our other treaties, and in treaties between other 
nations. 

First, as to the right on the ground of reason and 
principle. 

The general proposition on which it is supported 
is this: "That every individual of a nation with 
whom we are at war, wheresoever he may be, is our 
enemy, and his property of every kind, in every 
place, liable to capture by right of war." 

The only exception admitted to this rule respects 
property within the jurisdiction of a neutral state; 
but the exception is referred to the right of the 
neutral nation, not to any privilege which the situa 
tion gives to the enemy proprietor. 

Reason, if consulted, will suggest another excep 
tion. This regards all such property as the laws of 
a country permit foreigners to acquire within it or 

4J4 Alexander Hamilton 

to bring into it. The right of holding or having 
property in a country always implies a duty on the 
part of its government to protect that property, and 
to secure to the owner the full enjoyment of it. 
Whenever, therefore, a government grants permis 
sion to foreigners to acquire property within its ter 
ritories, or to bring and deposit it there, it tacitly 
promises protection and security. It must be under 
stood to engage that the foreign proprietor, as to 
what he shall have acquired or deposited, shall enjoy 
the rights, privileges, and immunities of a native 
proprietor, without any other exceptions than those 
which the established laws may have previously de 
clared. How can any thing else be understood? 
Every state, when it has entered into no contrary 
engagement, is free to permit or not to permit 
foreigners to acquire or bring property within its 
jurisdiction ; but if it grant the right, what is there 
to make the tenure of the foreigner different from 
that of the native, if antecedent laws have not 
pronounced a difference? Property, as it exists in 
civilized society, if not a creature of, is, at least, regu 
lated and defined by, the laws. They prescribe the 
manner in which it shall be used, alienated, or trans 
mitted; the conditions on which it may be held, 
preserved, or forfeited. It is to them we are to look 
for its rights, limitations, and conditions. No con 
dition of enjoyment, no cause of forfeiture, which 
they have not specified, can be presumed to exist. 
An extraordinary discretion to resume or take away 
the thing, without any personal fault of the pro 
prietor, is inconsistent with the notion of property. 

Camillus 415 

This seems always to imply a contract between the 
society and the individual, that he shall retain and 
be protected in the possession and use of his prop 
erty so long as he shall observe and perform the con 
ditions which the laws have annexed to the tenure. 
It is neither natural nor equitable to consider him as 
subject to be deprived of it for a cause foreign to 
himself; still less for one which may depend on the 
volition or pleasure, even of the very government 
to whose protection it has been confided; for the 
proposition which affirms the right to confiscate 
or sequester does not distinguish between offensive 
or defensive war; between a war of ambition on 
the part of the power which exercises the right, or 
a war of self-preservation against the assaults of 
another. 

The property of a foreigner placed in another 
country, by permission of its laws, may justly be 
regarded as a deposit, of which the society is the 
trustee. How can it be reconciled with the idea of 
a trust, to take the property from its owner, when he 
has personally given no cause for the deprivation ? 

Suppose two families in a state of nature, and that 
a member of one of them had, by permission of the 
head of the other, placed in his custody some article 
belonging to himself; and suppose a quarrel to ensue 
between the two heads of families, in which the mem 
ber had not participated by his immediate counsel or 
consent — would not natural equity declare the seiz 
ure and confiscation of the deposited property to be 
an act of perfidious rapacity? 

Again — suppose two neighboring nations, which 

4i 6 Alexander Hamilton 

had not had intercourse with each other, and one of 
them opens its ports and territories for the purpose 
of commerce, to the citizens of the other, proclaiming 
free and safe ingress and egress — suppose afterward 
a war to break out between the two nations, and the 
one which had granted that permission to seize and 
convert to its own use the goods and credits of the 
merchants of the other, within its dominion. What 
sentence would natural reason, un warped by par 
ticular dogmas, pronounce on such conduct? If we 
abstract ourselves from extraneous impressions, and 
consult a moral feeling, we shall not doubt that the 
sentence would inflict all the opprobrium and infamy 
of violated faith. 

Nor can we distinguish either case, in principle, 
from that which constantly takes place between 
nations, that permit a commercial intercourse with 
each other, whether with or without national com 
pact. They equally grant a right to bring into and 
carry out of their territories the property which is 
the subject of the intercourse, a right of free and 
secure ingress and egress; and in doing this they 
make their territories a sanctuary or asylum, which 
ought to be inviolable, and which the spirit of plunder 
only could have ever violated. 

There is no parity between the case of the persons 
and goods of enemies found in our own country and 
that of the persons and goods of enemies found else 
where. In the former there is a reliance upon our 
hospitality and justice; there is an express or im 
plied safe conduct; the individuals and their prop 
erty are in the custody of our faith; they have no 

Camillas 417 

power to resist our will; they can lawfully make no 
defence against our violence; they are deemed to 
owe a temporary allegiance; and for endeavoring 
resistance would be punished as criminals, a charac 
ter inconsistent with that of an enemy. To make 
them a prey is, therefore, to infringe every rule of 
generosity and equity; it is to add cowardice to 
treachery. In the latter case there is no confidence 
whatever reposed in us; no claim upon our hospital 
ity, justice, or good faith ; there is the simple charac 
ter of enemy, with entire liberty to oppose force to 
force. The right of war consequently to attack and 
seize, — whether to obtain indemnification for any 
injury received — to disable our enemy from doing us 
further harm, to force him to reasonable terms of 
accommodation, or to repress an overbearing am 
bition, exists in full vigor, unrestrained and un 
qualified by any trust or duty on our part. In 
pursuing it, though we may inflict hardship, we do 
not commit injustice. 

Moreover, the property of the foreigner within our 
country may be regarded as having paid a valuable 
consideration for its protection and exemption from 
forfeiture; that which is brought in, commonly en 
riches the revenue by a duty of entry. All that 
is within our territory, whether acquired there or 
brought there, is liable to contributions to the treas 
ury, in common with other similar property. Does 
there not result an obligation to protect that which 
contributes to the expense of its protection? Will 
justice sanction, upon the breaking out of a war, the 
confiscation of a property, which, during peace, 

VOL. V.— 27 

Alexander Hamilton 

serves to augment the resources and nourish the 
prosperity of a state? 

The principle of the proposition gives an equal 
right to subject the person as the property of the 
foreigner to the rigors of war. But what would be 
thought of a government which should seize all the 
subjects of its enemy found within its territory, and 
commit them to durance, as prisoners of war? Would 
not all agree that it had violated an asylum which 
ought to have been sacred? That it had trampled 
upon the laws of hospitality and civilization? That 
it had disgraced itself by an act of cruelty and bar 
barism ? J Why would it not be equally reprehensi 
ble to violate the asylum which had been given to the 
property of those foreigners? 

Reason, left to its own lights, would answer all 
these questions in one way, and severely condemn the 
molestation, on account of a national contest, as well 
of the property as person of a foreigner found in our 
country, under the license and guaranty of the laws 
of previous amity. 

The case of property in the public funds is still 
stronger than that of private debts. To all the 
sanctions which apply to the latter, it adds that of 
an express pledge of the public faith to the foreign 
holder of stock. 

The constituting of a public debt or fund, trans 
ferable without limitation or distinction, amounts to 
a promise to all the world, that whoever, foreigner 
or citizen, may acquire a title to it, shall enjoy the 

1 All that can rightfully be done is to oblige the foreigners, who are 
subjects of our enemy, to quit our country. 

Camillus . 419 

benefit of what is stipulated. Every transferee be 
comes, by the act of transfer, the immediate pro 
prietor of the promise. It inures directly to his use, 
and the foreign promisee no more than the native, 
can be deprived of that benefit, except in conse 
quence of some act of his own, without the infraction 
of a positive engagement. 

Public debt has been truly defined, "A property 
subsisting in ike faith of government.11 Its essence is 
promise. To confiscate or sequester it is emphatic 
ally to rescind the promise given, to revoke the 
faith plighted. It is impossible to separate the two 
ideas of a breach of faith, and the confiscation or 
sequestration of a property subsisting only in the 
faith of the government by which it is made. 

When it is considered that the promise made to 
the foreigner is not made to him in the capacity of 
member of another society, but in that of citizen of 
the world, or of an individual in the state of nature, 
the infraction of it towards him, on account of the 
fault, real or pretended, of the society to which he 
belongs, is the more obviously destitute of color. 
There is no real affinity between the motive and the 
consequence. There is a confounding of relations. 
The obligation of a contract can only be avoided by 
the breach of a condition express or implied, which 
appears or can be presumed to have been within the 
contemplation of both parties, or by the personal 
fault or crime of him to whom it is to be performed. 
Can it be supposed that a citizen of one country 
would lend his money to the government of another, 
in the expectation that a war between the two 

420 Alexander Hamilton 

countries, which, without or against their will, might 
break out the next day, could be deemed a sufficient 
cause of forfeiture? 

The principle may be tested in another way. Sup 
pose one government indebted to another in a 
certain sum of money, and suppose the creditor gov 
ernment to borrow of the citizen of the other an 
equal sum of money. When he came to demand 
payment, would justice, would good faith, permit the 
opposing to his claim, by way of set-off, the debt due 
from his government? Who would not revolt at 
such an attempt? Could not the individual creditor 
answer with conclusive force, that in a matter of 
contract he was not responsible for the society of 
which he was a member, and that the debts of the 
society were not a proper set-off against his private 
claim? 

With what greater reason could his claim be re 
fused on account of an injury, which was a cause of 
war, received from his sovereign, and which had 
created on the part of the sovereign a debt of re 
paration? It were certainly more natural and just 
to set off a debt due by contract to the citizen of a 
foreign country against a debt due by contract from 
the sovereign of that country, than to set it off against 
a vague claim of indemnification for an injury or an 
aggression of which we complain, and of which the 
reality or justice is seldom undisputed on the other 
side. 

The true rule which results from what has been 
said, and which reason sanctions with regard to the 
right of capture, is this : "It may be exercised every- 

Camillas 42 1 

where except within a neutral jurisdiction 1 or where 
the property is under the protection of our own laws"; 
and it may perhaps be added that it always supposes 
the possibility of rightful combat, of attack, and 
defence. 

These exceptions involve no refinement; they de 
pend on obvious .considerations, and are agreeable 
to common sense and to nature; the spontaneous 
feelings of equity accord with them. It is, indeed, 
astonishing that a contrary rule should ever have 
been countenanced by the opinion of any jurist, or 
by the practice of any civilized nation. 

We shall see in the next number how far either has 
been the case, and what influence it ought to have 

upon the question. 

CAMILLUS. 

NO. xx 

1795- 

The point next to be examined is the right of 
confiscation or sequestration, as depending on the 
opinions of jurists and on usage. 

To understand how far these ought to weigh, it is 
requisite to consider what are the elements or in 
gredients which compose what is called the law of 
nations. 

The constituent parts of this system are: i. The 
necessary or internal law, which is the law of na 
ture applied to nations; or that system of rules for 

1 There are exceptions to this exception ; but they depend on special 
circumstances, which admit the principal exception, and need not be 
particularized. 

422 Alexander Hamilton 

regulating the conduct of nation to nation, which 
reason deduces from the principles of natural right, 
as relative to political societies or states. 2. The 
voluntary law, which is a system of rules resulting 
from the equality and independence of nations, and 
which, in the administration of their affairs, and the 
pursuit of their pretensions, proceeding on the prin 
ciple of their having no common judge upon earth, 
attributes equal validity, as to external effects, to 
the measures or conduct of one as of another, with 
out regard to the intrinsic justice of those measures 
or that conduct. Thus captures, in war, are as 
valid, when made by the party in the wrong, as by 
the party in the right. 3. The factitious or conven 
tional law, or that law which results from a treaty 
between two or more nations. This is evidently a 
particular, not a general law, since a treaty or pact 
can only bind the contracting parties; yet, when 
we find a provision universally pervading the treaties 
between nations, for a length of time, as a kind of 
formula, it is high evidence of the general law of na 
tions. 4. The customary law, which consists of 
those rules of conduct, that, in practice, are re 
spected and observed among nations. Its authority 
depends on usage, implying a tacit consent and 
agreement. This also is a particular, not a general 
law, obligatory only on those nations whose acquies 
cence has appeared, or, from circumstances, may 
fairly be presumed. Thus, the customary law of 
Europe may not be that of a different quarter of the 
globe. The three last branches are sometimes ag 
gregately denominated the positive law of nations. 

Camillus 423 

The two first are discoverable by reason ; the two 
last depend on proof, as matters of fact. Hence the 
opinions of jurists, though weighing, as the senti 
ments of judicious or learned men, who have made 
the subject a particular study, are not conclusive, as 
authorities. In regard to the necessary and volun 
tary law, especially, they may be freely disregarded, 
unless they are found to be adopted and sanc 
tioned by the practice of nations. For where REASON 
is the guide, it cannot properly be renounced for 
mere OPINION, however respectable. As witnesses of 
the customary laws, their testimony, the result of 
careful researches, is more particularly entitled to 
attention. 

If, then, it has been satisfactorily proved, as the 
dictate of sound reason, that private debts, and pri 
vate property in public funds, are not justly liable 
to confiscation or sequestration, an opposite opinion 
of one or more jurists could not control the conclu 
sion in point of principle. So far as it may attest 
a practice of nations, which may have introduced a 
positive law on the subject, the consideration may 
be different. It will then remain to examine, upon 
their own and other testimony, whether that prac 
tice be so general as to be capable of varying a rule 
of reason, by the force of usage; and whether it still 
continues to bear the same character, or has been 
weakened or done away by some recent or more 
modern usage. 

I will not avail myself of a position, advanced by 
some 'writers, that usage, if derogating from the 
principles of natural justice, is null, further than to 

424 Alexander Hamilton 

draw this inference: that a rule of right, deducible 
from them, cannot be deemed to be altered by 
usage, partially contradicted, fluctuating. 

With these guides, our further inquiries will serve 
to confirm us in the negative of the pretended right 
to confiscate or sequester in the cases supposed. 

The notion of this right is evidently derived from 
the Roman law. It is seen there, in this peculiar 
form: " Those things of an enemy which are among 
us, belong not to the state, but to the first occupant, " r 
which seems to mean, that the things of an enemy, 
at the commencement of the war, found in our 
country, may be seized by any citizen, and will be 
long to him who first gets possession. It is known 
that the maxims of the Roman law are extensively 
incorporated into the different codes of Europe ; and 
particularly, that the writers on the law of nations 
have borrowed liberally from them. This source of 
the notion does not stamp it with much authority. 
The history of Rome proves that war and conquest 
were the great business of that people, and that, 
for the most part, commerce was little cultivated. 
Hence it was natural that the rights of war should be 
carried to an extreme, unmitigated by the softening 
and humanizing influence of commerce. Indeed the 
world was yet too young — moral science too much 
in its cradle — to render the Roman jurisprudence a 
proper model for implicit imitation ; accordingly, in 
this very particular of the rights of war, it seems to 
have been equally a rule of the Roman law, " That 
those who go into a foreign country in the time of 

1 Digest., xli., tit. i.: "Et quae res hostiles apud nos," etc. 

Camillus 425 

peace, if war is suddenly kindled, are made the 
slaves of those among whom, now become enemies 
by ill fortune, they are apprehended." x This right 
of capturing the property and of making slaves of 
the persons of enemies is referred, as we learn from 
Cicero, to the right of killing them; which was re 
garded as absolute and unqualified, extending even 
to women and children. Thus it would seem that, 
on the principle of the Roman law, we might right 
fully kill a foreigner who had come into our country 
during peace, and was there at the breaking out of 
war with his country. Can there be a position more 
horrible, more detestable? 

The improvement of moral science in modern 
times, restrains the right of killing an enemy to the 
time of battle or resistance, except by way of pun 
ishment for some enormous breach of the law of na 
tions, or for self-preservation, in case of immediate 
and urgent danger; and rejects altogether the right 
of imposing slavery on captives. 

Why should there have been a hesitation to reject 
other odious consequences of so exceptionable a prin 
ciple ? What respect is due to maxims which have so 
inhuman a foundation? 

And yet a deference for those maxims has misled 
writers who have professionally undertaken to teach 
the principles of national ethics; and the spirit of 
rapine has continued, to a late period, to consecrate 
the relics of ancient barbarism with too many pre 
cedents of imitation. Else it would not now be a 

1 "In' pace qui pervenerunt ad alteros, si bellum subito exarcisset, 
eorum servi efficiuntur, apud quos jam hostes suo facto deprehendun- 
tur." Digest., lib. xlix., tit. xv., 1. xii. 

426 Alexander Hamilton 

question with any, " Whether the person or property 
of a foreigner, being in our country with permission 
of the laws of peace, could be liable to molestation or 
injury by the laws of war, merely on account of the 
war?" 

Turning from the ancients to the moderns, we find, 
that the learned Grotius quotes and adopts, as the 
basis of his opinions, the rules of the Roman law; 
though he, in several particulars, qualifies them, by 
the humane innovations of later times. 

On the very question of the right to confiscate 
or sequester private debts, his opinion, as far as it 
appears, seems to be at variance with his premises, 
steering a kind of middle course. His expressions 
(L. III., C. XX., Sec. 16.) are these: "Those debts 
which are due to private persons, at the beginning 
of the war, are not to be accounted forgiven (that 
is, when peace is made) ; for these are not acquired 
by the right of war, but only forbidden to be demanded 
in time of war; therefore, the impediment being re 
moved, that is, the war ended, they retain their full 
force." His idea appears from this passage to be, 
that the right of war is limited to the arresting of the 
payment of private debts during its continuance, and 
not to the confiscation or annihilation of the debt. 
Nor is it clear, whether he means, that this arresta- 
tion is to be produced by a special act of prohibition, 
or by the operation of some rule of law, which denies 
to an alien enemy a right of action. This feeble and 
heterogeneous opinion may be conceived to have pro 
ceeded from a conflict between a respect for ancient 
maxims, and the impression of more enlightened 

Camillas 427 

views, inculcated by the principles of commerce and 
civilization. 

Bynkershoeck is more consistent. Adopting, with 
Grotius, the rule of the Roman law in its full vigor, he 
is not frightened at the consequences, but follows 
them throughout. Hence he bestows a chapter upon 
the defence of the proposition, quoted in a former 
number, to wit: that J " Since it is the condition of 
war, that enemies may, with full right, be despoiled 
and proscribed, it is reasonable that whatsoever 
things of an enemy are found among his enemies, 
should change their owner and go to the treasury ' ' ; 
and in several places he expressly implies the rule to 
things in action, or debts and credits, as well as to 
things in possession. 

In confirmation of his doctrine, he adduces a 
variety of examples, which embrace a period of some 
thing more than a century, beginning in the year 
1556, and ending in the year 1657, and which compre 
hends, as actors on the principle which he espouses, 
France, Spain, the States General, Denmark, the 
bishops of Cologne and Munster. But he acknow 
ledges that the right has been questioned; and notes 
particularly, that when the king of France and the 
bishops of Munster and Cologne, in the year 1563, 
confiscated the debts which their subjects owed to the 
confederate Belgians, the States General, by an edict 
of the 6th of July, of that year, censured the proceed 
ing, and decreed that those debts could not be paid 

1 Qu&stionum Juris Public. , liber i. , caput vii. : " Cum ea sit belli con- 
ditio ut'hostes sint omni jure spoliati proscriptique, rationis est quas- 
cumque res hostium apud hostes inventas, dominum mutare et fisco 
cedere." 

428 Alexander Hamilton 

but to the true creditors; and that the exaction of 
them, whether by force or with consent, was not to be 
esteemed valid. 

If from the great pains which appear to have been 
taken by this learned writer, to collect examples in 
proof of his doctrine, we are to conclude that the 
collection is tolerably complete, we are warranted in 
drawing this inference: that he has not cured any 
defect, which reason may discern in his principles, by 
any thing like the evidence of such a general, uniform, 
and continued usage, as is requisite to introduce a 
rule of the positive law of nations, in derogation from 
the natural. 

A minority only of the powers of Europe are shown 
to have been implicated in the practice ; and among 
the majority, not included, are several of the most 
considerable and respectable. One of these, Great 
Britain, is represented as having acquiesced in it, in 
the treaties of peace, between her and some of the 
powers who went into the practice, to her detriment, 
by relinquishing the claim of restitution. But war 
must, at length, end in peace; and the sacrifice a 
nation makes to the latter is a slight argument of her 
consent to the principle of the injuries which she may 
have sustained. I have not been able to trace a 
single instance in which Great Britain has, herself, 
set the example of such a practice ; nor could she do 
it, as has elsewhere appeared, without contravening 
an article of Magna Charta, unless by way of reprisal 
for the same thing done towards her. The sugges 
tion of an instance in the present war with France, 
will, hereafter, be examined. In such a question, 

Camillus 429 

the practice of a nation, which has, for ages, figured 
preeminently in the commercial world, is entitled to 
particular notice. 

It is not unworthy of remark, that the common 
law of England, from its earliest dawnings, contra 
dicted the rule of the Roman law. It exempted from 
seizure, by a subject of England, the property of a 
foreigner brought there before a war; but gave to 
the first seizer, or occupant, the property which came 
there after the breaking out of a war. The noble 
principles of the common law cannot cease to en 
gage our respect, while we have before our eyes so 
many monuments of their excellence in our own 
jurisdiction. 

It also merits to be dwelt upon, that the United 
Netherlands, for some time the first, and long only 
the second in commercial consequence, formally dis 
puted the right, and condemned the practice of con 
fiscating private debts, though themselves, in some 
instances, guilty of it. 

And it is likewise a material circumstance, that 
Bynkershoeck, who seems to have written in the year 
1737, does not adduce any precedent later than the 
year 1667, seventy years before his publication. 

The subsequent period will, it is believed, be found 
upon strict inquiry, equally barren of similar preced 
ents. The exceptions are so few,1 that we may 
fairly assert, that there is the negative usage of near 
a century and a half, against the pretended right. 
This negative usage of a period the most enlightened 

1 The case of Prussia and the Silesia loan, is the only one I have 
found. 

43° Alexander Hamilton 

as well as the most commercial in the annals of the 
world, is of the highest authority. The former usage, 
as being partial and with numerous exceptions, was 
insufficient to establish a rule. The contrary usage, 
or the renunciation of the former usage, as being 
general, as attended with few or no exceptions, is 
sufficient even to work a change in the rigor of an 
ancient rule, if it could be supposed to have been 
established. Much more is it sufficient to confirm 
and enforce the lesson of reason, and to dissipate the 
clouds which error, and some scattered instances of 
violence and rapine, may have produced. 

Of the theoretical writers whom I had an oppor 
tunity of consulting, Vatel is the only remaining one 
who directly treats the point. His opinion has been 
said to favor the right to confiscate and sequester. 
But when carefully analyzed, it will add to the proofs 
of the levity with which the opposers of the treaty 
make assertions. 

After stating, among other things, that " war gives 
the same right over any sum of money due by a 
neutral nation to our enemy, as it can give over his 
other goods/* he proceeds thus: "When Alexander, 
by conquest, became absolute master of Thebes, he 
remitted to the Thessalians, a hundred talents, which 
they owed to the Thebans. The sovereign has natur 
ally the same right over what his subjects may be 
indebted to his enemies ; therefore he may confiscate 
debts of this nature, if the term of payment happen 
in the time of war ; or, at least, he may prohibit his 
subjects from paying, while the war lasts. But at 
present, in regard to the advantages and safety of 

Camillas . 43 1 

commerce, all the sovereigns of Europe have departed 
from this rigor. And as this custom has been gener- 
erally received, he who should act contrary to it, 
would injure the public faith; for strangers trusted 
his subjects only from a firm persuasion that the 
general custom would be observed. The State does 
not so much as touch the sums which it owes to the 
enemy. Everywhere in case of a war, funds credited 
to the public, are exempt from confiscation and 
seizure." * 

The first proposition of the above passage amounts 
to this: that "a sovereign naturally, that is, accord 
ing to the law of nature, may confiscate debts, which 
his subjects owe to his enemies, if the term of pay 
ment happen in the time of war — or, at least, he 
may prohibit his subjects from paying while the 
war lasts." 

So far as this goes it agrees with the principle which 
I combat, that there is a natural right to confiscate or 
sequester private debts in time of war; so far Vatel 
accords with the Roman law and with Bynkershoeck. 

But he annexes a whimsical limitation: "If the 
term is the time of war ' ' — and there is a marked un 
certainty and hesitation — " the sovereign may con 
fiscate, or, at least, he may prohibit his subjects from 
paying while the war lasts." It is evident that the 
circumstance of the time of payment can have no 
influence upon the right. If it reaches to confisca 
tion, which takes away the substance of the thing, 
the mere incident of the happening of payment must 
be immaterial. If it is confined to the arresting of 

1 Book III., chap. v.f sec. 77. 

43 2 , Alexander Hamilton 

payment during the war, the reason of the rule, the 
object being to prevent supplies going to the enemy, 
will apply it as well to debts which had become pay 
able before the war, as to those which became pay 
able in the war. Whence this inaccuracy in so 
accurate a thinker? Whence the hesitation about so 
important a point, as whether the pretended right 
extends to confiscation or simply to sequestration? 
They must be accounted for, as in another case, by 
the conflict between respect for ancient maxims and 
the impressions of juster views, seconded by the 
more enlightened policy of modern times. 

But while Vatel thus countenances, in the first part 
of the passage, the opinion that the natural law of 
nations authorizes the confiscation or sequestration 
of private debts, in what immediately follows he most 
explicitly and unequivocally informs us that the rule 
of that law in this respect has been abrogated by 
modern usage or custom; in other words, that the 
modern customary law has changed in this particular 
the ancient natural law. Let his own words be con 
sulted: " At present," says he, " in regard to the ad 
vantage and safety of commerce, all the sovereigns of 
Europe have departed from this rigor; and as this 
custom has been generally received, he who should 
act contrary to it would injure the public faith; 
for strangers trusted his subjects only from the 
firm persuasion that the general custom would be 
observed." 

This testimony is full, that there is a general cus 
tom received and adopted by all the sovereigns of 
Europe, which obviates the rigor of the ancient rule; 

Camillas 433 

the non-observance of which custom would violate 
the public faith of a nation, as being a breach of an 
implied contract, by virtue of the custom, upon the 
strength of which foreigners trust his subjects. 

Language cannot describe more clearly a rule of the 
customary law of nations, the essence of which, we 
have seen, is general usage, implying a tacit agree 
ment to conform to the rule. The one alleged is 
denominated a custom generally received, a general 
custom; all the sovereigns of Europe are stated to 
be parties to it, and it is represented as obligatory on 
the public faith, since this would be injured by a 
departure from it. 

The consequence is that if the right pretended did 
exist by the natural law, it has given way to the 
customary law ; for it is a contradiction, to call that 
a right which cannot be exercised without breach of 
faith. The result is, that by the present customary 
law of nations, within the sphere of its action, there 
is no right to confiscate or sequester private debts in 
time of war. The reason or motive of which law is 
the advantage and safety of commerce. 

As to private property in public funds, the right to 
meddle with them is still more emphatically nega 
tived. "That state does not so much as touch the 
sums it owes to the enemy. Everywhere, in case of a 
war, funds credited to the public are exempt from 
confiscation and seizure." These terms manifestly 
exclude sequestration as well as confiscation. 

In another place, the author gives the reason of 
this position, Book II., Chap. XVIII. " In reprisals, 
the goods of a subject are seized in the same manner 

VOL. V.— 28. 

434 Alexander Hamilton 

as those of the state or the sovereign. Every thing 
that belongs to the nation is liable to reprisals as soon 
as it can be seized, provided it be not a deposit trusted 
to the public faith. This DEPOSIT is found in our 
hands, only in consequence of that confidence, which 
the proprietor has put in our good faith, and it ought 
to be respected, even in case of open war. Thus it is 
usual to behave in France, England, and elsewhere, 
with respect to the money which foreigners have 
placed in the public funds." The same principle, if 
he had reflected without bias, would have taught him, 
that reprisals could rightfully extend to nothing that 
had been committed with their permission, to the 
custody and guardianship of our laws, during a state 
of peace; and, consequently, that no property of our 
enemy which was in our country before the breaking 
out of the war, is justly liable to them. For is not 
all such property equally a deposit trusted to the public 
faith ? What foreigner would acquire property in 
our country, or bring and lodge it there, but in the 
confidence, that in case of war, it would not become 
an object of reprisals? Why then resort to custom 
for a denial of the right to confiscate or sequester 
private debts? Why not trace it to the natural in 
justice and perfidy of taking away in war what a 
foreigner is permitted to own and have among us in 
peace? Why ever consider that as a natural right 
which was contrary to good faith tacitly pledged? 
This is evidently the effect of too much deference to 
ferocious maxims of antiquity, of undue complais 
ance to some precedents of modern rapacity. 

He had avoided the error by weighing maturely the 

Camillas 435 

consequences of his own principle in another case: 
" He who declares war (says he) does not confiscate 
the immovable goods possessed in his country by his 
enemy 's subjects. In permitting tKem to purchase and 
possess those goods, he has, in this respect, admitted 
them into the number of his subjects," — that is, he 
has admitted them to a like privilege with his sub 
jects, as to the real property they were permitted to 
acquire and hold. But why should a less privilege 
attend the license to purchase, possess, or have other 
kinds of property in his country ? The reason, which 
is the permission of the sovereign, must extend to the 
protection of one kind of property as well as another, 
if the permission extends to both. 

Vatel advances in this and in the passage quoted 
immediately before it, the true principles which ought 
to govern the question — though he does not pursue 
them into their consequences ; else he would not have 
deduced the exemption of private debts, from con 
fiscation or sequestration, from the customary law 
of nations, but would have traced it to the natural 
or necessary law, as founded upon the obligations 
of good faith; upon the tacit promise of security 
connected with the permission to acquire property 
within, or bring property into, our country; upon 
the protection which every government owes to a 
property of which it legalizes the acquisition, or the 
deposit within its jurisdiction; and in case of im 
movable goods or real estate, of which he admits a 
right to sequester the income, to prevent its being 
remitted to the enemy, he would have perceived the 
necessity of leaving this effect to be produced by the 

43 6 Alexander Hamilton 

obstructions intrinsically incident to a state of war, 
— since there is no reason why the income should be 
less privileged than the substance of the thing. 

It appears, then, that the doctrine of Vatel, collect 
ively taken, amounts to this: that there is a natural 
right of war in certain cases to confiscate or sequester 
enemy's property found within our country ; but that, 
on motives relative to commerce and public credit, 
the customary law of Europe has restrained that 
right, as to private debts, and private property, in 
public funds. His opinion, therefore, favors the 
principle of the article of the treaty under examina 
tion, as consonant with the present European law of 
nations ; and it is an opinion of greater weight than 
any that can be cited, as well on account of the 
capacity, diligence, information, and the precision of 
ideas, which characterize the work in which it is con 
tained, as on account of the recency of that work.1 

A question may be raised — Does this customary 
law of nations, as established in Europe, bind the 
United States ? An affirmative answer to this is war 
ranted by conclusive reasons. 

i. The United States, when a member of the 
British Empire, were, in this capacity, a party to that 
law, and not having dissented from it, when they be 
came independent, they are to be considered as hav 
ing continued a party to it. 2. The common law of 
England, which was and is in force in each of these 
States, adopts the law of nations, the positive equally 
with the natural, as a part of itself. 3. Ever since 
we have been an independent nation, we have ap- 

1 It appears to have been written about the year 1760. 

Camillas 437 

pealed to and acted upon the modern law of nations 
as understood in Europe — various resolutions of Con 
gress during our revolution, the correspondence of 
executive officers, the decisions of our courts of ad 
miralty, all recognized this standard. 4. Executive 
and legislative acts, and the proceedings of our 
courts, under the present government, speak a 
similar language. The President's proclamation of 
neutrality, refers expressly to the modern law of na 
tions, which must necessarily be understood as that 
prevailing in Europe, and acceded to by this country; 
and the general voice of our nation, together with the 
very arguments used against the treaty, accord in the 
same point. It is indubitable, that the customary' 
law of European nations is as a part of the common 
law, and, by adoption, that of the United States. 

But let it not be forgotten, that I derive the vindi 
cation of the article from a higher source, from the 
natural or necessary law of nature — from the eternal 
principles of morality and good faith. 

There is one more authority which I shall cite in 
reference to a part of the question, property in the 
public funds. It is a report to the British king in the 
year 1753, from Sir George Lee, judge of the preroga 
tive court, Dr. Paul, advocate-general in the courts of 
civil law, Sir Dudley Rider and Mr. Murray, attorney- 
and solicitor-general,1 on the subject of the Silesia 
loan, sequestered by the king of Prussia, by way of 
reprisal, for the capture and condemnation of some 
Prussian vessels. This report merits all the respect 

1 Sir George Lee, was afterward the very celebrated Chief Justice 
Lee, and Mr. Murray was the late Lord Mansfield. 

Alexander Hamilton 

which can be derived from consummate knowledge 
and ability in the reporters ; but it would lose much 
of its weight from the want of impartiality, which 
might fairly be imputed to the officers of one of the 
governments interested in the contest, had it not 
since received the confirming eulogies of impartial 
and celebrated foreign writers. Among these, Vatel 
calls it an excellent piece on the law of nations. 

The following is an extract: " The king of Prussia 
has pledged his royal word to pay the Silesia debt to 
private men. It is negotiable, and many parts of it 
have been assigned to the subjects of other powers. 
It will not be easy to find an instance, where a prince 
has thought fit to make reprisals upon a debt due from 
himself to private men. There is a confidence that this 
will not be done. A private man lends money to a 
prince upon an engagement of honor; because a prince 
cannot be compelled, like other men, in an adversary 
way, by a court of justice. So scrupulously did Eng 
land and France adhere to this public faith, that even 
during the war, they suffered no inquiry to be 
made, whether any part of the public debt was due 
to the subjects of the enemy, though it is certain 
many English had money in the French funds, and 
many French had money in ours. 

The universal obligation of good faith is here rein 
forced on a special ground, by the point of honor; to 
confirm the position that money which a sovereign or 
State owes to private men, is not a proper object of 
reprisals. 

This case of the Silesia debt is the only example, 
within the present century, prior to the existing war, 

Camillas 439 

which I have been able to trace, violating the im 
munity of private debts, or private property, in 
public funds. It is a precedent that can have little 
weight, not only from singularity, but from the char 
acter of its author. Frederick was a consummate 
general, a profound statesman ; but he was very far 
from being a severe moralist. This is not the only 
instance in which he tarnished his faith; and the 
friends of his fame must regret that he could not 
plead on the occasion those mighty and dazzling 
reasons of state, which are the specious apologies for 
his other aberrations. 

It is asserted that the present war of Europe 
affords examples of the practice, which I reprobate, 
and that Great Britain herself has given one. The 
present war of Europe is of so extraordinary a com 
plexion, and has been conducted, in all respects, upon 
such extraordinary principles, that it may truly be 
regarded as an exception to all general rules, as a 
precedent for nothing. It is rather a beacon, warn 
ing mankind to shun the pernicious examples which 
it sets, than a model inviting to imitation. The 
human passions, on all sides, appear to have been 
wrought up to a pitch of frenzy, which has set reason, 
justice, and humanity at defiance. 

Those who have nevertheless thought fit to appeal 
to the examples of this very anomalous war, have not 
detailed to us the precise nature or course of the 
transactions to which they refer; nor do I know that 
sufficient documents have appeared in this country to 
guide us in the inquiry. 

The imperfect evidence which has fallen under my 

440 Alexander Hamilton 

observation, respects France and Great Britain, and 
seems to exhibit these facts: 

France passed a decree sequestering the property 
of the subjects of the powers at war with her ; and in 
the same or another decree, obliged all those of her 
citizens, who had moneys owing to them in foreign 
countries, to draw bills upon their debtors, and to 
furnish those bills to the Government, by way of 
loan, or upon certain terms of payment. 

The Government of Great Britain, in consequence 
of this proceeding, passed ten different acts, the 
objects of which were to prevent the payment of 
those bills, and to secure the sums due for the benefit 
of the original creditors. These acts appoint certain 
commissioners, to whom reports are to be made of all 
French property in the hands of British subjects, and 
who are empowered to receive and sell goods and 
other effects, to collect debts and to deposit the pro 
ceeds in the bank of London, or in other safe keeping, 
if preferred or required by parties interested. The 
moneys deposited are to be invested in the purchase 
of public stock, together with the interest or divi 
dends arising from time to time, to be eventually 
accounted for to the proprietors. The commissioners 
have, likewise, a discretion, upon demand, to deliver 
over their effects and moneys to such of the proprie 
tors as do not reside within the French dominions. 

I shall not enter into a discussion of the propriety 
of these acts of Great Britain. It is sufficient to 
observe that they are attended with circumstances 
which very essentially discriminate them from the 
thing for which they were quoted. The act of the 

Camillas 441 

French Government was in substance a compulsory 
assumption of all the property of its citizens in foreign 
countries. This extraordinary measure presented 
two options to the governments of those countries: 
One to consider the transfer as virtually effected, and 
to confiscate the property as being no longer that 
of the individuals, but that of the Government of 
France ; the other, to defeat the effect of her plan by 
buying up the property for the benefit of the original 
creditors, in exclusion of the drafts which they were 
compelled to draw. Great Britain appears to have 
elected the latter course. If we suppose her sincere 
in the motive, and there is fairness and fidelity in the 
execution, the issue will be favorable, rather than 
detrimental, to the rights of private property. 

I have said that there was an option to confiscate. 
A government may rightfully confiscate the property 
of an adversary government. No principle of justice 
or policy occurs to forbid reprisals upon the public 
or national property of an enemy. That case is 
foreign, in every view, to the principles which protect 
private property. The exemption stipulated by the 
tenth article of the treaty is accordingly restricted to 
the latter. 

It appears that the Government of France, con 
vinced by the effect of the experiment that the se 
questration of the property of the subjects of her 
enemies was impolitic, thought fit to rescind it. 
Thence on the 2gth of December, 1794, the conven 
tion decreed as follows : 

"The decrees concerning sequestration of the 
property of the subjects of the powers at war with the 

442 Alexander Hamilton 

republic, are annulled. Such sums as have been paid 
by French citizens into the treasury, in consequence 
of those decrees, will be reimbursed." 

In the course of the debates upon this decree, it was 
declared that the decrees which it was to repeal had 
prepared the ruin of commerce, and had severed, against 
the rights of nations, the obligations of merchants in 
different States. This is a direct admission that the 
sequestration was contrary to the law of nations. 

As far as respects France, then, the precedent, 
upon the whole, is a strong condemnation of the pre 
tended right to confiscate or sequester. This formal 
renunciation of the ground which was at first taken, 
is a very emphatic protest against the principle of the 
measure. It ought to serve us too as an instructive 
warning against the employment of so mischievious 
and disgraceful an expedient. And as to England, 
as has been shown, the precedent is foreign to the 
question. 

Thus we perceive, that opinion and usage, far from 
supporting the right to confiscate or sequester private 
property, on account of national wars, when referred 
to the modern standard, turn against that right, and 
coincide with the principle of the article of the treaty 
under examination. 

What remains to be offered will further illustrate 
its propriety, and reconcile it to all reflecting men. 

CAMILLUS. 

NO. XXI 

1795- 

Since the closing of my last number, I have ac 
cidentally turned to a passage of Vatel, which is so 

Camillas 443 

pertinent to the immediate subject of that paper, 
that I cannot refrain from interrupting the progress 
of the discussion, to quote it; it is in these words (B. 
III., Ch. IV., Sec. 63) : " The sovereign declaring war 
can neither detain those subjects of the enemy, who 
are within his dominions at the time of the declara 
tion, nor their effects. They came into his country on 
the public faith. By permitting them to enter his ter 
ritories, and continue there he tacitly promised them 
liberty and security for their return." This passage 
contains, explicitly, the principle which is the general 
basis of my argument — namely, that the permission 
to a foreigner to come with his effects into, and ac 
quire others within our country, in time of peace, 
virtually pledges the public faith for the security of 
his person and property, in the event of war. How 
can this be reconciled with the natural right (con 
trolled only by the customary law of nations) which 
this writer admits, to confiscate the debts due by the 
subjects of a State to its enemies? I ask once more, 
can there be a natural right to do that which includes 
a violation of faith? 

It is plain, to a demonstration, that the rule laid 
down in this passage, which is so just and perspicuous 
as to speak conviction to the heart and understand 
ing, unites the natural with the customary law of 
nations, in a condemnation of the pretension to 
confiscate or sequester the private property of our 
enemy, found in our country at the breaking out of 
a war. 

Let us now proceed to examine the policy and 
expediency of such a pretension. 

444 Alexander Hamilton 

In this investigation I shall assume, as a basis of 
argument, the following position: That it is advan 
tageous to nations to have commerce with each other. 

Commerce, it is manifest, like any other object of 
enterprise or industry, will prosper in proportion as it 
is secure. Its security, consequently, promoting its 
prosperity, extends its advantages. Security is in 
deed essential to its having a due and regular course. 

The pretension of a right to confiscate or se 
quester the effects of foreign merchants, in the case 
in question, is, in its principle, fatal to that neces 
sary security. Its free exercise would destroy ex 
ternal commerce ; or, which is nearly the same thing, 
reduce it within the contracted limits of a game of 
hazard, where the chance of large profits, accom 
panied with the great risks, would tempt alone the 
adventurous and the desperate. Those enterprises, 
which, from circuitous or long voyages, slowness of 
sales, incident to the nature of certain commodities, 
the necessity of credit, or from other causes, demand 
considerable time for their completion must be re 
nounced. Credit, indeed must be banished from all 
the operations of foreign commerce; an engine, the 
importance of which, to its vigorous and successful 
prosecution, will be doubted by none, who will be 
guided by experience or observation. 

It cannot need amplification, to elucidate the 
truth of these positions. The storms of war occur so 
suddenly and so often, as to forbid the supposition, 
that the merchants of one country would trust their 
property, to any extent, or for any duration, in 
another country, which was in the practice of con- 

Camillas 445 

fiscating or sequestering the effects of its enemies, 
found within its territories, at the commencement of 
a war. That practice, therefore, would necessarily 
paralyze and wither the commerce of the country in 
which it obtained. Accordingly, nations attentive to 
the cultivation of commerce, which formerly were 
betrayed, by temporary considerations, into par 
ticular instances of that atrocious practice, have 
been led, by the experience of its mischiefs, to ab 
stain from it in later times. They saw that to 
have persisted in it would have been to abandon 
competition on equal terms, in the lucrative and 
beneficial field of commerce. 

It is no answer to this, to say that the exercise of 
the right might be ordinarily suspended, though the 
right itself might be maintained, for extraordinary 
and great emergencies. 

In the first place, as the ordinary forbearance of 
its exercise would be taken by foreigners for evi 
dence of an intention never to exercise it, by which 
they would be enticed into large deposits, that 
would not otherwise have taken place; a departure 
from the general course would always involve an act 
of treachery and cruelty. 

In the second place, the possibility of the occa 
sional exercise of such a right, if conceived to exist, 
would be, at least, a slow poison, conducing to a 
sickly habit of commerce; and, in a series of time, 
would be productive of much more evil than could 
be counterbalanced by any good which it might be 
possible to obtain in the contemplated emergency, 
by the use of the expedient. 

446 Alexander Hamilton 

Let experience decide. Examples of confiscation 
and sequestration have been given. When did the 
dread of them prevent a war? When did it cripple 
an enemy, so as to disable him from exertion, or 
force him into a submission to the views of his ad 
versary? When did it even sensibly conspire to 
either of these ends? If it has ever had any such 
effect, the evidence of it has not come within my 
knowledge. 

It is true, that between Great Britain and the 
United States, the expectation of such effects is better 
warranted than perhaps in any other cases that have 
existed; because we commonly owe a larger debt to 
that country, than is usual between nations, and 
there is a relative state of things, which tend to a 
continuation of this situation. 

But how has the matter operated hitherto? In 
the late war between the two countries, certain 
States confiscated the debts due from their citizens 
to British creditors, and these creditors actually 
suffered great losses. The British Cabinet must have 
known that it was possible the same thing might 
happen in another war, and on a more general scale ; 
yet the appearances were extremely strong, at a 
particular juncture, that it was their plan, either 
from ill-will, from the belief that popular opinion 
would ultimately drag our Government into the war, 
from the union of these two, or from other causes, to 
force us into hostilities with them. Hence it appears, 
that the apprehension of acts of confiscation, or se 
questration, was not sufficient to deter from hostile 
views, or to insure pacific dispositions. 

Camillus 447 

It may be pretended, that the menace of this meas 
ure, had a restraining influence on the subsequent 
conduct of Great Britain. But if we ascribe nothing 
to the measures which our Government actually 
pursued, under the pressure of the provocations re 
ceived, we at least find in the course of European 
events, a better solution of a change of policy in 
the Cabinet of Great Britain, than from the dread 
of a legislative piracy on the debts due to their 
merchants. 

The truth unfortunately is, that the passions of 
men stifle calculation; that nations the most at 
tentive to pecuniary considerations, easily surren 
der them to ambition, to jealousy, to anger, or to 
revenge. 

For the same reason, the actual experiment of an 
exercise of the pretended right, by way of reprisal 
for an injury complained of, would commonly be as 
inefficacious as the menace of it to arrest general 
hostilities. Pride is roused ; resentment kin died; and 
where there is even no previous disposition to those 
hostilities, the probability is that they follow. Na 
tions, like individuals, ill brook the idea of receding 
from their pretensions under the rod, or of admitting 
the justice of an act of retaliation or reprisal by 
submitting to it. Thus we learn, from the king of 
Prussia himself, that the sequestration of the Silesia 
debt, instead of procuring the restoration for which 
it was designed, was on the point of occasioning an 
open rupture between him and Great Britain, when 
the supervention of a quarrel with France diverted 
the storm, by rendering him necessary as an ally. 

448 Alexander Hamilton 

Perhaps it may be imagined that the practice of 
confiscation or sequestration would be more effica 
cious to wound and disable Great Britain, in case of 
a war, than to prevent it. But this also is a vain 
chimera! A nation that can, at pleasure, raise by 
loan twenty millions sterling, would be in little dan 
ger of being disconcerted or enfeebled in her military 
enterprises by the taking away or arresting of three 
or four millions due to her merchants. Did it pro 
duce distress and disorder among those whom it 
affected and their connections? If that disorder 
was sufficient to threaten a general derangement of 
mercantile credit, and, with it, of the public finances, 
the pending war affords an example, that the public 
purse or credit could be brought successfully into 
action for the support of the sufferers. Three or 
four millions of exchequer bills applied in loans would 
be likely to suffice to prevent the partial evil from 
growing into a national calamity. 

But we forget that, as far as the interruption of 
the payment of the debts due to her merchants could 
be supposed to operate upon Great Britain, war it 
self would essentially answer the purposes of con 
fiscation or sequestration — by interrupting trade and 
intercourse, it is in fact in a great degree a virtual 
sequestration. Remittances to any extent become 
impracticable. There are few ways in which, on ac 
count of the state of war, it is lawful to make them ; 
and debtors are, for the most part, enough disposed 
to embrace pretexts of procrastination. 

The inconvenience of deferred payment would, 
therefore, be felt by Great Britain, with little mitiga- 

Camillus 449 

tion, from the bare existence of war, without the 
necessity of our Government incurring the discredit 
and responsibility of a special interference. 

Indeed, as far as the dread of eventual loss can 
operate, it ought in a great measure to have its effect 
exclusive of the idea of confiscation. Great Britain 
must want reflection, not to be sensible, that in 
making war upon us, she makes war upon her own 
merchants; by the depredations upon our trade de 
stroying those resources from which they are to be 
paid. If she be indifferent to this consideration, it 
will be because she is governed by some motive or 
passion powerful enough to dispose her to run the 
risk of the entire loss — in the reliance of obtaining 
indemnification by the acquisitions of war, or in the 
terms of peace. 

Will it be said that the seizure of the debts would 
put in the hands of our Government a valuable re 
source for carrying on the war? This, upon trial, 
would prove as fallacious as all the rest. Various 
inducements would prevent debtors from paying 
into the Treasury. Some would decline it from con 
scientious scruples, from a doubt of the rectitude of 
the thing — others, with intent to make a merit with 
their creditors of the concealment, and to favor their 
own future credit and advantage — others, from a 
desire to retain the money in their own employment; 
and a great number from the apprehension that the 
treaty of peace might revive their responsibility to 
the creditors, with the embarrassment to them 
selves of getting back, as well as they could, the 
moneys which they had paid into the Treasury. Of 

VOL. V.— 2Q. 

450 Alexander Hamilton 

this, our last treaty of peace, in the opinion of able 
judges, gave an example. These causes and others, 
which do not as readily occur, would oppose great 
obstacles to the execution of the measure. 

But severe laws, inflicting heavy penalties, might 
compel it. Experience does not warrant a sanguine 
reliance upon this expedient, in a case in which 
great opportunity of concealment is united with 
strong motives of inclination or interest. It would 
require an inquisition, justly intolerable to a free 
people — penalties, which would confound the due 
proportion between crime and punishment, to detect 
or to deter from concealment and evasion, and to 
execute the law. Probably no means less effica 
cious than a revolutionary tribunal and a guillotine 
would go near to answer the end. There are but 
few, I trust, to whom these would be welcome 
means. 

We may conclude, therefore, that the law would 
be evaded to an extent which would disappoint the 
expectations from it, as a resource. Some moneys, 
no doubt, would be collected; but the probability is 
that the amount would be insignificant, even in the 
scale of a single campaign. But, should the collec 
tion prove as complete as it ordinarily is between 
debtor and creditor, it would little, if at all, exceed 
the expense of one campaign. 

Hence we perceive that, regarding the measure 
either as a mean of disabling our enemies, or as a 
resource to ourselves, its consequence dwindles, upon 
a close survey; it cannot pretend to a magnitude 
which would apologize either for a sacrifice of na- 

Camillas 45 1 

tional honor or candor, or for a deviation from the 
true principles of commerce and credit. 

But let us take a further view of its disadvantages. 

A nation, in case of war, is under no responsibility 
for the delinquencies or frauds of its citizens, who 
are debtors to those of its enemy, if it does not 
specially interfere with the payment of the debts 
which they owe. But if it interposes its authority 
to prevent the payment, it gives a claim of indemni 
fication to its adversary for the intervening losses 
which those delinquencies or frauds may occasion. 
Whether, on the making of peace, this would be in 
sisted upon or waived, might depend much on the 
good or ill success of the war ; but every thing which 
adds to the catalogue of our enemy's just pretensions, 
especially when the fortune of war has been pretty 
equal, is an evil, either as an additional obstacle to 
speedy peace, or as an ingredient to render the terms 
of it less advantageous to ourselves. And it is, 
therefore, unwise in a government to increase the 
list of such pretensions, by a measure which, without 
utility to itself, administers to the indolence of negli 
gent, and to the avidity of fraudulent individuals. 

Further — Every species of reprisal or annoyance 
which a power at war employs, contrary to liberality 
or justice, of doubtful propriety in the estimation of 
the law of nations, departing from that moderation 
which, in later times, serves to mitigate the severi 
ties of war, by furnishing a pretext or provocation 
to the other side to resort to extremities, serves to 
embitter the spirit of hostilities, and to extend its rav 
ages. War is then apt to become more sanguinary, 

45 2 Alexander Hamilton 

more wasting, and every way more destructive. 
This is a ground of serious reflection to every nation, 
both as it regards humanity and policy; to this 
country it presents itself, accompanied with con 
siderations of peculiar force. A vastly extended 
sea-coast, overspread with defenceless towns, would 
offer an abundant prey to an incensed and malignant 
enemy, having the power to command the sea. The 
usages of modern war forbid hostilities of this kind ; 
and though they are not always respected, yet, as 
they are never violated, unless by way of retaliation 
for a violation of them on the other side, without 
exciting the reprobation of the impartial part of 
mankind, sullying the glory and blasting the reputa 
tion of the party which disregards them, this con 
sideration has, in general, force sufficient to induce 
an observance of them. But the confiscation or 
sequestration of private debts, or private property 
in public funds, now generally regarded as an odious 
and unwarrantable measure, would, as between us 
and Great Britain, contain a poignant sting. Its 
effect to exasperate, in an extreme degree, both the 
nation and government of that country, cannot be 
doubted. A disposition to retaliate, is a natural 
consequence ; and it would not be difficult for us to 
be made to suffer beyond any possible degree of ad 
vantage to be derived from the occasion of the re 
taliation. It were much wiser to leave the property 
of British subjects an untouched pledge for the mod 
eration of its government in the mode of prosecuting 
the war. 

Besides (as, if requisite, might be proved from the 

Camillus 453 

records of history), in national controversies, it is of 
real importance to conciliate the good opinion of 
mankind; and it is even useful to preserve or gain 
that of our enemy. The latter facilitates accommo 
dation and peace; the former attracts good offi 
ces, friendly interventions, sometimes direct support, 
from others. The exemplary conduct, in general, 
of our country, in our contest for independence, 
was probably not a little serviceable to us in this 
way; it secured to the intrinsic goodness of our 
cause every collateral advantage, and gave it a 
popularity among nations, unalloyed and unim 
paired, which even stole into the cabinets of princes. 
A contrary policy tends to contrary consequences. 
Though nations, in the main, are governed by what 
they suppose their interest, he must be imperfectly 
versed in human nature who thinks it indifferent 
whether the maxims of a State tend to excite kind or 
unkind dispositions in others, or who does not know 
that these dispositions may insensibly mould or bias 
the views of self-interest. This were to suppose 
that rulers only reason — do not feel ; in other words, 
are not men. 

Moreover, the measures of war ought ever to look 
forward to peace. The confiscation or sequestration 
of the private property of an enemy must always be 
a point of serious discussion, when interest or neces 
sity leads to negotiations for peace. Unless when 
absolutely prostrate by the war, restitution is likely 
to constitute an ultimatum of the suffering party. It 
must be agreed to, or the war protracted, and at last, 
it is probable, it must still be agreed to. Should a 

454 Alexander Hamilton 

refusal of restitution prolong the war for only one 
year, the chance is that more will be lost than was 
gained by the confiscation. Should it be necessary 
finally to make it, after prolonging the war, the 
disadvantage will preponderate in a ratio to the 
prolongation. Should it be, in the first instance, 
assented to, what will have been gained? The tem 
porary use of a fund of inconsiderable moment, in 
the general issue of the war, at the expense of justice, 
character, credit, and, perhaps, of having sharpened 
the evils of war. How infinitely preferable to have 
drawn an equal fund from our own resources, which, 
with good management, is always practicable! If 
the restitution includes damages, on account of the 
interference, for the failures of individuals, the loan 
will have been the most costly that could have been 
made. It has been elsewhere observed that our 
treaty of peace with Great Britain gives an example 
of restitution. The late one between France and 
Prussia gives another. This must become every 
day more and more a matter of course, because the 
immunity of mercantile debts becomes every day 
more and more important to trade, better understood 
to be so, and more clearly considered as enjoined by 
the principles of the law of nations. 

Thus we see that, in reference to the simple ques 
tion of war and peace, the measure of confiscation 
or sequestration is marked with every feature of 
impolicy. 

We have before seen that the pretensions of a 
right to do the one or the other has a most inimical 
aspect toward commerce and credit. 

Camillas 455 

Let us resume this view of the subject. The 
credit which our merchants have been able to obtain 
abroad, especially in Great Britain, has, from the 
first settlement of our country to this day, been the 
animating principle of our foreign commerce, This 
every merchant knows and feels; and every intelli 
gent merchant is sensible that, for many years to 
come, the case must continue the same. This, in 
our situation, is a peculiar reason, of the utmost 
force, for renouncing the pretension in question. 

The exercise of it, or the serious apprehension of 
its exercise, would necessarily have one of two 
effects. It would deprive our merchants of the 
credit, so important to them, or it would oblige them 
to pay a premium for it, proportioned to the opinion 
of the risk. Or, to speak more truly, it would com 
bine the two effects; it would cramp credit, and 
subject what was given to a high premium. The 
most obvious and familiar principles of human ac 
tion establish, that the consideration for money or 
property, lent or credited, is moderate or otherwise, 
according to the opinion of security or hazard, and 
that the quantity of either to be obtained, on loan 
or credit, is in a great degree contracted or enlarged 
by the same rule. 

Thus should we, in the operations of our trade, pay 
exorbitantly for a pretension which is of little value, 
or rather, which is pernicious, even in the relations 
to which its utility is referred. What folly to cher 
ish it! How much greater the folly ever to think of 
exercising it! It never can be exercised hereafter, 
in our country, without great and lasting mischief. 

456 Alexander Hamilton 

Instead of cherishing so odious a pretension, as 
"our best, our only weapon of defence," wisdom 
admonishes us to be eager to cast it from us, as a 
weapon most dangerous to the wearer, proscribed by 
the laws of nations, by the laws of honor, and by 
every principle of sound policy. 

Every merchant ought to desire that the most 
perfect tranquillity on this point, in foreign coun 
tries, should facilitate to him, on the best and cheap 
est terms, the credit for which he has occasion. 
And every other citizen ought to desire, that he 
may be thus freed from a continual contribution, 
in the enhanced price of every imported commod 
ity he consumes, towards defraying the premium 
which the want of that tranquillity is calculated to 
generate. 

CAMILLUS. 

NO. XXII 

1795- 

The analogy of the stipulation in the loth article, 
with stipulations in our other treaties, and in the 
treaties between other nations, is the remaining topic 
of discussion. After this, attention will be paid to 
such observations, by way of objection to the article, 
as may not have been before expressly or virtually 
answered. 

The 2oth article of our treaty of amity and com 
merce with France is in these words : 

" For the better promoting of commerce, on both 
sides, it is agreed, that if a war shall break out be 
tween the said two nations, six months, after the 

Camillus 457 

proclamation of war, shall be allowed to the mer 
chants in the cities and towns where they live, for 
selling and transporting their goods and merchan 
dises ; and if any thing be taken from them or any 
injury be done them within that term by either party, 
or the people or subjects of either, full satisfaction 
shall be made for the same." 

The 1 8th article of our treaty of amity and com 
merce with the United Netherlands is in these words : 

" For the better promoting of commerce, on both 
sides, it is agreed, that if a war should break out be 
tween their high Mightinesses, the States General of 
the United Netherlands, and the United States of 
America, there shall always be granted to the sub 
jects on each side, the term of nine months, after the 
date of the rupture or the proclamation of war, to the 
end that they may retire with their effects and trans 
port them where they please, which it shall be lawful 
for them to do, as well as to sell and transport their 
effects and goods, with all freedom and without any 
hindrance, and without being able to proceed, during 
the said term of nine months, to any arrest of their 
effects, much less of their persons ; on the contrary, 
there shall be given them, for their vessels and effects 
which they would carry away, passports and safe 
conducts for the nearest ports of their respective 
countries, and for the time necessary for the voyage. " 

The 22d article of our treaty of amity and com 
merce with Sweden is in these words: 

" In order to favor commerce on both sides as 
much as possible, it is agreed, that in case war 
should break out between the two nations, the term 

45 8 Alexander Hamilton 

of nine months after the declaration of war shall be 
allowed to the merchants and subjects respectively, 
on one side and on the other, in order that they may 
withdraw with their effects and movables, which they 
shall be at liberty to carry off or to sell where they 
please, without the least obstacle, nor shall any seize 
their effects, and much less their persons, during the 
said nine months; but, on the contrary, passports, 
which shall be valid for a time necessary for their re 
turn, shall be given them for their vessels and the 
effects which they shall be willing to carry with them, 
and if anything is taken from them or any injury is 
done to them by one of the parties, their people and 
subjects, during the term above prescribed, full and 
entire satisfaction shall be made to them on that 
account." 

The 23d article of our treaty of amity and com 
merce with Prussia contains this provision : 

" If war should arise between the two contracting 
parties, the merchants of either country, then resid 
ing in the other, shall be allowed to remain nine 
months, to collect their debts and settle their affairs, 
and may depart freely, carrying off all their effects 
without molestation or hindrance." 

These articles of four, and the only commercial, 
treaties we had with foreign powers, prior to the 
pending treaty with Great Britain, though differing 
in terms, agree in substance, except as to time, which 
varies from six to nine months. And they clearly 
amount to this : that upon the breaking out of a war 
between the contracting parties in each case, there 
shall be, for a term of six or nine months, full protec- 

Camillas 459 

tion and security to the persons and property of the 
subjects of one which are then in the territories of 
the other, with liberty to collect their debts,1 to sell 
their goods and merchandises, and to remove, with 
their effects, wheresoever they please. For this term 
of six or nine months, there is a complete suspension 
of the pretended right to confiscate or sequester, 
giving, or being designed to give, an opportunity to 
withdraw the whole property which the subjects or 
citizens of one party have in the country of the other. 

The differences between these stipulations and 
that in the article under examination are chiefly these : 
The latter is confined to debts, property in the public 
funds and in public and private banks, without any 
limitation of the duration of the protection. The 
former comprehends, in addition, goods and mer 
chandises, with a limitation of the protection to a 
term of six or nine months ; but with the intent and 
supposition that the term allowed may and will be 
adequate to entire security. The principle, therefore, 
of all the stipulations is the same; each aims at 
putting the persons and property of the subjects of 
one enemy, especially merchants, being within the 
country of the other enemy at the commencement 
of a war, out of the reach of confiscation or sequestra 
tion. 

The persons whose names are to our other treaties, 
on the part of the United States, are Benjamin 
Franklin, Silas Deane, Arthur Lee, John Adams, and 

1 The term "debts" is only expressed in the Prussian treaty, but 
there are in the other treaties, terms which include debts, and this is 
the manifest spirit and intent of all. 

460 Alexander Hamilton 

Thomas Jefferson. The three first are to the treaty 
with France; Mr. Adams is singly to that with the 
United Netherlands; Dr. Franklin singly to that 
with Sweden; and these two, with Mr. Jefferson, are 
jointly to that with Prussia. The treaty with Sweden 
was concluded in April, 1783; that with Prussia, 
in August, 1785. These dates repel the idea, that 
considerations of policy, relative to the war, might 
have operated in the case. 

We have, consequently, the sanction of all these 
characters to the principle which governed the stipu 
lation entered into by Mr. Jay; and not only from 
the ratification of the former treaties at different 
periods, distant from each other, by different descrip 
tions of men in our public councils, but also from 
there never having been heard in the community a 
lisp of murmur against the stipulation, through a 
period of seventeen years, counting from the date of 
the treaty with France, there is just ground to infer 
a coincidence of the public opinion of the country. 

I verily believe, that if, in the year 1783, a treaty 
had been made with England, containing an article 
similar to the loth in the present treaty, it would 
have met with general acquiescence. The spirit of 
party had not then predisposed men's minds to 
estimate the propriety of a measure according to 
the agent, rather than according to its real fitness 
and quality. What would then have been applauded 
as wise, liberal, equitable, and expedient, is now, in 
more instances than one, under the pestilential in 
fluence of that baneful spirit, condemned as improvi 
dent, impolitic, and dangerous. 

Camillus 46 1 

Our treaty with Prussia, the 23d article of which 
has been cited, is indeed a model of liberality, which, 
for the principles it contains, does honor to the 
parties, and has been in this country a subject of 
deserved and unqualified admiration. It contradicts 
as if studiously, those principles of restriction and 
exclusion, which are the foundations of the mercan 
tile and navigating system of Europe. It grants 
perfect freedom of conscience and worship to the 
respective subjects and citizens, with no other re 
straint than that they shall not insult the religion of 
others. Adopting the rule, that free ships shall make 
free goods, it extends the protection to the persons as 
well as to the goods of enemies. Enumerating, as 
contraband, only " arms, ammunition, and military 
stores," it even provides that contraband articles 
shall not be confiscated, but may be taken on the 
condition of paying for them. It provides against 
embargoes of vessels and effects. It expressly ex 
empts women, children, scholars of every faculty, 
cultivators of the earth, artisans, manufacturers, and 
fishermen, unarmed and inhabiting unfortified towns, 
villages, and places, and, in general, all others whose 
occupations are for the common subsistence and 
benefit of mankind, their houses, fields, and goods, 
from molestation in their persons and employments, 
and from burning, wasting, and destruction, in time 
of war ; and stipulates payment at a reasonable price 
for what may be necessarily taken from them for 
military use. It likewise protects from seizure and 
confiscation, in time of war, vessels employed in 
trade, and inhibits the granting commissions to 

462 Alexander Hamilton 

private armed vessels, empowering them to take or 
destroy such trading vessels, or to interrupt their 
commerce ; and it makes a variety of excellent pro 
visions to secure to prisoners of war a humane treat 
ment. 

These particulars are stated as evidence of the 
temper of the day, and of a policy, which then pre 
vailed, to bottom our system with regard to foreign 
nations upon those grounds of moderation and 
equity, by which reason, religion, and philosophy 
had tempered the harsh maxims of more early times. 
It is painful to observe an effort to make the public 
opinion, in this respect, retrograde, and to infect our 
councils with a spirit contrary to these salutary ad 
vances toward improvement in true civilization and 
humanity. 

If we pass from our own treaties to those between 
other nations, we find that the provisions which have 
been extracted from ours have very nearly become 
formulas in the conventions of Europe. As examples 
of this may be consulted the following articles of 
treaties between Great Britain and other powers (to 
wit), the XVIIIth article of a treaty of peace and 
commerce with Portugal, in 1642; the XXXVIth 
article of a treaty of peace, commerce, and alliance 
with Spain, in 1667 ; the XlXth article of a treaty of 
peace, and the lid of a treaty of commerce with 
France, both in 1713; and the Xllth article of a 
treaty of commerce and navigation with Russia, in 
1766. 

The article with Portugal provides, that if difficul 
ties and doubts shall arise between the two nations, 

Camillus 463 

which give reason to apprehend the interruption of 
commerce, public notice of it shall be given to the 
subjects on both sides, and after that notice, two 
years shall be allowed to carry away the merchan 
dises and goods, and in the meantime there shall be 
no injury or prejudice done to any person or goods 
on either side. 

The articles with France, in addition to the pro 
visions common in other cases, particularly stipulate, 
that during the term of the protection (six months) 
"the subjects on each side shall enjoy good and 
speedy justice, so that during the said space of six 
months they may be able to recover their goods and 
effects, intrusted as well to the public as to private 
persons." 

The article with Russia, besides stipulating an 
exemption from confiscation for one year, with the 
privilege to remove and carry away in safety, pro 
vides additionally, that the subjects of each party 
" shall be further permitted, either at or before their 
departure, to consign the effects which they shall not 
as yet have disposed of, as well as the debts that shall 
be due to them, to such persons as they shall think 
proper, in order to dispose of them according to their 
desire and for their benefit ; which debts the debtors 
shall be obliged to pay in the same manner as if no 
such rupture had happened." 

All these articles are, with those of our treaties, 
analogous in principle, as heretofore particularly 
explained, to the loth article of the treaty under 
discussion. That of the British treaty with France 
designates expressly debts due from the public as well 

464 Alexander Hamilton 

as those due from private persons. That with Russia 
goes the full length of our loth article; empowering 
the creditors on each side to assign the debts which 
they are not able to collect within the term of their 
residence, to whomsoever they think fit, for their own 
benefit, and declaring that these debts shall be paid 
to the assigns in the same manner as if no rupture 
had happened. 

There is a document extant, which may fairly be 
supposed to express the sense of the Government of 
France, at the period to which it relates, of the 
foundation of these stipulations. It is a memorial of 
Mr. Bussy, minister from the court of France to that 
of London, for negotiating peace, dated in the year 
1761, and contains these passages: " As it is imprac 
ticable for two princes who make war with each other 
to agree between them which is the aggressor with 
regard to the other,1 equity and humanity have dic 
tated these precautions, that where an unforeseen 
rupture happens suddenly and without any previous 
declaration, foreign vessels, which, navigating under 
the security of peace and of treaties, happen, at the 
time of rupture, to be in either of the respective 
ports, shall have time and full liberty to withdraw 
themselves. 

"This wise provision, so agreeable to the rules of 
good faith, constitutes a part of the law of nations, and 
the article of the treaty which sanctifies these pre- 

1 Thus we find it the sentiment of this minister, that it is impossible 
for two princes who make war with each other, to agree which is the 
aggressor with regard to the other. And yet Mr. Jay was to extort from 
Great Britain an acknowledgment, that she was the aggressor with 
regard to us, and was guilty of pusillanimity in waiving the question. 

Camillas 465 

cautions ought to be faithfully executed, notwith 
standing the breach of the other articles of the treaty 
which is the natural consequence of the war. 

"The courts of France and Great Britain used 
this salutary precaution in the treaties of Utrecht 
and Aix-la-Chapelle. " 

These passages place the security stipulated in the 
treaties for the persons and property of the subjects 
of one party found in the country of another, at the 
beginning of a war, upon the footing of its consti 
tuting a part of the law of nations, which may be 
considered as a formal diplomatic recognition of the 
principle for which we contend. As this position 
was not itself in dispute between the two govern 
ments, but merely a collateral inference from it, 
applicable to vessels taken at sea, prior to a declara 
tion of war, it may be regarded as a respectable 
testimony of the law of nations on the principal 
point. 

If the law of nations confers this exemption from 
seizure upon vessels which, at the time of the rupture, 
happen to be in the respective parts of the belligerent 
parties, it is evident that it must equally extend its 
protection to debts contracted in a course of lawful 
trade. Vessels are particularly mentioned, because 
the discussion turned upon vessels seized at sea. 
But the reference to the treaties of Utrecht and 
Aix-la-Chapelle shows, that the minister, in his ob 
servation, had in view the whole subject-matter of 
the articles of those treaties which provide for the 
security of merchants and their effects in the event of 
war. 

VOL. V.— 30. 

466 Alexander Hamilton 

This conformity in principle, of the article under 
examination, with the provisions in so many treaties 
of our own and of other nations, taken in connection 
with the comment of Mr. Bussy, brings a very power 
ful support to the article. It is additional and full 
evidence that our envoy, in agreeing to it, did not go 
upon new and untrodden ground; that, on the con 
trary, he was in a beaten track; that, in pursuing the 
dictates of reason, and the better opinion of writers, 
as to the rule of the law of nations respecting the 
point, he was, at the same time, pursuing the 
examples of all the other treaties which we had our 
selves made, and of many of those of other countries. 

It is now incumbent upon me to perform my 
promise of replying to such objections to the article 
as may remain unanswered by the preceding remarks. 
It is with pleasure I note that the field is very nar 
row — that, indeed, there scarcely remains any thing 
which is not so frivolous and impotent as almost to 
forbid a serious replication. It will therefore be my 
aim to be brief. 

It is said, there is only an apparent reciprocity in 
the article, millions being due on our side, and little 
or nothing on the other. 

The answer to this is, that no right being relin 
quished on either side, no privilege granted, the 
stipulation amounting only to a recognition of a rule 
of the law of nations, to a promise to abstain from 
injustice and a breach of faith, there is no room for 
an argument about reciprocity further than to require 
that the promise should be mutual, as is the case. 
This is the only equivalent which the nature of the 

Camillas 467 

subject demands or permits. It would be dishonor 
able to accept a boon merely for an engagement to 
fulfil a moral obligation. Indeed, as heretofore inti 
mated, the true rule of reciprocity in stipulations of 
treaties, is equal right, not equal advantage from 
each several stipulation. 

But it has been shown, that the stipulation will be 
beneficial to us, by the confidence which it will give 
on the other side, obviating and avoiding the obstruc 
tions to trade, the injuries to and encumbrances 
upon credit, naturally incident to the distrust and 
apprehension which, after the question had been once 
moved, were to be expected. Here, if a compensa 
tion were required, there is one. Let me add as a 
truth — which, perhaps, has no exception, however 
uncongenial with the fashionable patriotic creed— 
that, in the wise order of Providence, nations, in a 
temporal sense, may safely trust the maxim, that the 
observance of justice carries with it its own and a 
full reward. 

It is also said that, having bound ourselves by 
treaty, we shall hereafter lose the credit of modera 
tion, which would attend a forbearance to exercise 
the right. But it having been demonstrated that no 
such right exists, we only renounce a claim to the 
negative merit of not committing injustice, and we 
acquire the positive praise of exhibiting a willingness 
to renounce explicitly a pretension which might be 
the instrument of oppression and fraud. It is always 
honorable to give proof of upright intention. 

It is further said, that under the protection of 
this stipulation the king of Great Britain, who has 

468 Alexander Hamilton 

already speculated in our funds (the assertors would be 
puzzled to bring proof of the fact), may engross the 
whole capital of the Bank of the United States, and 
thereby secure the uncontrolled direction of it ; that 
he may hold the stock in the name of the ambassa 
dor, or of some citizen of the United States, perhaps 
a Senator, who, if of the virtuous twenty,1 might be 
proud of the honor ; that thus our citizens, in time of 
peace, might experience the mortification of being 
beholden to British directors for the accommodations 
they might want; that, in time of war, our opera 
tions might be cramped at the pleasure of his 
Majesty, and according as he should see fit or not to 
accommodate our Government with loans ; and that 
both in peace and war we may be reduced to the 
abject condition of having the whole capital of our 
national bank administered by his Britannic Majesty. 

Shall I treat this rhapsody with seriousness or 
ridicule? 

The capital of the Bank of the United States is ten 
millions of dollars, little short, at the present market 
price, of three millions of pounds sterling; but, 
from the natural operation of such a demand, in 
raising the price, it is not probable that much less 
than four millions sterling would suffice to complete 
the monopoly. I have never understood, that the 
private purse of his Britannic Majesty, if it be true, 
as asserted, that he has already witnessed a relish 
for speculation in our funds (a fact, however, from 
which it was natural to infer a more pacific disposi 
tion toward us), was so very ample as conveniently 

1 Those who advised to a ratification of the treaty. 

Camillas 469 

to spare an item of such size for a speculation across 
the Atlantic. But, perhaps, the national purse will 
be brought to his aid. As this supposes a parlia 
mentary grant, new taxes, and new loans, it does 
not seem to be a very manageable thing, without 
disclosure of the object; and, if disclosed, so very 
unexampled an attempt of a foreign government 
would present a case completely out of the reach of 
all ordinary rules, justifying, by the manifest danger 
to us, even war and the confiscation of all that had 
been purchased. For let it be remembered, that the 
article does not protect the public property of a 
foreign government, prince, or state, independent 
of the observation just made, that such a case would 
be without the reach of ordinary rules. It may be 
added, that an attempt of this kind, from the force 
of the pecuniary capital of Great Britain, would, as 
a precedent, threaten and alarm all nations. Would 
consequences like these be incurred? 

But let it be supposed that the inclination shall 
exist, and that all difficulties about funds have been 
surmounted — still, to effect the plan, there must be, 
in all the stockholders, a willingness to sell to the 
British king or his agents, as well as the will and 
means, on his part, to purchase. Here, too, some 
impediments might be experienced; there are per 
sons who might choose to keep their property in the 
shape of bank stock, and live upon the income of it, 
whom price would not readily tempt to part with it. 
Besides, there is an additional obstacle to complete 
success, — the United States are themselves the pro 
prietors of two millions of the bank stock. 

4/o Alexander Hamilton 

Of two things, one, either the monopoly of his 
Britannic Majesty would be known (and it would be 
a pretty arduous task to keep it a secret, especially 
if the stock was to stand, as suggested, in the name 
of his ambassador), or it would be unknown and 
concealed under unsuspected names. In the former 
supposition, the observations already made recur. 
There would be no protection to it from the article ; 
and the extraordinary nature of the case would war 
rant any thing. Would his Majesty or the Parlia 
ment choose to trust so large a property in so perilous 
a situation? 

If, to avoid this, the plan should be to keep the 
operation unknown, the most effectual method would 
be to place the stock in the names of our own citizens. 
This, it seems, would be attended with no difficulty, 
since even our Senators would be ambitious of the 
honor; and if they should have qualms and fears, 
others more compliant could, no doubt, be found 
amongst the numerous sectaries or adherents of 
Great Britain in our country; probably some of the 
patriots would not be inexorable, if properly so 
licited. Or, in the last resort, persons might be sent 
from Great Britain to acquire naturalization for the 
express purpose. 

In this supposition, too, the article would be at 
the least innocent. For its provisions are entirely 
foreign to the case of stock standing in the names of 
our own citizens. It neither enlarges nor abridges 
the power of the Government in this respect. 

Further, how will the article work the miracle of 
placing the bank under the management of British 

Camillas 471 

directors? It gives no new rights, no new qualifica 
tions. 

The constitution of the bank (section the 5th, yth 
of the act of incorporation) has provided, with so 
licitude, these important guards against foreign or 
other sinister influence: i. That none but a citizen 
of the United States shall be eligible as a director. 2. 
That none but a stockholder, actually resident within 
the United States, shall vote in the elections by 
proxy. 3. That one fourth of the directors, who are 
to be elected annually, must every year go out of 
the direction. 4. That a director may, at any time, 
be removed and replaced by the stockholders at a 
general meeting. 5. That a single share shall give 
one vote for directors, while any number of shares, 
in the same person, copartnership, or body politic, 
will not give more than thirty votes. 

Hence it is impossible that the bank can be in the 
management of British directors — a British subject 
being incapable of being a director. It is also next 
to impossible that an undue British influence could 
operate in the choice of directors, out of the number 
of our own citizens. The British king, or British 
subjects out of the United States, could not even have 
a vote by attorney, in the choice. Schemes of secret 
monopoly could not be executed, because they would 
be betrayed, unless the secret was confined to a small 
number. A small number, no one of whom could 
have more than thirty votes, would be easily over 
ruled by the more numerous proprietors of single or 
a small number of shares, with the addition of the 
votes of the United States. 

472 Alexander Hamilton 

But here again it is to be remembered that as to 
combination with our own citizens, in which they 
were to be ostensible for any pernicious foreign pro 
ject, the article under consideration is perfectly nu 
gatory. It can do neither good nor harm, since it 
merely relates, as to the exemption from confisca 
tion and seizure on our part, to the known property 
of British subjects. 

It follows, therefore, that the dangers portrayed to 
us from the speculative enterprises of his Britannic 
Majesty are the vagaries of an over-heated imagina 
tion, or the contrivances of a spirit of deception ; and 
that so far as they could be supposed to have the 
least color, it turns upon circumstances upon which 
the treaty can have no influence whatever. In tak 
ing pains to expose their futility I have been prin 
cipally led by the desire of making my fellow-citizens 
sensible, in this instance, as in others, of the ex 
travagancies of the opposers of the treaty. 

One artifice to render the article unacceptable has 
been to put cases of extreme misconduct, on the 
other side, — of flagrant violations of the law of na 
tions, of war, of justice, and of humanity; and to 
ask, whether, under such circumstances, the con 
fiscation or sequestration of debts would not be 
justifiable? To this the answer is, that if circum 
stances so extraordinary should arise, as, without 
the treaty, would warrant so extraordinary an act, 
they will equally warrant it under the treaty. For 
cases of this kind are exceptions to all general rules. 
They would excuse the violation of an express or 
positive, as well as of a tacit or virtual, pledge of the 

Camillus 473 

public faith: which describes the whole difference 
between the existence and non-existence of the 
article in question. They resemble those cases of 
extreme necessity (through excessive hunger, for in 
stance), which, in the eye of the law of nature, will 
excuse the taking of the property of another, or 
those cases of extreme abuse of authority of rulers, 
which, amounting unequivocally to tyranny, are ad 
mitted to justify forcible resistance to the established 
authorities. Constitutions of government, laws, 
treaties, all give way to extremities of such a de 
scription: the point of obligation is to distinguish 
them with sincerity, and not to indulge our passions 
and interests in substituting pretended for real 
losses. 

A writer, who disgraces the name of CICERO by 
adopting it, makes a curious remark by way of ob 
jection. He affirms that the article is nugatory, be 
cause a treaty is dissolved by a state of war, in which 
state the provision is designed to operate. If this be 
true, the article is at least harmless, and the trouble 
of painting it in such terrific colors might have been 
spared. But it is not true. Reason, writers, the 
practice of all nations, accord in this position, that 
those stipulations which contemplate the state of 
war — in other words, which are designed to operate 
in case of war, preserve their force and obligation 
when war takes place.1 To what end else all the 
stipulations which have been cited from so many 
treaties ? 2 

1 Vatel, B. III., ch. x. 

2 This writer is as profligate as he is absurd. Besides imputing to 
Camillus, in general terms, a number of things of which he never 

474 Alexander Hamilton 

Previous to a conclusion I shall observe, barely 
with a view to accuracy, that the article leaves 
unprotected all vessels, goods, and merchandises — 
every species of property, indeed, except debts be 
tween individuals and the property of individuals 
in the public funds and in public and private banks. 
With this exception, whatever before may have been 
liable to confiscation or sequestration still remains so, 
notwithstanding any thing contained in this article. 

To overrate the value and force of our own argu 
ments is a natural foible of self-love; to be con 
vinced without convincing others, is no uncommon 
fate of a writer or speaker ; but I am more than ordi 
narily mistaken if every mind open to conviction 
will not have been satisfied by what has been offered 
—that the loth article of the treaty lately negotiated 
with Great Britain, does nothing but confirm, by a 
positive agreement, a rule of the law of nations, in 
dicated by reason, supported by the better opinion 
of writers, ratified by modern usage, dictated by 
justice and good faith, recognized by formal acts and 
declarations of different nations, witnessed by diplo 
matic testimony, sanctioned by our treaties with 
other countries, and by treaties between other coun 
tries, and conformable with sound policy and the 
true interests of the United States. 

dreamt, he has the effrontery to forge, as a literal quotation from him 
(calling it his own language and designating it by inverted commas) , a 
passage respecting the impressing of seamen, which certainly not in 
terms, nor even in substance, upon fair construction, is to be found in 
any thing he has written. Not having all the numbers of Cicero at 
hand, I may mistake, in attributing to him the principal sentiment, 
which is from memory, but I have under my eye the number which 
witnesses his forgery. 

Camillas 475 

The discussion has been drawn out to so great a 
length, because the objections to this article are 
amongst those which have been urged with the 
greatest warmth and emphasis against the treaty, 
and its vindication from them, if satisfactory, must 
go far toward securing to it the public suffrage. 
Citizens of America, it is for you to perform your 
part of the task; it is for you to weigh with candor 
the arguments which have been submitted to your 
judgments ; to consult, without bias, the integrity of 
your hearts ; to exile prejudice, and to immolate on 
the altar of truth the artifices of cabal and falsehood! 
There can then be no danger that patriotism will 
have to lament, or national honor to blush, at the 
sentence you shall pronounce. 

The articles which adjust the matters of contro 
versy between the two countries, all those which are 
permanent, have now been reviewed. Let me ap 
peal to the consciences of those who have accom 
panied me in the review; if these articles were all 
that composed the treaty, would it be the better that 
they should exist — or that all the sources of rupture 
and war with Great Britain should have survived the 
negotiation to extinguish them, and should still 
actually subsist in full vigor? If every enlightened 
and honest man must prefer the former — then let me 
make another observation, and put another question. 
The remaining articles of the treaty, which consti 
tute its commercial part, expire by their own limita 
tion at the end of twelve years. It is in the power 
of either party, consistently with the instrument, to 
terminate them at the end of the expiration of two 

476 Alexander Hamilton 

years after the present war between France and 
Great Britain. 

Is it at all probable that they can contain any 
thing so injurious, considering the short duration 
which may be given to them, as to counterbalance 
the important consideration of preserving peace to 
this young country; as to warrant the excessive 
clamors which have been raised ; as to authorize the 
horrid calumnies which are vented; and to justify 
the systematic efforts which are in operation to con 
vulse our country and to hazard even CIVIL WAR ? x 

CAMILLUS. 

NO. XXIII 2 

1795- 

The preceding articles having adjusted those con 
troversies which threatened an open rupture be 
tween the two countries, it remained to form such 
dispositions relative to the intercourse, commerce, 
and navigation of the parties as should appear most 
likely to preserve peace, and promote their mutual 
advantage. 

Those who have considered with attention the in 
terests of commerce will agree in the opinion, that 
its utility, as well as general prosperity, would be 

1 In applying the character of dishonesty and turpitude to the prin 
ciple of confiscation or sequestration, I am far from intending to brand 
as dishonest men all those whose opinions favor it. I know there are 
some ardent spirits chargeable with the error, of whose integrity I 
think well. 

2 This and the seven succeeding numbers are from the pen of Rufus 
King, excepting the parts within brackets, which are in Hamilton's 
hand. — ED. 

Camillas 477 

most effectually advanced by a total abolition of 
the restraints and regulations with which the jeal 
ousies and rival policy of nations have embarrassed 
it. But though we are not chargeable with having 
contributed to the establishment of these errors, so 
discouraging to the industry and perplexing in the 
intercourse of nations, we found them so deeply 
rooted and so extensively prevalent, that our voice 
and opinions would have been little regarded, had 
we expressed a desire of a system more liberal and 
advantageous to all. 

The rights of commerce among nations between 
whom exist no treaties, are imperfect. 

"The law of nature," says Vatel (B. I., s. 89), 
"gives to no person whatever the least kind of right 
to sell what belongs to him to another who does not 
want to buy it ; nor has any nation that of selling its 
commodities or merchandise to a people who are un 
willing to have them; every man and every nation 
being perfectly at liberty to buy a thing that is to 
be sold, or not to buy it, and to buy it of one rather 
than of another. Every State has constantly, " con 
tinues the same author, "a right to prohibit the 
entrance of foreign merchandise, and the people who 
are interested in this prohibition have no right to 
complain of it." States by convention may turn 
these imperfect into perfect rights, and thus a na 
tion, not having naturally a perfect right to carry on 
commerce with another, may acquire it by treaty. 
A simple permission to trade with a nation gives 
no perfect right to that trade; it may be carried on 
so long as permitted, but the nation granting such 

478 Alexander Hamilton 

permission is under no obligation to continue it. A 
perfect right in one nation to carry on commerce 
and trade with another nation can alone be procured 
by treaty. 

From the precarious nature of trade between na 
tions, as well as from the desire of obtaining special 
advantages and preferences in carrying it on, origi 
nated the earliest conventions on the subject of com 
merce. The first commercial treaty that placed the 
parties on a more secure and better footing in their 
dealings with each other than existed in their re 
spective intercourse with other nations, inspired 
others with a desire to establish, by similar treaties, 
an equally advantageous arrangement. Thus one 
treaty was followed by another, until, as was the 
case when the United States became an independent 
power, all nations had entered into extensive and 
complicated stipulations, concerning their naviga 
tion, manufactures, and commerce. 

This being the actual condition of the commercial 
world when we arrived at our station in it, the like 
inducements to render certain that which by the 
law of nations was precarious, and to participate in 
the advantages secured by national agreements, 
prompted our Government to propose to all, and 
to conclude with several, of the European nations, 
treaties of commerce. 

Immediately after the conclusion of the war, Con 
gress appointed Mr. Adams, Doctor Franklin, and 
Mr. Jefferson, joint commissioners, to propose and 
conclude commercial treaties with the different na 
tions of Europe. This commission was opened at 

Camillas 479 

Paris, and overtures were made to the different 
powers (including Great Britain) through their min 
isters residing at Paris. The basis of these numer 
ous treaties, which Congress were desirous to form, 
was, that the parties should respectively enjoy the 
rights of the most favored nations. Various an 
swers were given by the foreign ministers, in be 
half of their several nations. But the treaty with 
Prussia was the only one concluded, of the very 
great number proposed by the American commis 
sioners. Mr. Adams, in 1785, was removed to Lon 
don, Dr. Franklin soon after returned to America, 
and Mr. Jefferson succeeded him as minister at Paris. 
Thus failed the project of forming commercial treat 
ies with almost every power in Europe. Treaties 
with Russia, Denmark, Great Britain, Spain, and 
Portugal would have been of importance; but the 
scheme of extending treaties of commerce to all the 
minor powers of Europe, not omitting his Holiness 
the Pope, was, it must be acknowledged, somewhat 
chimerical, and could not fail to have cast an air of 
ridicule on the commissions that with great solem 
nity were opened at Paris. 

The imbecility of our National Government, under 
the articles of confederation, was understood abroad 
as well as at home ; and the opinions of characters in 
England, most inclined to favor an extensive com 
mercial connection between the two countries, were 
understood to have been opposed to the formation 
of a commercial treaty with us, since, from the de 
fects of our articles of union, we were supposed to 
be destitute of the power requisite to enforce the 

480 Alexander Hamilton 

execution of the stipulations that such a treaty 
might contain. 

We must all remember the various and ill-digested 
laws for the regulation of commerce, which were 
adopted by the several States as substitutes for those 
commercial treaties, in the conclusion of which our 
commissioners had been disappointed ; the embarrass 
ments which proceeded from this source, joined to 
those felt from the derangement of the national 
treasury, were the immediate cause which assembled 
the convention at Philadelphia in 1787. The result 
of this convention was the adoption of the present 
Federal Constitution, the legislative and executive 
departments of which each possess a power to regu 
late foreign commerce : the former by enacting laws 
for that purpose ; the latter, by forming commercial 
treaties with foreign nations. 

The opinion heretofore entertained by our Gov 
ernment, respecting the utility of commercial treat 
ies, is not equivocal; and it is probable that they 
will, in future, deem it expedient to adjust their 
foreign trade by treaty, in preference to legislative 
provisions, as far as it shall be found practicable, on 
terms of reasonable advantage. In the formation 
of the regtilations that are legislative, being ex parte, 
the interest of those who establish them is seen in its 
strongest light, while that of the other side is rarely 
allowed its just weight. Pride and passion too fre 
quently add their influence to carry these regulations 
beyond the limits of moderation ; restraints and ex 
clusions on one side beget restraints and exclusions 
on the other ; and these retaliatory laws lead to, and 

Camillus 481 

often terminate in, open war: while, on the other 
hand, by adjusting the commercial intercourse of 
nations by treaty, the pretensions of the parties are 
candidly examined, and the result of the discussion, 
it is fair to presume, as well from the experience of 
individuals in private affairs, as from that of nations 
in their more important and complicated relations, 
establishes those regulations which are best suited 
to the interests of the parties, and which alone afford 
that stability and confidence so essential to the 
success of commercial enterprise. 

That our present government have thought a 
commercial treaty with Great Britain would be ad 
vantageous, is evident, not alone from the special 
and distinct commission given to Mr. Jay to form 
one, but likewise from the letter of Mr. Jefferson to 
Mr. Hammond, of the 2Qth of November, 1791, 
which was the first letter to that minister after his 
arrival, in which the Executive says: " With respect 
to the commerce of the two countries, we have sup 
posed that we saw, in several instances, regulations 
on the part of your Government which, if recipro 
cally adopted, would materially injure the interests 
of both nations; on this subject, too, I must beg the 
favor of you to say, whether you are authorized to 
conclude or to negotiate arrangements with us which 
may fix the commerce between the two countries on 
principles of reciprocal advantage." 

Further, from the first session of Congress, to that 
during which Mr. Jay's appointment took place, 
efforts were made to discriminate, in our revenue 
and commercial laws, between those nations with 

VOL. V.— 31. 

482 Alexander Hamilton 

whom we had, and those with whom we had not, 
commercial treaties — the avowed object of which 
discrimination was, to place the latter nations on 
a less advantageous commercial footing than the 
former, in order to induce them likewise to form com 
mercial treaties with us ; and it cannot be forgotten 
by those who affect to suppose that it was not ex 
pected that a treaty of commerce would be formed by 
Mr. Jay, that Mr. Madison's commercial resolutions 
which were under consideration at the time of Mr. 
Jay's appointment, grew out of, and were built upon, 
a clause of Mr. Jefferson's report of the 26th Decem 
ber, 1793, which asserts that Great Britain dis 
covered no disposition to enter into a commercial 
treaty with us. The report alluded to is explicit in 
declaring a preference of friendly arrangements, by 
treaties of commerce, to regulations by the acts of 
our Legislature, and authorizes the inference, under 
which the commercial resolutions were brought for 
ward, that the latter should be resorted to only 
when the former cannot be effected. 

The power of the Executive to form commercial 
treaties, and the objection against the commercial 
articles before us, as an unconstitutional interfer 
ence with the legislative powers of Congress, will, 
in the sequel, be distinctly examined, together with 
other objections on the point of constitutionality. 

Against the policy of regulating commerce by 
treaty, rather than by acts of the Legislature, it is 
said that the legislative acts can, but that a treaty 
cannot, be repealed. This remark is true, and of 
weight against the formation of commercial treaties 

Camillus 483 

which are to be of long duration, or like our com 
mercial treaty with France, which is permanent. 
For, as we are yearly advancing in agriculture, manu 
factories, commerce, navigation, and strength, our 
treaties of commerce, especially such as, by particular 
stipulations, shall give to the parties other rights than 
those of the most favored nation, ought to be of 
short duration, that, like temporary laws, they may, 
at an early day, expire by their own limitation, 
leaving the interests of the parties to a new adjust 
ment, founded on equity and mutual convenience. 

Of this description are the commercial articles of 
the treaty with Great Britain ; for none of them can 
continue in force more than twelve years; and they 
may all expire, if either party shall choose it, at the 
end of two years after the peace between France and 
Great Britain. 

Did the limits assigned to this defence admit a 
review of the commercial and maritime codes of 
the principal Etiropean nations, we should discover 
one prevailing feature to characterize them all: we 
should see the general or common interest of nations, 
everywhere, placed in a subordinate rank, and their 
separate advantage adopted, as the end to be at 
tained by their respective laws. Hence, one nation 
has enacted laws to protect their manufactures, an 
other to encourage and extend their navigation, a 
third to monopolize some important branch of trade, 
and all have contributed to the creation of that com 
plicated system of regulations and restraints which 
we see established throughout the commercial 
world. 

484 Alexander Hamilton 

One branch, and a principal one of this system, 
that which establishes the connection between the 
several European nations and their colonies, merits 
our particular attention. An exact knowledge of 
this connection would assist us in forming a just 
estimate of the difficulties that stand in opposition 
to our claim of free and full participation in the 
colony trade of Great Britain. 

Unlike the plan of colonization adopted by the an 
cient governments, who, from the crowded popula 
tion of their cities, sent forth and established beneath 
their auspices new and independent republics, the 
colonies of modern times have been planted with 
entirely different views; retained in a state of de 
pendence on the parent country, their connection 
has been made subservient to that spirit of monopoly 
which has shown itself among all the commercial 
powers. Every European nation has its colonies, 
and for that reason prohibited all foreigners from 
trading to them. 

Important political events arise and pass in such 
quick succession, that we are liable to forget facts and 
opinions familiar to us in periods within the ordinary 
powers of recollection. No subject was more criti 
cally examined, or generally understood before the 
American Revolution, than that which respected the 
connection between Great Britain and her colonies; 
all were then agreed, that the colony trade and navi 
gation were subject to the restraints and regulations 
of the parent state. It was not against this depend 
ence and commercial monopoly that the colonies 
complained! They were willing to submit to them. 

Camillas 485 

It was the unjust attempt to tax them, to raise a 
revenue from them, without their consent, which 
combined that firm and spirited opposition which 
effected a division of the empire. Thus the Congress 
of 1775, in their last address to the inhabitants of 
Great Britain, say: "We cheerfully consent to such 
acts of the British Parliament as shall be restrained 
to the regulations of our external commerce, for the 
purpose of securing the commercial advantages of the 
whole empire to the mother country, and the commercial 
benefit of its respective members; excluding every 
idea of taxation, internal or external, for the purpose 
of raising a revenue on the subjects in America with 
out their consent. ' ' The ' * colonial codes ' ' of other na 
tions are marked with the same spirit of monopoly. 
Thus Portugal shuts out all foreigners from the Brazils 
as well as from her Asiatic possessions ; Spain, from 
South America and her West India islands; France 
excludes all foreigners from her Asiatic dominions, 
and limits within narrow bounds their intercourse 
with her colonies in the West Indies. Holland 
guards, with the miser's vigilance, the access to her 
Spice islands, and imitates, though with somewhat 
less rigor, the policy of the other powers in her West 
India possessions. And England, by her act of navi 
gation, which has been in operation for more than a 
century, asserted, and hitherto has uniformly adhered 
to, the like system of exclusion and monopoly. 

Notwithstanding the intimate alliance, the family 
compact, between France and Spain, the former has 
not, been able to procure admission into the Spanish 
colonial territories, where she might have acquired 

486 Alexander Hamilton 

immense wealth by the sale of her manufactures, her 
wines, and her brandies. Holland, though a part of 
the Spanish monarchy long after the discovery of 
America and the establishment of the Spanish power 
in that quarter of the world, was unable, after her 
separation from Spain, and the acknowledgment of 
her independence, even in the zenith of her splendid 
power upon the ocean, to obtain by force or treaty a 
share in the Spanish colony trade to South America. 
The rival wars between the English and the Dutch 
toward the close of the last century, which originated 
in commercial competition and jealousy, were suc 
cessively terminated without England yielding the 
smallest departure from the exclusive commercial 
system contained in her act of navigation. 

Great Britain, though maintaining her exclusive 
laws against other nations at different periods, has 
shown the strongest desire to share in the rich trade 
of Spain with her colonies. The war that com 
menced in 1739 was occasioned by the firm, but irreg 
ular, opposition of Spain to the contraband efforts 
of British traders. 

The impediments Great Britain has uniformly met 
in her attempts to extend her settlement in the Bay 
of Honduras, to form establishments at Falkland's 
Island, and more recently at Nootka Sound, afford 
additional proofs of the fixed policy of Spain on the 
subject of her colony trade. 

Portugal, whose political safety more than once has 
appeared to depend upon the efficacious aid of Great 
Britain, does not yield to her ally any portion of her 
valuable colonial commerce. 

Camillus 487 

So uniform and persevering has been the practice 
of nations on this point, that in the latest treaties of 
commerce between France and Spain, between each 
of these powers and Great Britain, between Great 
Britain, Sweden, Denmark, Holland, and Portugal, 
we do not discover that any one of these powers has 
consented to admit the others to a participation in 
the trade and navigation to their respective colonies 
—the Assiento contract for the supply of negroes to 
the Spanish colonies, which has been made by Spain 
with several powers, is an unimportant and solitary 
exception to this rule. 

Montesquieu calls this law appropriating the 
colony commerce to the benefit of the parent state, 
"A fundamental law of Europe." "It has been 
established," says this enlightened Frenchman, " that 
the metropolis or mother country alone shall trade 
in the colonies, and that for very good reasons; be 
cause the design of the settlement was the extension 
of commerce, not the foundation of a city or new em 
pire. Thus it is still a fundamental law of Europe, 
that all commerce with a foreign colony shall be re 
garded as a mere monopoly, punishable by the laws 
of the country ; and in this case we are not to be 
directed by the laws and precedents of the ancients, 
which are not at all applicable." 

"It is likewise acknowledged, that a commerce 
established between the mother countries does not 
include a permission to trade in the colonies; for 
these always continue in a state of prohibition." 
[Montesquieu, Liv. XXL, Chap. XVII.] 

This subject is of too great importance not to be 

488 Alexander Hamilton 

pursued a little further. Principles connected with 
it, and such as will continue to operate whether we 
sanction or condemn them, remain to be disclosed. 
It is true that the principal end of the dominion that 
the European powers have held over their colonies, 
has been the monopoly of their commerce, " since in 
their exclusive trade (as has been observed by a 
sensible writer on the subject) consist the principal 
advantages of colonies, which afford neither revenue 
nor force for the defence of the parent country"; 
but this is not the sole object. Some nations, and 
among them Great Britain, have viewed the exclusive 
navigation and trade to their colonies, in the light in 
which they have seen their coasting trade and fisher 
ies, — as a nursery for that body of seamen whom they 
have considered not only as necessary to the pro 
sperity and protection of commerce, but as essential 
to the defence and safety of the state. 

The situation of Great Britain in this respect is 
peculiar. When compared with several of the neigh 
boring powers, her numbers and military forces are 
manifestly inferior. The armies kept on foot in 
peace, as well as those brought into the field in war, 
by the great nations in Europe, are so decidedly 
superior to those of Great Britain, that were she a 
continental power, her rivals would easily be an over 
match for her. The ocean is her fortification, and 
her seamen alone are the soldiers who can defend it. 
When Great Britain shall become an inferior mari 
time power, when her enemy shall acquire a decisive 
superiority on the sea, what will prevent a repetition 
of those conquests the examples of which we find in 

Camillus 489 

her early history? No subject has been more pro 
foundly thought on than this has been in Great 
Britain. Her policy, from the date of her navigation 
act, has been guided by these considerations; that 
her national safety depends on her wooden walls, is a 
maxim as sacred in Britain, as it once was in Athens. 
Her statesmen, her merchants, her manufacturers, 
and her yeomanry comprehend and believe it. 

Is it then surprising, that we see her so anxious to 
encourage and extend her navigation, as to exclude, 
as far as practicable, foreigners from any share of her 
fisheries, her coasting, and her colony trade? Does 
not candor require us to admit, since her national 
defence rests upon her navy, which again depends on 
her seamen, which an extensive navigation can alone 
supply, that Great Britain, having more to risk, is 
among the last powers likely to break in upon or 
materially to relinquish that system of exclusive 
colony trade, that has so long and uniformly pre 
vailed among the great colonizing powers? 

America has her opinions, perhaps prejudices, on 
the subject of commerce: she is, and, at least until 
she shall become a naval power, will continue to be, 
without colonies. But her laws manifest a similar 
spirit with those of other nations, in the regulations 
which they prescribe for the government of her fish 
eries and her coasting trade. The object of these 
laws is an exclusion of foreign competition, in order 
to encourage and increase her own navigation and 
seamen; from which resources, not only in wars be 
tween other nations, but likewise in those in which 
she may be engaged, important commercial and 

49° Alexander Hamilton 

national advantages may be expected. These opin 
ions deserve attention; they have already had and 
will continue to have a suitable influence with her 
Government. But we should remember, that other 
nations have likewise their opinions and prejudices 
on these subjects; opinions and prejudices not the 
less strong or deeply rooted for having been transmit 
ted to them through a series of past generations. 
Thus in England, not only the public opinion, but 
what is more unconquerable, the private interests of 
many individuals will oppose every change in the 
existing laws that may be supposed likely to dimin 
ish their navigation, to limit their trade, or in any 
measure to affect disadvantageotisly their established 
system of national commerce. 

It cannot have escaped notice, that we have among 
us characters who are unwilling to see stated the im 
pediments that stand in the way of the commercial 
arrangements which, they contend, should be con 
ceded to us by foreign nations, and who are ready 
to charge those who faithfully expose them, with an 
inclination to excuse or vindicate the unreasonable 
denials of our commercial rivals, and with a desire to 
yield up the just pretensions of our country. The 
article seems too gross to be dangerous with a sensi 
ble people, but the public should notwithstanding be 
on their guard against it. They should dispassion 
ately examine the real difficulties to be encountered 
in the formation of our commercial treaties. They 
should inquire and ascertain how far other nations, 
seeking the same advantages, have been able to suc 
ceed. They should further compare the treaty in 

Camillas 491 

question with those we have made before with other 
nations. The result of such investigation, so far 
from warranting the condemnation of the commercial 
articles of the treaty before us, it is believed, would 
demonstrate that these articles make a wider breach 
in the British commercial system than has ever before 
been made; that on their commercial dispositions 
they are preferable to any treaty we have before 
concluded; and that there is rational ground to be 
lieve that the treaty will have a tendency friendly to 
the agriculture, the commerce, and the navigation of 

our country. 

CAMILLUS. 

END OF VOL. V. 

THIS BOOK IS DUE ON THE LAST DATE 
STAMPED BELOW 

AN INITIAL FINE OF 25 CENTS 

WILL BE ASSESSED FOR FAILURE TO RETURN THIS BOOK 
ON THE DATE DUE. THE PENALTY WILL INCREASE TO 
50 CENTS ON THE FOURTH DAY AND TO $1.00 ON THE 
SEVENTH DAY OVERDUE. 

JAN 2 3 1963 

•N. 

Book Slip-20m-9,'60 (B3010s4)458 

Hamilton, A 
Works. 

Call Number: 

E302 

H3 
190U 

r , 

v-5