LIBRARY 

UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA 
PAVIS 

THE CONNOISSEUR'S FEDERAL EDI 
TION OF THE WORKS OF ALEXANDER 
HAMILTON IS LIMITED TO FOUR HUN 
DRED SIGNED AND NUMBERED SETS OF 
WHICH THIS IS NUMBER -%&&- 

7. \]\ 1fc£l4Mi**^lA&trHd 

* at 

tu 

Alexander Hamilton 

After the painting by John Trumbull 

<§iritum 

ilTY OF CALIFORNIA 

ffittxrrk* # f 

JBsntiltmi 

LIBRARY 

OF CALIFORNIA 

PA vis 

The Works of 


Edited by 
Henry Cabot Lodge 

" The tacrcd rights of mankind are not to be rummaged for among old parchments or 
musty records. They are written, as with a sunbeam, in the whole volume of human nature, 
by the hand of the Divinity itself, and can never be erased or obscured by mortal power." 

[HAMILTON— The Farmer Refuted, 1775, ^t. i8.J 

" We are laboring hard to establish in this country principles more and more national, 
and free from all foreign ingredients, so that we may be neither 4 Greeks nor Trojans,1 but 
truly Americans.1' — [HAMILTON TO KING, 1796, JEt. 39.] 

Volume I 

G. P. Putnam's Sons 

New York and London 
Gbe "Knickerbocker press 
fmfcfeerbocfeer press, Hew I3orft 

CONTENTS 

PAGE 

PREFACE TO SECOND EDITION . . . . . v 

PREFACE xi 

HAMILTON CHRONOLOGY . . . . . . xxi 

A FULL VINDICATION i 

THE FARMER REFUTED 53 

REMARKS ON THE QUEBEC BILL 181 

PUBLIUS 199 

THE GOVERNMENT AND THE CONSTITUTION . . . 213 

THE CONTINENTALIST ....... 243 

RESOLUTIONS FOR A GENERAL CONVENTION OF THE 

STATES 291 

SPEECHES AND RESOLUTIONS IN CONGRESS . . . 299 

OPEN DEBATE 302 

MUTINY OF TROOPS 303 

RESOLUTIONS FOR A GENERAL CONVENTION . 305 

MUTINY OF THE TROOPS 314 

VINDICATION OF CONGRESS . 327 

ADDRESS OF THE ANNAPOLIS CONVENTION . . . 335 
RESOLUTIONS OFFERED IN THE LEGISLATURE OF NEW 

YoRK • 343 

FEDERAL CONVENTION: 

PROPOSITIONS FOR A CONSTITUTION OF GOVERN 
MENT 347 

CONSTITUTION OF GOVERNMENT BY THE PEOPLE 
OF THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA , 

VOL. I. 

XIX 

xx Contents 

PAGB 

FEDERAL CONVENTION — Continued: 

BRIEF OP SPEECH ON SUBMITTING HIS PLAN OP 

CONSTITUTION . . . . . .370 

SPEECHES IN THE FEDERAL CONVENTION . . . 381 
IMPRESSIONS AS TO THE NEW CONSTITUTION . 420 
COMMENTS ON THE OPPOSITION TO THE CONSTI 
TUTION 424 

APPENDIX 431 

HAMILTON CHRONOLOGY. 

Jan. n, 1757. Alexander Hamilton born in the island of 
Nevis. 

Oct., 1772. Arrives in New York. 

1773. Enters college. 

Dec. 15, 1774. Publishes the Full Vindication. 

1775. Joins a volunteer corps. 

1776. Takes command of artillery company. 
March i, 1777. Joins Washington's Staff. 

1779. Writes his first letter to Robert Morris on the Na 
tional Bank. 

Sept. 3, 1780. Letter to Duane on Government. 
Dec. 14, 1780. Married to Miss Schuyler. 

1782. Admitted to the bar. 

June, 1782. Appointed Receiver of Taxes. 
Nov., 1782. Enters Congress. 

1783. Returns to practice of the law. 
1786. Delegate to Annapolis Convention. 

1786. Elected to the New York Legislature. 

1787. Delegate to the Philadelphia Convention. 

1787. Writes the Federalist. 

1788. Delegate to the New York Convention. 
Sept., 1789. Appointed Secretary of the Treasury. 

Jan. 14, 1790. Transmits to the House the First Report on 
the Public Credit. 

Jan. 31, 1795. Resigns the Secretaryship of the Treasury 
and returns to the practice of the law. 

July 25, 1798. Appointed Inspector-General of the Army 
with the rank of Major-General. 

July 2, 1800. Retires from the army. 

July n, 1804. Shot by Burr in a duel at Weehawken. 

July 12, 1804. Death. 

xxi 

PREFACE TO SECOND EDITION 

IT is eighteen years since the first publication of 
* this edition of the Works of Alexander Hamil 
ton. The letterpress edition at that time printed 
was limited to 500 copies, which were subscribed 
for within a very short time after the completion of 
the publication, and for a number of years no further 
sets have been available for sale. In connection 
with the continued demand for the writings of 
Hamilton, a demand that is now coming from a 
later generation than that for which the set was 
originally printed, the publishers have felt warranted 
in again bringing the work before the public. The 
volumes as now issued are, of necessity, printed 
from type newly set for the purpose. The text is 
in substance identical with that of the original issue, 
but such errors, typographical or other, as crept into 
the earlier volumes, have, so far as detected, been 
corrected. It would appear that the writings and 
correspondence presented in the volumes as first is 
sued were substantially complete. The editor has 
no knowledge of further Hamilton material of suffi 
cient compass or importance to warrant any fresh 
compilation or general revision. 

iii 

iv Preface to Second Edition 

The editor has no change, either, to make in the 
Preface written eighteen years ago, in which he 
tried to give an estimate of Hamilton's influence 
and intellect and of his power and standing as an 
American statesman, or rather as a statesman of 
the closing years of the eighteenth century, for 
Hamilton is one of the representative minds of a 
period as well as of a country. But the increased 
demand for his Works which has called forth 
this second edition furnishes, when rightly consid 
ered, a text of such significance, that the editor 
of his Works is not willing to let it pass without 
comment. 

Hamilton's great contemporary reputation suf 
fered after his death an almost complete eclipse. 
The unrestricted triumph of his chief opponent, 
Thomas Jefferson, and the course pursued by the 
Federalists in regard to the purchase of Louisiana 
and the War of 1812, were the chief causes of this 
result. The party of which he had been the chief 
and the champion sank out of existence, and even 
its name was lost except as a byword of political 
unpopularity. The early history of the United 
States, moreover, was little studied in the first half 
of the nineteenth century except by a few public 
men or by scholars and antiquarians thought to be 
possessed by strange fancies. After the Civil War, 
however, the American people, purged by a great 
ordeal of fire from the crude boasting which fur 
nished the Dickenses and Trollopes a theme for their 
abuse, awoke to a full realization of the greatness of 
the work in which they had been engaged and of the 

Preface to Second Edition v 

meaning and power of the nation they had built up. 
In schools and universities, American history was 
taught as never before, and the popular interest in 
it became not only widespread but profound. One 
has but to turn to the catalogues of our libraries and 
our publishers to find proof of this, and to learn that 
every nook and corner of our history is being ex 
plored, and that all the most important periods have 
been and are being studied and written about with 
the utmost care and ability. 

No one has profited by these changed conditions 
more than Hamilton. As the history of the United 
States has been investigated and developed, Hamil 
ton has loomed ever larger upon the receding horizon 
of the days when that history began. His com 
manding figure has grown ever more luminous and 
more vital as the years have passed by, and the 
change is marked even in the eighteen which have 
elapsed since this edition was first published. He 
has been the subject of many biographies and in 
these later days has become the hero of fiction, which 
has discovered the romantic side of his career, and 
has made his name and deeds familiar to many to 
whom history is only a task. 

Eighteen years ago, many persons probably would 
have hesitated to admit in full the editor 's estimate 
of Hamilton's ability and power and of his standing 
among the statesmen of his time at home and abroad. 
The editor is inclined to think that few good judges 
to-day, whether or not they agreed with Hamilton 
in political principles, would seriously question that 
estimate and opinion as put forth in 1885. More and 

vi Preface to Second Edition 

more have events justified Hamilton's conception 
of the government of the United States ; more and 
more has the soundness of his finance and of his 
principles of administration been silently accepted. 
Even upon the most contested of his policies, that 
of protection, to which the United States has always 
adhered, it would seem as if the world were gradually 
coming round to Hamilton's position. 

The Preface to this edition, written in 1885, says: 
" He studied Adam Smith and then wrote the Re 
port on Manufactures, developing the theory as to 
the protection of nascent industries in its applica 
tion to the United States, and standing firmly on 
the doctrine that this was a question which each 
nation must decide for itself." All the nations of 
the earth, with but one exception, have in practice 
accepted this doctrine, and when the leader of one 
party in England says: " There is nothing sacred in 
Free Trade," and the leader of the other is urging 
preferential colonial and imperial tariffs, it seems as 
if, despite the fervor of their Free-Trade protesta 
tions, they were drawing near to the great American 
statesman who a hundred years ago declared that 
Free Trade or Protection was a mere question of 
what was more profitable, and that each nation, in 
view of all the surrounding circumstances, must 
decide that question for itself. 

Hamilton was a thinker as well as an actor. He 
did many great deeds. He cut his name deep in 
our history. His influence is felt to-day, as it al 
ways has been, in our government and our policies. 
But if he had never done anything personally his 

Preface to Second Edition vii 

writings must always be studied as enduring con 
tributions to finance, political economy, and the 

science of government. 

H. C. LODGE. 

NAHANT, 
July 8th, 1903. 

Mrs. Alexander Hamilton 

From the painting by Inman 

PREFACE 

TWO schools of political thought have existed 
in the United States, and their struggle for 
supremacy has made the history of the country. 
One was the national school, the other was the 
school of States '-rights. One believed in a liberal 
construction of the Constitution, and in a strong and 
energetic federal government, wielding all its powers 
to their full extent. The other believed in a strict 
construction of the Constitution, in a simple and re 
strained federal government, exercising in a limited 
way only such powers as were absolutely needful. 
One was founded by Alexander Hamilton, the other 
by Thomas Jefferson. On the one side it was main 
tained that the United States ought to be, and 
were, a nation; on the other, that the Union was a 
confederacy. The conflict between these opposing 
forces began at the close of the Revolution, was ardent 
in the convention which framed the Constitution, 
continued with ever-increasing intensity for seventy 
years, and then culminated in the Civil War. In 
that fierce battle the national principle, which had 
strengthened with every year from the time of the 
formation of the government, triumphed, and it is 
now supreme. 

ix 

x Preface 

The dominant purpose of Hamilton's life was 
the creation of a national sentiment, and thereby 
the making of a great and powerful nation from the 
discordant elements furnished by thirteen jarring 
States. To the accomplishment of this purpose 
every thing he said and did as a public man was 
steadily and strongly directed. The influence of 
the policy of Washington's administration upon the 
establishment and development of this great nation 
of ours cannot be overestimated. Much of that 
policy was due to Hamilton alone, and in all parts of 
it he made himself deeply felt. Yet his masterly 
policy as Secretary of the Treasury, and as cabinet 
officer, as well as the active and influential part 
which he took in the Constitutional Convention, 
represent but a small portion of his services to the 
cause of nationality. Hamilton's greatest work was 
in creating, forming, and guiding a powerful public 
opinion in support of a national system ; and the sen 
timent thus brought into being went steadily on 
with ever-increasing force, until it prevailed over all 
its enemies. Hamilton achieved his success by the 
profound influence which he exerted on the public 
mind. No statesman in our history has ever swayed 
so many of the leading men among his contem 
poraries as Hamilton, and at the same time he ap 
pealed by his pen to the largest popular audience of 
any man of his time. He was the first teacher in 
the school of national politics. The sacred fire once 
lighted never went out, and the principles then in 
culcated were carried forward and ever raised higher 
through the after years. 

Preface xi 

This vast influence upon the political thought and 
the political history of the country Hamilton ob 
tained by his writings, which range from elaborate 
Treasury reports to the brief utterances of private 
correspondence. The historical value and import 
ance of these writings cannot be rated too highly, 
and are of themselves sufficient reason for the repub- 
lication of his works, of which the original edition is 
now almost unobtainable. 

But there is another side to Hamilton's writings 
which makes them of even wider and more lasting 
worth than their effect upon the people of the United 
States. This is their intrinsic merit as contributions 
to the philosophy or science of government, as well 
as to finance and political economy. These were 
questions much meditated upon at the close of the 
eighteenth century, and they have engaged the best 
attention of the civilized world ever since. Hamil 
ton ranks as one of the great thinkers in the days 
when political economy and the huge mechanism of 
modern finance came into being. He stands con 
spicuous in that all-important period, and in that 
broad field of thought, side by side with such men as 
Turgot, Pitt, and Adam Smith, and he does not 
suffer by comparison with these contemporaries, 
either in force and originality of ideas, or in practical 
success. He studied Adam Smith and then wrote 
the Report on Manufactures, developing the theory 
as to the protection of nascent industries in its ap 
plication to the United States, and standing firmly 
on the doctrine that this was a question which 
each nation must decide for itself. He watched 

Xll 

Preface 

the policy of Pitt with close attention, but when he 
came to deal with our own financial problem, al 
though he adopted the funding system and the sink 
ing fund he used the latter simply as a plain business 
expedient, and cast aside the juggling pretences by 
which "the heaven-born minister'* deluded a whole 
generation of Englishmen. Beyond the field of 
finance and political economy, he dealt with the far- 
reaching questions of federative systems of govern 
ment to which many thinkers look to-day for a 
solution of the difficulties which great armies and 
recurring wars constantly present in Europe. As 
contributions to modern thought on the most im 
portant of modern themes the writings of Hamilton 
hold now and must always hold a very high position. 

This is not the place nor is it needful here to say 
anything about Hamilton either as a statesman, 
writer, or man. His strong personality is becoming 
every day more familiar and more vivid to a posterity 
which is now beginning to understand and appreciate 
him, and his influence may be traced in every page 
of our history. He was every inch a statesman, in 
tellectually second to no one of his own day in that 
high calling, where he still waits for his superior. 
But these are subjects for the historian or the 
biographer, and Hamilton's personal history and 
public career have been written, rewritten, and 
minutely discussed from the island of Nevis down 
to the fatal glade at Weehawken. As for his writings 
they tell their own story, and their ability and force 
are obvious to every one who reads them. 

It is enough for the editor of these volumes to say 

Preface xiii 

a very few words as to the general character and 
quality of Hamilton's mind as they appear to him 
after careful and repeated study. Hamilton was 
pre-eminently a believer in Pope's axiom that 
" order is heaven's first law," and his intellect was in 
the highest degree lucid, well-ordered, and system 
atic. Whatever defects they may have had, Ham 
ilton's arguments were invariably strong, cogent, 
compact, and most rigid in reasoning. His mind 
was penetrating and clear, and although every thing 
he ever wrote is simplicity itself in statement and 
thought, it is the simplicity of thorough knowledge 
and absolute command, and not that of superfi 
ciality and ignorance. 

Statesmen, or rather leaders, of the destructive 
class can always be found when they are needed, 
which is, fortunately, not often. Great statesmen 
of the constructive order are, on the contrary, rare 
enough, and are always wanted. Hamilton was one 
of the latter kind. He was most conspicuously 
"cosmic, and not chaotic," as Carlyle would have 
put it, and he had another quality which would have 
commended him still more to the great Scotchman: 
he saw, appreciated, and admitted facts. Never did 
he blink them out of sight or go upon a vain shadow- 
hunt, but always faced them and btiilt upon them or 
did battle with them as the case might be. There is 
nothing vague or misty about Hamilton. Every 
thing is as clear-cut and well defined as the Amer 
ican landscape on a bright, frosty, autumn day. He 
had a powerful imagination for facts, if such an ap 
parent contradiction in terms may be permitted. 

XIV 


That is, he saw and felt the realities of every situa 
tion so strongly himself that he never failed to 
depict them vividly, and bring them home sharply 
to the minds of others. With such mental qualities, 
backed by a relentless will, a strong and even pas 
sionate nature, and burning energy, it is not to be 
wondered at that Alexander Hamilton left so deep a 
mark upon our history, and that he is in every way 
so well worth our careful study. 

It only remains to say a word in regard to the 
plan and arrangement of this edition. The first 
object was to bring all Hamilton's writings under 
one roof. This has never been done hitherto, for 
the Federalist has always found shelter else 
where. To accomplish this purpose in good print 
and within reasonable limits, it became necessary 
first to reduce the large amount of material gath 
ered together in the edition of 1851 by John C. 
Hamilton. The omissions thus made from the 
earlier edition can be readily classified. All letters 
written by others to Hamilton, with one or two 
trifling exceptions, have been dropped. Many of 
these are, of course, historically speaking, very im 
portant, but those which deserve this description 
are for the most part to be found elsewhere in the 
works of their respective writers. All of them, 
however, whether valuable or worthless, were sacri 
ficed because the edition was to embody Hamilton's 
works and not the letters of his contemporaries. Of 
Hamilton's own writings a small number have been 
omitted, but nothing which did not seem to the 
editor entirely valueless for history or any other pur- 

Preface xv 

pose. Such are revenue circulars; reports on pri 
vate claims against the government ; bald statements 
of accounts, or estimates rendered to Congress; 
letters written during the Revolution and containing 
merely the current news or rumors of the day with 
out opinion or comment; the letters of Washington 
written by Hamilton in his capacity of secretary, 
and attributed by the latter 's son to the aide-de 
camp and not to the General who signed them; 
brief notes acknowledging the receipt of letters or 
transmitting reports and the like ; and, finally, rou 
tine business letters to the Amsterdam bankers 
and others. A calendar of all letters and docu 
ments written by Hamilton, and printed in the 
John C. Hamilton edition, but omitted here, will 
follow the index. In addition to the Federalist 
there are certain other papers now included in Ham 
ilton's works for the first time. The most important 
is the famous Reynolds pamphlet. The editor 
hesitated long before deciding to include that pub 
lication in this edition, because he felt a strong dis 
taste to even the appearance of reviving an old 
scandal. But the reasons for reprinting it seemed 
irresistible. Every one who is at all familiar with 
Hamilton's career, or with our early history, has 
heard of the Reynolds affair. Comparatively few 
persons have read or have been able to obtain Ham 
ilton's own account of the matter. It was a melan 
choly but a very important incident in Hamilton's 
life, and can never be separated from it. It in 
volves questions of private and public morality 
which unhappily are always likely to arise, and it 

XVI 


throws a bright light upon the strength of Hamil 
ton's character, as well as upon the errors into which 
he fell. His enemies used it at the time, and Mr. 
Parton has recently given copious selections from it 
in his Life of Jefferson. Hamilton published the 
story to the world to vindicate his honor as a public 
man. The justice which he thus sought to obtain 
from his contemporaries he has a right to demand 
at the hands of posterity. Inasmuch as the affair 
cannot be forgotten, and what Hamilton felt himself 
ought to be made public, his editor has not the right 
to suppress the pamphlet. 

Besides the Reynolds pamphlet, there are some 
letters which have found their way into print since 
the edition of 1851 appeared. These, together with 
the heretofore unpublished letters still in the ar 
chives at Washington, are also included in this edi 
tion. The new letters, as well as the collation with 
the originals of those previously printed, are due 
to the untiring kindness of Mr. Theodore F. Dwight, 
the librarian of the State Department. To his care 
and thought the merit of this edition in regard to the 
accuracy and completeness of the private corre 
spondence will be entirely due, and the editor cannot 
express too fully his indebtedness for such generous 
assistance. In the first volume the Continentalist, 
incomplete in the edition of 1851, is given in full. 
The speeches in the Federal convention, which were 
wholly omitted in the first edition, are now given 
entire from Madison and Yates, and John C. Hamil 
ton's imperfect publication of the speeches in the 
New York convention is now replaced by a com- 

Preface xvii 

plete report. The most important addition, how 
ever, in the first volume is an address to the electors 
in 1789, for which the editor is indebted to the 
thoughtful kindness of Mr. Henry A. Homes, State 
Librarian of New York. This address is reprinted 
here for the first time from a probably unique copy 
of the original pamphlet at Albany. It is of great 
importance because it shows, in connection with a 
previous address to the Albany Supervisors, and 
with the " H. G." letters, the policy and work of the 
Federalists in their efforts to secure a first Cxmgress 
favorable to the Constitution, and to break down 
all opposition. 

The editor is satisfied that nothing of any value 
has been omitted unless by some inadvertence 
which cannot always be avoided. He is, however, 
by no means equally sure that, in his desire to make 
this edition a really complete collection of Hamil 
ton's writings, he has not included a number of 
papers which, for the comfort of the public it would 
have been better to consign to the dust-bins of the 
past. The work of selection is always difficult in 
such cases, but the editor's purpose has been to 
make the edition complete without loading it with 
material of no earthly importance to any human 
being. 

A purely chronological arrangement of the letters 
and papers would have led to inextricable confusion, 
through which no index could have piloted any one. 
The writings, therefore, except in the case of the 
Federalist, which has a volume to itself, and of the 
private correspondence, are arranged by subjects, 

XV111 

Preface 

and these subdivisions are in turn arranged chro 
nologically. Hamilton's writings lend themselves 
easily to such a classification, and this method of 
presenting them in groups seems to the editor to 
do them more justice, and to show better than any 
other the course and the results of the writer's 
thoughts and influence. This arrangement also, it 
is thought, will be found the most convenient and 
manageable which could be devised for general use. 
Hamilton is not a writer who requires much annota 
tion, for he tells his own story in almost every case 
a good deal better than any one can tell it for him. 
The editor's notes, which are few, and, as a rule, 
very brief, have been inserted simply to explain the 
occasion of the letter or essay to which they are 
appended, to define some individual or occurrence 
therein mentioned, or to trace in outline the sub 
sequent history of a policy which owed its inception 
or its establishment to Hamilton's efforts. If these 
volumes serve to make better known the ability and 
the influence of one of America's greatest statesmen, 
the purpose of this edition will be amply fulfilled. 

The portrait in the first volume is from a picture 
by Trumbull, painted in 1792 for Mr. George Cabot. 
This portrait has always remained in the possession 
of Mr. Cabot's descendants, and is now engraved for 
the first time. 

HENRY CABOT LODGE. 

January 10, 1885. 

A FULL VINDICATION 

OF THE 

Measures of Congress from the calumnies of their 
enemies, in answer to a letter under the signa 
ture of a Westchester Farmer; whereby his 
sophistry is exposed, his cavils confuted, his 
artifices detected, and his wit ridiculed, in a 
General Address to the inhabitants of America, 
and a Particular Address to the Farmers of the 
Province of New York. Veritas magna est et 
prevalebit — Truth is powerful and will prevail. 
New York: printed by James Rivington: 1774. 

VOL. I.— I. 

A FULL VINDICATION.' 

DECEMBER 15, 1774. 

FRIENDS AND COUNTRYMEN : 

It was hardly to be expected that any man could 
be so presumptuous as openly to controvert the 

1 About two months after the adjournment of the first Continental 
Congress, Dr. Seabury, afterward Bishop of Connecticut, published two 
pamphlets entitled Free Thoughts on the Proceedings of the Con 
tinental Congress, and Congress Canvassed by a Westchester Farmer. 
The pamphlets were written with considerable skill and pre 
sented all the arguments in behalf of the Crown in an attractive 
and popular manner. They were not without effect and were of much 
use to the Tories, by whom they were freely circulated. Within a 
fortnight after the appearance of the second tract appeared A Full 
Vindication. A reply to this was published, and then a month later 
came a still more elaborate pamphlet entitled The Farmer Refuted. 
These two productions in the patriot interest excited much attention, 
were widely read, and were attributed to Jay. Few suspected that 
they would prove to be the work of a college boy, and all were amazed 
when the true author was known. These two pamphlets are the first 
important efforts of Hamilton's pen. They are not now much more 
entertaining than other like essays of their period and class, but they 
take high rank among the writings of a period remarkable for the 
ability of its political discussions. They are, moreover, little short of 
wonderful when we remember that they are the work of a boy not 
eighteen years old. They have certain marks of youth about them, 
but are singularly free from such defects. They are, on the whole, 
very mature in thought, and show the strength of argument, the logi 
cal severity, the clearness and terseness which afterward made Hamil 
ton the ablest controversialist and most brilliant political writer of 
his time. On this account, and also as examples of the manner in 
which public questions were then discussed, these two essays have a 
lasting interest and genuine historical and literary value. 
4 Alexander Hamilton 

equity, wisdom, and authority of the measures 
adopted by the Congress — an assembly truly respect 
able on every account, whether we consider the 
characters of the men who composed it, the number 
and dignity of their constituents, or the important 
ends for which they were appointed. But, however 
improbable such a degree of presumption might have 
seemed, we find there are some in whom it exists. 
Attempts are daily making to diminish the influence 
of their decisions, and prevent the salutary effects 
intended by them. The impotence of such insidious 
efforts is evident from the general indignation they 
are treated with; so that no material ill-conse 
quences can be dreaded from them. But lest they 
should have a tendency to mislead, and prejudice the 
minds of a few, it cannot be deemed altogether use 
less to bestow some notice upon them. 

And first, let me ask these restless spirits, Whence 
arises that violent antipathy they seem to entertain, 
not only to the natural rights of mankind, but to 
common-sense and common modesty? That they 
are enemies to the natural rights of mankind is mani 
fest, because they wish to see one part of their 
species enslaved by another. That they have an in 
vincible aversion to common-sense is apparent in 
many respects: they endeavor to persuade us that 
the absolute sovereignty of Parliament does not 
imply our absolute slavery; that it is a Christian 
duty to submit to be plundered of all we have, 
merely because some of our fellow-subjects are 
wicked enough to require it of us; that slavery, so 
far from being a great evil, is a great blessing; and 

A Full Vindication 5 

even that our contest with Britain is founded en 
tirely upon the petty duty of three pence per pound 
on East India tea, whereas the whole world knows it 
is built upon this interesting question, whether the 
inhabitants of Great Britain have a right to dispose 
of the lives and properties of the inhabitants of 
America, or not. And lastly, that these men have 
discarded all pretension to common modesty, is clear 
from hence: first, because they, in the plainest 
terms, call an august body of men, famed for their 
patriotism and abilities, fools or knaves; and of 
course the people whom they represented cannot be 
exempt from the same opprobrious appellations; 
and secondly, because they set themselves up as 
standards of wisdom and probity, by contradicting 
and censuring the public voice in favor of those men. 

A little consideration will convince us that the 
Congress, instead of having "ignorantly misunder 
stood, carelessly neglected, or basely betrayed the 
interests of the colonies," have, on the contrary, de 
vised and recommended the only effectual means to 
secure the freedom, and establish the future pros 
perity of America upon a solid basis. If we are not 
free and happy hereafter, it must proceed from the 
want of integrity and resolution in executing what 
they have concerted, not from the temerity or im 
policy of their determinations. 

Before I proceed to confirm this assertion by the 
most obvious arguments, I will premise a few brief 
remarks. The only distinction between freedom and 
slavery consists in this: In the former state a man 
is governed by the laws to which he has given his 

6 Alexander Hamilton 

consent, either in person or by his representative; 
in the latter, he is governed by the will of another. 
In the one case, his life and property are his own; 
in the other, they depend upon the pleasure of his 
master. It is easy to discern which of these two 
states is preferable. No man in his senses can hesi 
tate in choosing to be free, rather than a slave. 

That Americans are entitled to freedom is incon 
testable on every rational principle. All men have 
one common original: they participate in one com 
mon nature, and consequently have one common 
right. No reason can be assigned why one man 
should exercise any power or pre-eminence over his 
fellow-creatures more than another; unless they 
have voluntarily vested him with it. Since, then, 
Americans have not, by any act of theirs, empowered 
the British Parliament to make laws for them, it 
follows they can have no just authority to do it. 

Besides the clear voice of natural justice HI this 
respect, the fundamental principles of the English 
constitution are in our favor. It has been repeatedly 
demonstrated that the idea of legislation or taxa 
tion, when the subject is not represented, is incon 
sistent with that. Nor is this all; our charters, the 
express conditions on which our progenitors relin 
quished their native countries, and came to settle in 
this, preclude every claim of ruling and taxing us 
without our assent. 

Every subterfuge that sophistry has been able to 
invent, to evade or obscure this truth, has been re 
futed by the most conclusive reasonings ; so that we 
may pronounce it a matter of undeniable certainty, 

A Full Vindication 7 

that the pretensions of Parliament are contradictory 
to the law of nature, subversive of the British con 
stitution, and destructive of the faith of the most 
solemn compacts. 

What, then, is the subject of our controversy with 
the mother country? It is this: Whether we shall 
preserve that security to our lives and properties, 
which the law of nature, the genius of the British 
constitution, and our charters, afford us ; or whether 
we shall resign them into the hands of the British 
House of Commons, which is no more privileged to 
dispose of them than the Great Mogul. What can 
actuate those men who labor to delude any of us 
into an opinion that the object of contention be 
tween the parent state and the colonies is only three 
pence duty upon tea; or that the commotions in 
America originate in a plan, formed by some turbu 
lent men, to erect it into a republican government? 
The Parliament claims a right to tax us in all cases 
whatsoever; its late acts are in virtue of that claim. 
How ridiculous, then, is it to affirm that we are 
quarrelling for the trifling sum of three pence a 
pound on tea, when it is evidently the principle 
against which we contend. 

The design of electing members to represent us in 
general Congress was, that the wisdom of America 
might be collected in devising the most proper and 
expedient means to repel this atrocious invasion of 
our rights. It has been accordingly done. Their 
decrees are binding upon all, and demand a religious 
observance. 

We did not, especially in this province, circum- 

8 Alexander Hamilton 

scribe them by any fixed boundary; and therefore, 
as they cannot be said to have exceeded the limits of 
their authority, their act must be esteemed the act 
of their constituents. If it should be objected that 
they have not answered the end of their election, 
but have fallen upon an improper and ruinous mode 
of proceeding, I reply by asking, Who shall be the 
judge ? Shall any individual oppose his private 
sentiment to the united counsels of men in whom 
America has reposed so high a confidence? The 
attempt must argue no small degree of arrogance 
and self-sufficiency. 

Yet this attempt has been made ; and it is become, 
in some measure, necessary to vindicate the conduct 
of this venerable assembly from the aspersions of 
men who are their adversaries only because they are 
foes to America. 

When the political salvation of any community is 
depending, it is incumbent upon those who are set 
up as its guardians to embrace such measures as have 
justice, vigor, and a probability of success to recom 
mend them. If, instead of this, they take those 
methods which are in themselves feeble and little 
likely to succeed, and may, through a defect in vigor, 
involve the community in a still greater danger, they 
may be justly considered as its betrayers. It is not 
enough, in times of imminent peril, to use only pos 
sible means of preservation. Justice and sound 
policy dictate the use of probable means. 

The only scheme of opposition suggested by those 
who have been and are averse from a non-importa 
tion and non-exportation agreement, is by REMON- 

A Full Vindication 9 

STRANGE and PETITION. The authors and abettors 
of this scheme have never been able to invent a 
single argument to prove the likelihood of its suc 
ceeding. On the other hand, there are many stand 
ing facts and valid considerations against it. 

In the infancy of the present dispute, we had re 
course to this method only. We addressed the 
throne in the most loyal and respectful manner, in a 
legislative capacity; but what was the consequence? 
Our address was treated with contempt and neglect. 
The first American Congress did the same, and met 
with similar treatment. The total repeal of the 
stamp act, and the partial repeal of the revenue acts, 
took place not because the complaints of America 
were deemed just and reasonable, but because these 
acts were found to militate against the commercial 
interests of Great Britain. This was the declared 
motive of the repeal. 

These instances are sufficient for our purpose ; but 
they derive greater validity and force from the fol 
lowing : 

The legal assembly of Massachusetts Bay pre 
sented, not long since, a most humble, dutiful, and 
earnest petition to his Majesty, requesting the dis 
mission of a governor highly odious to the people, 
and whose misrepresentations they regarded as one 
chief source of all their calamities. Did they suc 
ceed in their request? No — it was treated with the 
greatest indignity, and stigmatized as "a seditious, 
vexatious, and scandalous libel." 

I know the men I have to deal with will acquiesce 
in this stigma. Will they also dare to calumniate 

io Alexander Hamilton 

the noble and spirited petition that came from the 
Mayor and Aldermen of the city of London? Will 
they venture to justify the unparalleled stride of 
power by which Popery and arbitrary dominion were 
established in Canada? The citizens of London re 
monstrated against it ; they signified its repugnancy 
to the principles of the revolution ; but, like ours, their 
complaints were unattended to. From thence we 
may learn how little dependence ought to be placed 
on this method of obtaining the redress of grievances. 
There is less reason now than ever to expect deliv 
erance, in this way, from the hand of oppression. 
The system of slavery, fabricated against America, 
cannot, at this time, be considered as the effect of 
inconsideration and rashness. It is the offspring of 
mature deliberation. It has been fostered by time 
and strengthened by every artifice human subtility 
is capable of. After the claims of Parliament had 
lain dormant for a while, they are again resumed and 
prosecuted with more than common ardor. The 
Premier has advanced too far to recede with safety. 
He is deeply interested to execute his purpose, if pos 
sible. We know he has declared that he will never 
desist till he has brought America to his feet; and 
we may conclude nothing but necessity will induce 
him to abandon his aims. In common life, to re 
tract an error, even in the beginning, is no easy task; 
perseverance confirms us in it, and rivets the diffi 
culty. But in a public station, to have been in an 
error and to have persisted in it when it is detected, 
ruins both reputation and fortune. To this we may 
add, that disappointment and opposition inflame the 

A Full Vindication n 

minds of men and attach them still more to their 
mistakes. 

What can we represent which has not already been 
represented ? What petitions can we offer that have 
not already been offered? The rights of America 
and the injustice of Parliamentary pretensions have 
been clearly and repeatedly stated, both in and out 
of Parliament. No new arguments can be framed to 
operate in our favor. Should we even resolve the 
errors of the Ministry and Parliament into the falli 
bility of human understanding, if they have not yet 
been convinced we have no prospect of being able to 
do it by anything further we can say. But if we 
impute their conduct to a wicked thirst of domination 
and disregard to justice, we have no hope of prevail 
ing with them to alter it by expatiating on our rights 
and suing to their compassion for relief; especially 
since we have found, by various experiments, the 
inefficacy of such methods. Upon the whole, it is 
morally certain this mode of opposition would be 
fruitless and defective. The exigency of the times 
requires vigorous and probable remedies; not weak 
and improbable. It would, therefore, be the ex 
treme of folly to place any confidence in, much less 
confine ourselves wholly to, it. 

This being the case, we can have no resource but 
in a restriction of our trade, or in a resistance w et 
armis. It is impossible to conceive any other alter 
native. Our Congress, therefore, have imposed what 
restraint they thought necessary. Those who con 
demn or clamor against it do nothing more nor less 
than advise us to be slaves. 

12 Alexander Hamilton 

I shall now examine the principal measures of the 
Congress, and vindicate them fully from the charge 
of injustice or impolicy. 

Were I to argue in a philosophical manner, I 
might say the obligation to a mutual intercourse in 
the way of trade, with the inhabitants of Great 
Britain, Ireland, and the West Indies, is of the im 
perfect kind. There is no law, either of nature or of 
the civil society in which we live, that obliges us to 
purchase and make use of the products and manu 
factures of a different land or people. It is indeed 
a dictate of humanity to contribute to the support 
and happiness of our fellow creatures, and more espe 
cially those who are allied to us by the ties of blood, 
interest, and mutual protection ; but humanity does 
not require us to sacrifice our own security and 
welfare to the convenience or advantage of others. 
Self-preservation is the first principle of our nature. 
When our lives and properties are at stake, it would 
be foolish and unnatural to refrain from such meas 
ures as might preserve them because they would be 
detrimental to others. 

But we are justified upon another principle be 
sides this. Though the manufacturers of Great Brit 
ain and Ireland and the inhabitants of the West 
Indies are not chargeable with any actual crime 
toward America, they may, in a political view, be 
esteemed criminal. In a civil society it is the duty 
of each particular branch to promote not only the 
good of the whole community, but the good of every 
other particular branch. If one part endeavors to 
violate the rights of another, the rest ought to assist 

A Full Vindication 13 

in preventing the injury. When they do not but 
remain neutral, they are deficient in their duty, and 
may be regarded, in some measure, as accomplices. 

The reason of this is obvious from the design of 
civil society; which is, that the united strength of 
the several members might give stability and secur 
ity to the whole body, and each respective member; 
so that one part cannot encroach upon another with 
out becoming a common enemy, and eventually en 
dangering the safety and happiness of all the other 
parts. 

Since, then, the persons who will be distressed by 
the methods we are using for our own protection, 
have, by their neutrality, first committed a breach of 
an obligation similar to that which bound us to con 
sult their emolument, it is plain the obligation upon 
us is annulled, and we are blameless in what we are 
about to do. 

With respect to the manufacturers of Great Britain, 
they are criminal in a more particular sense. Our 
oppression arises from that member of the great body 
politic of which they compose a considerable part. 
So far as their influence has been wanting to counter 
act the iniquity of their rulers, so far they acquiesced 
in it, and are deemed to be confederates in their guilt. 
It is impossible to exculpate a people that suffers its 
rulers to abuse and tyrannize over others. 

It may not be amiss to add, that we are ready to 
receive with open arms any who may be sufferers by 
the operation of our measures, and recompense them 
with every blessing our country affords to honest in 
dustry. We will receive them as brethren, and make 

14 Alexander Hamilton 

them sharers with us in all the advantages we are 
struggling for. 

From these plain and indisputable principles, the 
mode of opposition we have chosen is reconcilable to 
the strictest maxims of justice. It remains now to 
be examined whether it has also the sanction of good 
policy. 

To render it agreeable to good policy, three things 
are requisite. First, that the necessity of the times re 
quires it; secondly, that it be not the probable source 
of greater evils than those it pretends to remedy; and 
lastly, that it have a probability of success. 

That the necessity of the times demands it, needs 
but little elucidation. We are threatened with abso 
lute slavery. It has been proved that resistance by 
means of REMONSTRANCE and PETITION would not be 
efficacious, and, of course, that a restriction on our 
trade is the only peaceable method in our power to 
avoid the impending mischief. It follows, there 
fore, that such a restriction is necessary. 

That it is not the probable source of greater evils 
than those it pretends to remedy, may easily be 
determined. The most abject slavery, which com 
prehends almost every species of human misery, is 
what it is designed to prevent. 

The consequences of the means are a temporary 
stagnation of commerce, and thereby a deprivation of 
the luxuries and some of the conveniences of life. 
The necessaries and many of the conveniences our 
own fertile and propitious soil affords us. 

No person that has enjoyed the sweets of liberty 
can be insensible of its infinite value, or can reflect on 

A Full Vindication 15 

its reverse without horror and detestation. No per 
son that is not lost to every generous feeling of 
humanity, or that is not stupidly blind to his own 
interest, could bear to offer himself and posterity as 
victims at the shrine of despotism, in preference to 
enduring the shortlived inconveniences that may 
result from an abridgment, or even entire suspension, 
of commerce. 

Were not the disadvantages of slavery too obvious 
to stand in need of it, I might enumerate and describe 
the tedious train of calamities inseparable from it. I 
might show that it is fatal to religion and morality; 
that it tends to debase the mind, and corrupt its no 
blest springs of action. I might show that it re 
laxes the sinews of industry, clips the wings of 
commerce, and introduces misery and indigence in 
every shape. 

Under the auspices of tyranny the life of the sub 
ject is often sported with, and the fruits of his daily 
toil are consumed in oppressive taxes, that serve to 
gratify the ambition, avarice, and lusts of his su 
periors. Every court minion riots in the spoils of 
the honest laborer, and despises the hand by which 
he is fed. The page of history is replete with in 
stances that loudly warn us to beware of slavery. 

ROME was the nurse of freedom. She was cele 
brated for her justice and lenity ; but in what manner 
did she govern her dependent provinces ? They were 
made the continual scene of rapine and cruelty. 
From thence let us learn how little confidence is due 
to the wisdom and equity of the most exemplary 
nations. 

1 6 Alexander Hamilton 

Should Americans submit to become the vassals of 
their fellow-subjects in Great Britain, their yoke will 
be peculiarly grievous and intolerable. A vast ma 
jority of mankind is entirely biassed by motives of 
self-interest. Most men are glad to remove any 
burthens off themselves, and place them upon the 
necks of their neighbors. We cannot, therefore, 
doubt but that the British Parliament, with a view 
to the ease and advantage of itself and its consti 
tuents, would oppress and grind the Americans as 
much as possible. Jealousy would concur with self 
ishness; and for fear of the future independence of 
America, if it should be permitted to rise to too 
great a height of splendor and opulence, every 
method would be taken to drain it of its wealth and 
restrain its prosperity. We are already suspected 
of aiming at independence, and that is one principal 
cause of the severity we experience. The same 
cause will always operate against us, and produce a 
uniform severity of treatment. 

The evils which may flow from the execution of 
our measures, if we consider them with respect to 
their extent and duration, are comparatively no 
thing. In all human probability they will scarcely 
be felt. Reason and experience teach us that the 
consequences would be too fatal to Great Britain to 
admit of delay. There is an immense trade between 
her and the colonies. The revenues arising from 
thence are prodigious. The consumption of her 
manufactures in these colonies supplies the means 
of subsistence to a vast number of her most useful 
inhabitants. The experiment we have made here- 

A Full Vindication 17 

tofore shows us of how much importance our com 
mercial connection is to her, and gives us the highest 
assurance of obtaining immediate redress by sus 
pending it. 

From these considerations it is evident she must 
do something decisive. She must either listen to 
our complaints and restore us to a peaceful enjoy 
ment of our violated rights, or she must exert herself 
to enforce her despotic claims by fire and sword. 
To imagine she would prefer the latter, implies a 
charge of the grossest infatuation, of madness itself. 
Our numbers are very considerable; the courage of 
Americans has been tried and proved. Contests for 
liberty have ever been found the most bloody, im 
placable, and obstinate. The disciplined troops 
Great Britain could send against us would be but 
few. Our superiority in number would overbalance 
our inferiority in discipline. It would be a hard, if 
not impracticable, task to subjugate us by force. 

Besides, while Great Britain was engaged in carry 
ing on an unnatural war against us, her commerce 
would be in a state of decay. Her revenues would 
be decreasing. An armament, sufficient to enslave 
America, would put her to an insupportable expense. 

She would be laid open to the attacks of foreign 
enemies. Ruin, like a deluge, would pour in from 
every quarter. After lavishing her blood and treas 
ure to reduce us to a state of vassalage, she would 
herself become a prey to some triumphant neighbor. 

These are not imaginary mischiefs. The colonies 
contain above three millions of people. Commerce 
flourishes with the most rapid progress throughout 

VOL. i. — a. 

1 8 Alexander Hamilton 

them. This commerce Great Britain has hitherto 
regulated to her own advantage. Can we think the 
annihilation of so exuberant a source of wealth a 
matter of trifling import? On the contrary, must it 
not be productive of the most disastrous effects ? It 
is evident it must. It is equally evident, that the 
conquest of so numerous a people, armed in the ani 
mating cause of liberty, could not be accomplished 
without an inconceivable expense of blood and 
treasure. 

We cannot, therefore, suspect Great Britain to be 
capable of such frantic extravagance as to hazard 
these dreadful consequences; without which, she 
must necessarily desist from her unjust pretensions, 
and leave us in the undisturbed possession of our 
privileges. 

Those who affect to ridicule the resistance America 
might make to the military force of Great Britain, 
and represent its humiliation as a matter the most 
easily to be achieved, betray either a mind clouded 
by the most irrational prejudices, or a total ignor 
ance of human nature. However, it must be the 
wish of every honest man never to see a trial. 

But should we admit a possibility of a third course, 
as our pamphleteer supposes, — that is, the endeavor 
ing to bring us to a compliance by putting a stop to 
our whole trade, even this would not be so terrible 
as he pretends. We can live without trade of any 
kind. Food and clothing we have within ourselves. 
Our climate produces cotton, wool, flax, and hemp; 
which, with proper cultivation, would furnish us with 
summer apparel in abundance. The article of cot- 

A Full Vindication 19 

ton, indeed, would do more; it would contribute to 
defend us from the inclemency of winter. We have 
sheep, which, with due care in improving and in 
creasing them, would soon yield a sufficiency of wool. 
The large quantity of skins we have among us would 
never let us want a warm and comfortable suit. It 
would be no unbecoming employment for our daugh 
ters to provide silks of their own country. The silk 
worm answers as well here as in any part of the 
world. Those hands which may be deprived of 
business by the cessation of commerce, may be occu 
pied in various kinds of manufactures and other 
internal improvements. If, by the necessity of the 
thing, manufactures should once be established, and 
take root among us, they will pave the way still 
more to the future grandeur and glory of America; 
and, by lessening its need of external commerce, will 
render it still securer against the encroachments of 
tyranny. 

It is, however, chimerical to imagine, that the 
circumstances of Great Britain will admit of such a 
tardy method of subjugating us, for reasons which 
have been already given, and which shall be cor 
roborated by others equally forcible. 

I come now to consider the last and principal in 
gredient that constitutes the policy of a measure, 
which is, a probabilty of success. I have been 
obliged to anticipate this part of my subject in con 
sidering the second requisite; and, indeed, what I 
have already said seems to me to leave no room for 
doubting that the means we have used will be 
successful; but I shall here examine the matter 

20 Alexander Hamilton 

more thoroughly, and endeavor to evince it more 
fully. 

The design of the Congress in their proceedings, it 
cannot and need not be denied, was, either, by a 
prospect of the evil consequences, to influence the 
ministry to give up their enterprise, or, should they 
prove inflexible, to affect the inhabitants of Great 
Britain, Ireland, and the West Indies in such a man 
ner as to rouse them from their state of neutrality, 
and engage them to unite with us in opposing the 
lawless hand of tyranny, which is extended to ravish 
our liberty from us, and might soon be extended for 
the same purpose against them. 

The FARMER mentions, as one probable conse 
quence of our measures, "clamors, discord, confus 
ion, mobs, riots, insurrections, rebellions in Great 
Britain, Ireland, and the West Indies"; though at 
the same time he thinks it is, he also thinks it is 
not, a probable consequence. For my part, without 
hazarding any such seeming contradictions, I shall, 
in a plain way, assert that I verily believe a non 
importation and a non-exportation will effect all the 
purposes they are intended for. 

It is no easy matter to make any tolerably exact 
estimate of the advantages that accrue to Great 
Britain, Ireland, and the West Indies from their 
commercial intercourse with the colonies; nor, in 
deed, is it necessary. Every man, the least ac 
quainted with the state and extent of our trade, 
must be convinced it is the source of immense reve 
nues to the parent state, and gives employment and 
bread to a vast number of his Majesty's subjects. 

A Full Vindication 21 

It is impossible but that a suspension of it, for any 
time, must introduce beggary and wretchedness, in 
an eminent degree, both in England and Ireland. 
And as to the West India plantations, they could not 
possibly subsist without us. I am the more confident 
of this, because I have a pretty general acquaintance 
with their circumstances and dependencies. 

We are told, " that it is highly improbable we shall 
succeed in distressing the people of Great Britain, 
Ireland, and the West Indies so far as to oblige 
them to join with us in getting the acts of Parlia 
ment which we complain of repealed. The first 
distress," it is said, "will fall on ourselves; it will 
be more severely felt by us than any part of his 
Majesty's dominions, and will affect us the longest. 
The fleets of Great Britain command respect through 
out the globe. Her influence extends to every part 
of the earth. Her manufactures are equal to any, 
superior to most, in the world. Her wealth is great. 
Her people enterprising and persevering in their at 
tempts to extend, and enlarge, and protect her trade. 
The total loss of our trade will be felt only for a 
time. Her merchants would turn their attention 
another way ; new sources of trade and wealth would 
be opened; new schemes pursued. She would soon 
find a vent for all her manufactures in spite of all 
we could do. Our malice would hurt only our 
selves. Should our schemes distress some branches 
of her trade, it would be only for a time ; and there 
is ability and humanity enough in the nation to 
relieve those that are distressed by us, and put them 
in some other way of getting their living." 

22 Alexander Hamilton 

The omnipotency and all-sufficiency of Great 
Britain may be pretty good topics for her passionate 
admirers to exercise their declamatory powers upon, 
for amusement and trial of skill ; but they ought not 
to be proposed to the world as matters of truth and 
reality. In the calm, unprejudiced eye of reason, 
they are altogether visionary. As to her wealth, it 
is notorious that she is oppressed with a heavy 
national debt, which it requires the utmost policy 
and economy ever to discharge. Luxury has arrived 
to a great pitch; and it is a universal maxim, that 
luxury indicates the declension of a state. Her sub 
jects are loaded with the most enormous taxes. All 
circumstances agree in declaring their distress. The 
continual emigrations from Great Britain and Ireland 
to the continent are a glaring symptom that those 
kingdoms are a good deal impoverished. 

The attention of Great Britain has hitherto been 
constantly awake to expand her commerce. She has 
been vigilant to explore every region with which it 
might be her interest to trade. One of the principal 
branches of her commerce is with the colonies. 
These colonies, as they are now settled and peopled, 
have been the work of near two centuries. They 
are blessed with every advantage of soil, climate, 
and situation. They have advanced with an almost 
incredible rapidity. It is, therefore, an egregious 
piece of absurdity to affirm, that the loss of our 
trade would be felt for a time (which must only 
signify for a short time). No new schemes could 
be pursued that would not require, at least, as much 
time to repair the loss of our trade, as was spent in 

A Full Vindication 23 

bringing it to its present degree of perfection, which 
is near two centuries. Nor can it be reasonably 
imagined, that the total and sudden loss of so ex 
tensive and lucrative a branch would not produce 
the most violent effects to a nation that subsists 
entirely upon its commerce. 

It is said " there is ability and humanity enough in 
the nation to relieve those who are distressed by us, 
and to put them into some other way of getting their 
living." I wish the gentleman had obliged his read 
ers so much as to have pointed out this other way. 
I must confess, I have racked my brains to no pur 
pose to discover it; and I am fully of opinion it is 
purely ideal. Besides the common mechanic arts, 
which are subservient to the ordinary uses of life, 
and which are the instruments of commerce, I know 
no other ways, in time of peace, in which men can be 
employed, except in agriculture and the liberal arts. 
Persons employed in the mechanic arts are those 
whom the abridgment of commerce would im 
mediately affect; and as to such branches as might 
be less affected, they are already sufficiently stocked 
with workmen, and could give bread to no more. 
Not only so, but I can't see by what legerdemain a 
weaver, a clothier, could be at once converted into a 
carpenter or blacksmith. With respect to agricul 
ture, the lands of Great Britain and Ireland have 
been long ago distributed and taken up; nor do 
they require any additional laborers to till them, so 
that there could be no employment in this way. 
The liberal arts cannot maintain those who are al 
ready devoted to them; not to say, it is more than 

24 Alexander Hamilton 

probable, the generality of mechanics would make 
but indifferent philosophers, poets, painters, and 
musicians. 

What poor shifts is sophistry obliged to have re 
course to ! We are threatened with the resentment of 
those against whom our measures will operate. It is 
said that " instead of conciliating we shall alienate the 
affections of the people of Great Britain ; of friends, 
we shall make them our enemies." And further, 
that " we shall excite the resentment of the govern 
ment at home against us, which will do us no good, 
but, on the contrary, much harm." 

Soon after we are told that "we shall probably 
raise the resentment of the Irish and West Indians. 
The passions of human nature," it is said, " are much 
the same in all countries. If they find us disposed 
wantonly to distress them, to serve our own purposes, 
they will look out for some method to do without us. 
Will they not look elsewhere for a supply of those 
articles they used to take from us? They would 
deserve to be despised for their meanness, did 
they not." 

To these objections I reply, first, with respect to 
the inhabitants of Great Britain : that if they are our 
friends, as is supposed, and as we have reason to be 
lieve, they cannot, without being destitute of ra 
tionality, be incensed against us for using the only 
peaceable and probable means in our power to preserve 
our invaded rights. They know, by their own experi 
ence, how fruitless remonstrances and petitions are. 
They know we have tried them, over and over, to no 
purpose. They know also how dangerous to their 

A Full Vindication 25 

liberties the loss of ours must be. What, then, 
could excite their resentment, if they have the least 
regard to common justice? The calamities that 
threaten them proceed from the weakness or wicked 
ness of their own rulers, which compels us to take 
the measures we do. The insinuation, that we 
wantonly distress them to serve our own purposes, 
is futile, and unsupported by a single argument. I 
have shown we could have no other resource; nor 
can they think our conduct such, without a degree of 
infatuation that it would be impossible to provide 
against, and therefore useless to consult. It is most 
reasonable to believe they will revenge the evils they 
may feel, on the true authors of them — on an aspir 
ing and ill-judged ministry; not on us who act out 
of a melancholy necessity, and are the innocent 
causes in self-defence. 

With respect to the ministry, it is certain that any 
thing which has a tendency to frustrate their designs 
will not fail to excite their displeasure. But since we 
have nothing to expect from their justice and lenity, 
it can be no objection to a measure that it tends to 
stir up their resentment. But their resentment (it is 
often said) may ruin us. The impossibility of doing 
that, without at the same time ruining Great Britain, 
is a sufficient security. 

The same may be said with regard to the Irish 
and the West Indians, which has been said concern 
ing the people of Great Britain. The Irish, in par 
ticular, by their own circumstances, will be taught to 
sympathize with us, and commend our conduct. Jus 
tice will direct their resentment to its proper objects. 

26 Alexander Hamilton 

It is true, self-love will prompt both the Irish and 
the West Indians to take every method in their 
power to escape the miseries they are in danger of. 
But what methods can they take? "The Irish," it 
is said, " may be supplied with flaxseed from Holland, 
the Baltic, and the river St. Lawrence. Canada pro 
duces no inconsiderable quantity already." And as 
to the West Indies, " they produce now many of the 
necessaries of life. The quantity may be easily in 
creased. Canada will furnish them with many 
articles they now take from us : flour, lumber, horses, 
etc. Georgia, the Floridas, and the Mississippi 
abound in lumber; Nova Scotia, in fish." 

The Dutch are rivals to the English in their com 
merce. They make large quantities of fine linens, 
gauze, laces, etc., which require the flax to be picked 
before it comes to seed; for which reason, it is not in 
their power to raise much more seed than they want 
for their own use. Ireland has always had the sur 
plus from them. They could, if they were ever so 
willing, enlarge their usual supplies but very little. 
It is, indeed, probable they may withhold them. 
They may choose to improve the occasion for the 
advancement of their own trade. They may take 
advantage of the scarcity of materials in Ireland, to 
increase and put off their own manufactures. 

The Baltic has ever supplied Ireland with its flax; 
and she has been able to consume that, with all she 
could derive from other quarters. 

As to Canada, I am well informed, it could at pres 
ent afford but a very inconsiderable quantity. It 
has had little encouragement, hitherto, to raise that 

A Full Vindication 27 

article; and, of course, has not much attended to it. 
The instances mentioned of seed being "bought up 
there at a low price, brought to New York, and sold 
to the Irish factors at a great advance," does not 
prove there is any quantity raised there. Its cheap 
ness proceeds from there being no demand for it; 
and where there was no demand, there was no in 
ducement to cultivate it. 

Upon the whole, it appears that the supplies of 
flax-seed which Ireland might draw elsewhere would 
be trifling, in comparison with those received from us, 
and not at all equivalent to her wants. But if this 
were not the case, if she might procure a sufficiency 
without our help, yet could she not do without us. 
She would want purchasers for her linens after they 
were manufactured; and where could she find any 
so numerous and wealthy as we are? I must refer 
it to the profound sagacity of Mr. A. W. Farmer to 
explore them. It is too arduous a task for me. 

Much less could the West Indies subsist independ 
ent of us. Notwithstanding the continual imports 
from hence, there is seldom, or never, in any of the 
islands, a sufficient stock of provisions to last six 
months, which may give us an idea how great the 
consumption is. The necessaries they produce 
within themselves, when compared with the con 
sumption, are scarcely worth mentioning. Very 
small portions of the land are appropriated to the 
production of such necessaries; indeed, it is too 
valuable to admit of it. Nor could the quantity be 
increased to any material degree, without applying 
the whole of the land to it. It is alleged that 

28 Alexander Hamilton 

" Canada will furnish them with flour, lumber, 
horses, etc.," and that " Georgia, the Floridas, and 
Mississippi abound in lumber; Nova Scotia, in fish." 
These countries have been all along carrying on a 
trade to the West Indies as well as we ; and can it be 
imagined that, alone, they will be able to supply 
them tolerably? The Canadians have been indolent, 
and have not improved their country as they ought 
to have done. The wheat they raise at present, 
over and above what they have occasion for them 
selves, would be found to go but little way among 
the islands. Those who think the contrary, must 
have mistaken notions of them. They must be un- 
apprised of the number of souls they contain. Al 
most every one hundred and fifty or two hundred 
acres of land, exclusive of populous towns, compre 
hend a hundred people. It is not a small quantity 
of food that will suffice for so many. Ten or fifteen 
years' diligence, I grant, might enable Canada to per 
form what is now expected from her; but, in the 
meantime, the West Indians might have the satis 
faction of starving. 

To suppose the best; which is, that by applying 
their cane-lands to the purpose of procuring suste 
nance, they may preserve themselves from starving; 
still, the consequences must be very serious or perni 
cious. The wealthy planters would but ill relish the 
loss of their crops; and such of them as were con 
siderably in debt would be ruined. At any rate, the 
revenues of Great Britain would suffer a vast 
diminution. 

The FARMER, I am inclined to hope, builds too 

A Full Vindication 29 

much upon the present disunion of Canada, Georgia, 
the Floridas, the Mississippi, and Nova Scotia from 
other colonies. A little time, I trust, will awaken 
them from their slumbers, and bring them to a proper 
sense of their indiscretion. I please myself with the 
flattering prospect, that they will, erelong, unite in 
one indissoluble chain with the rest of the colonies. 
I cannot believe they will persist in such a conduct as 
must exclude them from the secure enjoyment of those 
heaven-descended immunities we are contending for. 

There is one argument I have frequently heard 
urged, which it may be of some use to invalidate. It 
is this: that if the mother country should be in 
clined to an accommodation of our disputes, we have, 
by our rash procedure, thrown an insurmountable 
obstacle in her way ; we have made it disgraceful to 
her to comply with our requisitions, because they are 
proposed in a hostile manner. 

Our present measures, I have proved, are the only 
peaceable ones we could place the least confidence in. 
They are the least exceptionable, upon the score of 
irritating Great Britain, of any our circumstances 
would permit. The Congress have petitioned his 
Majesty for the redress of grievances. They have, 
no doubt, addressed him in the most humble, re 
spectful, and affectionate terms; assured him of 
their own loyalty and fidelity, and of the loyalty and 
fidelity of his American subjects in general; en 
deavored to convince him, that we have been mis 
represented and abused; and expressed an earnest 
desire to see an amicable termination of the unhappy 
differences now existing. Can a pretext be wanting, 

30 Alexander Hamilton 

in this case, to preserve the dignity of this parent 
state, and yet remove the complaints of the colonies? 
How easy would it be to overlook our particular 
agreements, and grant us redress in consequence of 
our petitions ? It is easy to perceive there would be 
no difficulty in this respect. 

I have omitted many considerations which might 
be adduced, to show the impolicy of Great Britain 
delaying to accommodate matters, and attempting to 
enforce submission, by cutting off all external sources 
of trade. To say all the subject allows would spin 
out this piece to an immoderate length. I shall 
therefore content myself with mentioning only three 
things more. First, it would be extremely hurtful 
to the commerce of Great Britain to drive us to the 
necessity of laying a regular foundation for manu 
factories of our own, which, if once established, could 
not easily, if at all, be undermined or abolished. 
Secondly, it would be very expensive to the nation 
to maintain a fleet for the purpose of blocking up 
our ports and destroying our trade; nor could she 
interrupt our intercourse with foreign climes without, 
at the same time, retrenching her own revenues; for 
she must then lose the duties and customs upon the 
articles we are wont to export to, and import from, 
them. Added to this, it would not be prudent to 
risk the displeasure of those nations, to whom our 
trade is useful and beneficial. And lastly, a perse 
verance in ill-treatment would naturally beget such 
deep-rooted animosities in America as might never 
be eradicated, and which might operate to the preju 
dice of the empire to the latest period. 

A Full Vindication 31 

Thus have I clearly proved, that the plan of oppo 
sition concerted by our Congress is perfectly con 
sonant with justice and sound policy, and will, in all 
human probability, secure our freedom against the 
assaults of our enemies. 

But, after all, it may be demanded, why they have 
adopted a non-exportation ; seeing many arguments 
tend to show that a non-importation, alone, would 
accomplish the end desired. 

I answer, that the continuance of our exports is 
the only thing which could lessen, or retard, the 
efficacy of a non-importation. It is not, indeed, 
probable it should do that to any great degree; but 
it was advisable to provide against every possible 
obstruction. Besides this, the prospect of its taking 
place, and of the evils attendant upon it, will be a 
prevailing motive with the ministry to abandon 
their malignant schemes. It will also serve to con 
vince them that we are not afraid of putting our 
selves to any inconveniences sooner than be the 
victims of their lawless ambition. 

The execution of this measure has been wisely de 
ferred to a future time, because we have the greatest 
reason to think affairs will be settled without it, and 
because its consequences would be too fatal to be 
justified by any thing but absolute necessity. This 
necessity there will be, should not our disputes 
terminate before the time allotted for its com. 
mencement. 

Before I conclude this part of my address, I will 
answer two very singular interrogatories proposed by 
the FARMER. " Can we think, ' ' says he, " to threaten, 

32 Alexander Hamilton 

and bully, and frighten the supreme government of 
the nation into a compliance with our demands? 
Can we expect to force submission to our peevish 
and petulant humors, by exciting clamors and riots 
in England?" No, gentle sir. We neither desire 
nor endeavor to threaten, bully, or frighten any per 
sons into a compliance with our demands. We have 
no peevish and petulant humors to be submitted to. 
All we aim at is, to convince your high and mighty 
master, the ministry, that we are not such asses as 
to let them ride us as they please. We are deter 
mined to show them that we know the value of free 
dom; nor shall their rapacity extort that inestimable 
jewel from us, without a manly and virtuous struggle. 
But for your part, sweet sir! though we cannot 
much applaud your wisdom, yet we are compelled 
to admire your valor, which leads you to hope you 
may be able to swear, threaten, bully, and frighten 
all America into a compliance with your sinister 
designs. When properly accoutred, and armed with 
your formidable hickory cudgel, what may not the 
ministry expect from such a champion ? Alas for the 
poor committee gentlemen! How I tremble when I 
reflect on the many wounds and scars they must 
receive from your tremendous arm! Alas for their 
supporters and abettors! a very large part, indeed, 
of the continent, — but what of that? They must 
all be soundly drubbed with that confounded hickory 
cudgel; for surely you would not undertake to drub 
one of them, without knowing yourself able to treat all 
their friends and adherents in the same manner, since 
't is plain you would bring them all upon your back. 

A Full Vindication 33 

I am now to address myself in particular to the 
Farmers of New York. 

MY GOOD COUNTRYMEN * : 

The reason I address myself to you, in particular, 
is not because I am one of your number, or connected 
with you in interest, more than with any other branch 
of the community. I love to speak the truth, and 
would scorn to prejudice you in favor of what I have 
to say, by taking upon me a fictitious character, as 
other people have done. I can venture to assure you 
the true writer of the piece signed A. W. FARMER, is 
not in reality a Farmer. He is some ministerial 
emissary, that has assumed the name to deceive you, 
and make you swallow the intoxicating potion he has 
prepared for you. But I have a better opinion of 
you than to think he will be able to succeed. I am 
persuaded you love yourselves and children better 
than to let any designing men cheat you out of your 
liberty and property, to serve their own purposes. 
You would be a disgrace to your ancestors, and the 
bitterest enemies to yourselves, and to your posterity, 
if you did not act like men, in protecting and defend 
ing those rights you have hitherto enjoyed. 

I say, my friends, I do not address you in par 
ticular, because I have any greater connection with 
you than with other people. I despise all false pre 
tensions and mean arts. Let those have recourse to 

1 This address to the farmers is written with remarkable skill. 
Nothing could be better adapted for telling popular effect than the 
simple, easy, and yet forcible style in which the appeal is made. It 
will bear comparison with the Drapier's letters, the greatest and 
purest model of popular political controversial writing in the language. 

VOL. I.— 3. 

34 Alexander Hamilton 

dissimulation and falsehood, who can't defend their 
cause without it. 'T is my maxim to let the plain, 
naked truth speak for itself: and if men won't listen 
to it, 't is their own fault: they must be contented 
to suffer for it. I am neither merchant nor farmer. 
I address you, because I wish well to my country, 
and of course to you, who are one chief support of it ; 
and because an attempt has been made to lead you 
astray in particular. You are the men, too, who 
would lose most, should you be foolish enough to 
counteract the prudent measures our worthy Con 
gress has taken for the preservation of our liberties. 
Those who advise you to do it are not your friends, 
but your greatest foes. They would have you made 
slaves, that they may pamper themselves with the 
fruits of your honest labor. 'T is the Farmer who 
is most oppressed in all countries where slavery 
prevails. 

You have seen how clearly I have proved, that a 
non-importation and a non-exportation are the only 
peaceable means in our power to save ourselves from 
the most dreadful state of slavery. I have shown 
there is not the least hope to be placed in any thing 
else. I have confuted all the principal cavils raised 
by the pretended Farmer ; and I hope, before I finish, 
to satisfy you, that he has attempted to frighten you 
with the prospect of evils which will never happen. 
This, indeed, I have, in a great measure, done 
already, by making appear the great probability, I 
may almost say, certainty, that our measures will 
procure us the most speedy redress. 

Are you willing, then, to be slaves without a single 

A Full Vindication 35 

struggle ? Will you give up your freedom, or, which 
is the same thing, will you resign all security for your 
life and property, rather than endure some small 
present inconveniences? Will you not take a little 
trouble to transmit the advantages you now possess 
to those who are to come after you ? I cannot doubt 
it. I would not suspect you of so much baseness 
and stupidity as to suppose the contrary. 

Pray, who can tell me why a farmer in America is 
not as honest and good a man as a farmer in Eng 
land ? or why has not the one as good a right to what 
he has earned by his labor as the other? I can't, for 
my life, see any distinction between them. And yet, 
it seems, the English farmers are to be governed and 
taxed by their own Assembly, or Parliament; and 
the American farmers are not. The former are to 
choose their own representatives from among them 
selves, whose interest is connected with theirs, and 
over whom they have proper control. The latter 
are to be loaded with taxes by men three thousand 
miles off; by men who have no interest or connec 
tions among them, but whose interest it will be to 
burden them as much as possible, and over whom 
they cannot have the least restraint. How do you 
like this doctrine, my friends? Are you ready to 
own the English farmers for your masters ? Are you 
willing to acknowledge their right to take your 
property from you, and when they please? I know 
you scorn the thought. You had rather die than 
submit to it. 

But some people try to make you believe we are 
disputing about the foolish trifle of three pence duty 

36 Alexander Hamilton 

upon tea. They may as well tell you that black is 
white. Surely you can judge for yourselves. Is a 
dispute, whether the Parliament of Great Britain 
shall make what laws and impose what taxes they 
please upon us, or not; I say, is this a dispute about 
three pence duty upon tea? The man that affirms 
it deserves to be laughed at. 

It is true, we are denying to pay the duty upon tea ; 
but it is not for the value of the thing itself. It is 
because we cannot submit to that without acknow 
ledging the principle upon which it is founded; and 
that principle is, a right to tax us in all cases whatso 
ever. 

You have heretofore experienced the benefit of 
being taxed by your own Assemblies only. Your 
burdens are so light that you scarcely feel them. 
You'd soon find the difference, if you were once to 
let the Parliament have the management of these 
matters. 

How would you like to pay four shillings a year,1 
out of every pound your farms are worth, to be 
squandered (at least a great part of it) upon minis 
terial tools and court sycophants? What would you 
think of giving a tenth part of the yearly products 
of your lands to the clergy? Would you not think 
it very hard to pay ten shillings sterling, per annum, 
for every wheel of your wagons and other carriages; 
a shilling or two for every pane of glass in your houses ; 
and two or three shillings for every one of your 
hearths? I might mention taxes upon your mares, 
cows, and many other things; but those I have 

1 The full price of your farms every five years. 

A Full Vindication 37 

already mentioned are sufficient. Methinks I see 
you stare, and hear you ask, how you could live, if 
you were to pay such heavy taxes. Indeed, my 
friends, I can't tell you. You are to look out for 
that, and take care you do not run yourselves in the 
way of danger, by following the advice of those who 
want to betray you. This you may depend upon: 
if ever you let the Parliament carry its point, you 
will have these and more to pay. Perhaps, before 
long, your tables, and chairs, and platters, and dishes, 
and knives, and forks, and every thing else, would be 
taxed. Nay, I don't know but they would find 
means to tax you for every child you got, and for 
every kiss your daughters received from their sweet 
hearts ; and, God knows, that would soon ruin you. 
The people of England would pull down the Parlia 
ment House, if their present heavy burdens were not 
transferred from them to you. Indeed, there is no 
reason to think the Parliament would have any 
inclination to spare you. The contrary is evident. 

But being ruined by taxes is not the worst you 
have to fear. What security would you have for 
your lives? How can any of you be sure you would 
have the free enjoyment of your religion long? 
Would you put your religion in the power of any set 
of men living ? Remember civil and religious liberty 
always go together: if the foundation of the one be 
sapped, the other will fall of course. 

Call to mind one of our sister colonies, Boston. 
Reflect upon the situation of Canada; and then tell 
whether you are inclined to place any confidence in 
the justice and humanity of the Parliament. The 

38 Alexander Hamilton 

port of Boston is blocked up, and an army planted 
in the town. An act has been passed to alter its 
charter; to prohibit its assemblies; to license the 
murder of its inhabitants ; and to convey them from 
their own country to Great Britain to be tried for 
their lives. What was all this for? Just because a 
small number of people, provoked by an open and 
dangerous attack upon their liberties, destroyed a 
parcel of tea belonging to the East India Company. 
It was not public, but private property they de 
stroyed. It was not the act of the whole province, 
but the act of a part of the citizens. Instead of try 
ing to discover the perpetrators, and commencing a 
legal prosecution against them, the Parliament of 
Great Britain interfered in an unprecedented manner, 
and inflicted a punishment upon a whole province, 
" untried, unheard, unconvicted of any crime. " This 
may be justice, but it looks so much like cruelty, 
that a man of a humane heart would be more apt to 
call it by the latter than the former name. 

The affair of Canada, if possible, is still worse. 
The English laws have been superseded by the 
French laws. The Romish faith is made the estab 
lished religion of the land, and his Majesty is placed 
at the head of it. The free exercise of the Protestant 
faith depends upon the pleasure of the Governor 
and Council. The subject is divested of the right 
of trial by jury, and an innocent man may be im 
prisoned his whole life, without being able to obtain 
any trial at all. The Parliament was not contented 
with introducing arbitrary power and Popery in 
Canada, with its former limits; but they have 

A Full Vindication 39 

annexed to it the vast tracts of land that surround 
all the colonies. 

Does not your blood run cold, to think that an 
English Parliament should pass an act for the estab 
lishment of arbitrary power and Popery in such an 
extensive country? If they had any regard to the 
freedom and happiness of mankind, they would 
never have done it. If they had been friends to the 
Protestant cause, they would never have provided 
such a nursery for its great enemy ; they would not 
have given such encouragement to Popery. The 
thought of their conduct, in this particular, shocks 
me. It must shock you, too, my friends. Beware 
of trusting yourselves to men who are capable of such 
an action! They may as well establish Popery in 
New York, and the other colonies, as they did in 
Canada. They had no more right to do it there than 
here. 

Is it not better, I ask, to suffer a few present incon 
veniences, than to put yourselves in the way of los 
ing every thing that is precious? Your lives, your 
property, your religion, are all at stake. I do my 
duty. I warn you of your danger. If you should 
still be so mad as to bring destruction upon your 
selves ; if you still neglect what you owe to God and 
man, you cannot plead ignorance in your excuse. 
Your consciences will reproach you for your folly; 
and your children's children will curse you. 

You are told, the schemes of our Congress will ruin 
you. You are told, they have not considered your 
interest; but have neglected or betrayed you. It is 
endeavored to make you look upon some of the 

40 Alexander Hamilton 

wisest and best men in America as rogues and rebels. 
What will not wicked men attempt! They will 
scruple nothing that may serve their purposes. In 
truth, my friends, it is very unlikely any of us shall 
suffer much; but let the worst happen, the farmers 
will be better off than other people. 

Many of those that made up the Congress have 
large possessions in land, and may, therefore, be 
looked upon as farmers themselves. Can it be sup 
posed they would be careless about the farmers' in 
terest, when they could not injure that without 
injuring themselves? You see the absurdity of such 
a supposition. 

The merchants, and a great part of the tradesmen, 
get their living by commerce. These are the people 
that would be hurt most by putting a stop to it. As 
to the farmers, " they furnish food for the merchant 
and mechanic; the raw materials for most manu 
factures are the produce of their industry.'' The 
merchants and mechanics are already dependent 
upon the farmers for their food; and if the non 
importation should continue any time, they would 
be dependent upon them for their clothes also. 

It is a false assertion that the merchants have im 
ported more them usual this year. That report has 
been raised by your enemies, to poison your minds 
with evil suspicions. If our disputes be not settled 
within eighteen months, the goods we have among 
us will be consumed; and then the materials for 
making clothes must be had from you. Manufac 
tures must be promoted with vigor; and a high 
price will be given for your wool, flax, and hemp. 

A Full Vindication 41 

It will be your interest to pay the greatest care and 
attention to your sheep. Increase and improve the 
breed as much as possible. Kill them sparingly, and 
such only as will not be of use toward the increase and 
improvement of them. In a few months we shall 
know what we have to trust to. If matters be not 
accommodated by spring, enlarge the quantity of 
your flax and hemp. You will experience the benefit 
of it. All those articles will be very much wanted; 
they will bring a great deal higher price than they 
used to do. And while you are supplying the wants 
of the community, you will be enriching yourselves. 

Should we hereafter find it necessary to stop our 
exports, you can apply more of your land to raising 
flax and hemp, and less of it to wheat, rye, etc. By 
which means, you will not have any of those latter 
articles to lie upon hand. There will be consump 
tion for as much of the former as you can raise ; and 
the great demand they will be in will make them 
very profitable to you. 

Patience, good Mr. Critic! Kill them sparingly, I 
said. What objection have you to the phrase? 
You 11 tell me, it is not classical; but I affirm it is, 
and if you will condescend to look into Mr. Johnson's 
dictionary, you will find I have his authority for it. 
Pray, then, for the future spare your wit upon such 
occasions, otherwise the world will not be disposed to 
spare its ridicule. And though the man that spares 
nobody does not deserve to be spared himself, yet 
will I spare you for the present, and proceed to things 
of more importance. 

Pardon me, my friends, for taking up your time 

42 Alexander Hamilton 

with this digression, but I could not forbear stepping 
out of the way a little to show the world I am as able 
a critic and as good a punster as Mr. Farmer. I now 
return to the main point with pleasure. 

It is insinuated, " that the bustle about non-impor 
tation, etc., has its rise, not from patriotism, but self 
ishness ' ' ; and is only made by the merchants, that 
they may get a high price for their goods. 

By this time I flatter myself you are convinced that 
we are not disputing about trifles. It has been clearly 
proved to you, that we are contending for every 
thing dear in life ; and that the measures adopted by 
the Congress, are the only ones which can save us 
from ruin. This is sufficient to confute that insinu 
ation. But to confirm it, let me observe to you, that 
the merchants have not been the foremost to bring 
about a non-importation. All the members of the 
Congress were unanimous in it; and many of them 
were not merchants. The warmest advocates for it, 
everywhere, are not concerned in trade; and, as I 
have before remarked, the traders will be the princi 
pal sufferers, if it should continue any time. 

But it is said it will not continue, because, " when 
the stores are like to become empty, they will have 
weight enough to break up the agreement/' I don't 
think they would attempt it : but if they should, it is 
impossible a few mercenary men could have influence 
enough to make the whole body of the people give up 
the only plan their circumstances admit of for the 
preservation of their rights, and, of course, to forfeit 
all they have been so long striving to secure. The 
making of a non-importation agreement, did not 

A Full Vindication 43 

depend upon the merchants ; neither will the breaking 
of it depend upon them. The Congress have pro 
vided against the breach of the non-importation, by 
the non-consumption agreement. They have re 
solved for themselves, and us their constitutents, 
" not to purchase, nor use, any East India tea what 
soever; nor any goods, wares, or merchandise from 
Great Britain or Ireland, imported after the first of 
December; nor molasses, etc., from the West Indies; 
nor wine from Madeira or the Western Islands; nor 
foreign indigo." If we do not purchase, nor use, 
these things, the merchant will have no inducement 
to import them. 

Hence, you may perceive the reason of a non- 
consumption agreement. It is to put it out of the 
power of dishonest men to break the non-importation. 
Is this a slavish regulation? Or is it a hardship upon 
us to submit to it? Surely not. Every sensible, every 
good man must approve of it. Whoever tries to 
disaffect you to it ought to meet with your contempt. 

Take notice, my friends, how these men are obliged 
to contradict themselves. In one place you are told, 
"that all the bustle about non-importation, etc., has 
its rise, not from patriotism, but from selfishness"; 
or, in other words, that it is made by the merchants, 
to get a higher price for their goods. In another 
place it is said, " that all we are doing is instigated by 
some turbulent men, who want to establish a repub 
lican form of government among us." 

The Congress is censured for appointing commit 
tees to carry their measures into execution, and direct 
ing them "to establish such further regulations as 

44 Alexander Hamilton 

they may think proper for that purpose. " Pray, did 
we not appoint our delegates to make regulations for 
us? What signified making them if they did not 
provide some persons to see them executed? Must 
a few bad men be left to do what they please, con 
trary to the general sense of the people, without any 
persons to control them, or to look into their be 
havior, and mark them out to the public? The man 
that desires to screen his knavery from the public 
eye will answer, Yes; but the honest man, that is 
determined to do nothing hurtful to his country, and 
who is conscious his actions will bear the light, will 
heartily answer, No. 

The high prices of goods are held up, to make you 
dissatisfied with the non-importation. If the argu 
ment on this head were true, it would be much better 
to subject yourselves to that disadvantage for a time, 
than to bring upon yourselves all the mischiefs I have 
pointed out to you. Should you submit to the claim 
of the Parliament, you will not only be oppressed 
with the taxes upon your lands, etc., which I have 
already mentioned, but you will have to pay heavy 
taxes upon all the goods we import from Great 
Britain. Large duties will be laid upon them at 
home; and the merchants, of course, will have a 
greater price for them, or it would not be worth their 
while to carry on trade. The duty laid upon paper, 
glass, painters' colors, etc., was a beginning of this 
kind. The present duty upon tea is preparatory to 
the imposition of duties upon all other articles. Do 
you think the Parliament would make such a serious 
matter of three pence a pound upon tea if it intended 

A Full Vindication 45 

to stop there? It is absurd to imagine it. You 
would soon find your mistake if you did. For fear 
of paying a somewhat higher price to the merchants 
for a year or two you would have to pay an endless 
list of taxes, within and without, as long as you live, 
and your children after you. 

But I trust there is no danger that the prices of 
goods will rise much, if at all. The same Congress 
that put a stop to the importation of them, has also 
forbid raising the prices of them. The same com 
mittee that is to regulate the one, is also to regulate 
the other. All care will be taken to give no cause of 
dissatisfaction. Confide in the men whom you, and 
the rest of the continent, have chosen the guardians 
of our common liberties. They are men of sense 
and virtue. They will do nothing but what is 
really necessary for the security of your lives and 
properties. 

A sad pother is made, too, about prohibiting the 
exportation of sheep without excepting wethers. The 
poor Farmer is at a mighty loss to know how wethers 
can improve or increase the breed. Truly I am not 
such a conjurer as to be able to inform him, but, if 
you please, my friends, I can give you two pretty 
good reasons why the Congress have not excepted 
wethers. One is, that for some time we shall have 
occasion for all the wool we can raise ; so that it would 
be imprudent to export sheep of any kind. And the 
other is, that if you confine yourself chiefly to killing 
wethers, as you ought to do, you will have none to 
export. The gentleman who made the objection 
must have known these things as well as myself ; but 

46 Alexander Hamilton 

he loves to crack a jest, and could not pass by so fair 
an opportunity. 

He takes notice of the first of these reasons himself; 
but in order to weaken its force cries: " Let me ask 
you, brother farmers, which of you would keep a flock 
of sheep barely for the sake of their wool ? ' ' To this 
he answers: "Not one of you. If you cannot sell 
your sheep to advantage, at a certain age, you cannot 
keep them to any profit." He thinks, because he 
calls you " brother farmers," that he can cajole you 
into believing what he pleases ; but you are not the 
fools he takes you for. You know what is for your 
own interest better than he can tell you. And we 
all know that, in a little time, if our affairs be not 
settled, the demand for wool will be very great. You 
will be able to obtain such a price as will make it 
worth your while to bestow the greatest attention 
upon your sheep. 

In another place this crafty writer tells you that 
"from the day our exports from this province are 
stopped, the farmers may date the commencement of 
their ruin. ' ' He asks : " Will the shopkeeper give you 
his goods ? Will the weaver, shoemaker, blacksmith, 
carpenter, work for you without pay?" I make no 
doubt you are satisfied, from what I have said, that 
we shall never have occasion to stop our exports ; but 
if things turn out contrary to our expectation, and 
it should become necessary to take that step, you 
will find no difficulty in getting what you want from 
the merchants and mechanics. They will not be able 
to do without you; and, consequently, they cannot 
refuse to supply you with what you stand in need of 

A Full Vindication 47 

from them. Where will the merchants and mechan 
ics get food and material for clothing, if not from the 
farmer? And if they are dependent upon you for 
those two grand supports of life, how can they with 
hold what they have from you? 

I repeat it, my friends, we shall know how matters 
are like to be settled by the spring. If our disputes 
be not terminated to our satisfaction by that time, it 
will be your business to plant large parts of your 
land with flax and hemp. Those articles will be 
wanted for manufactures ; and they will yield you a 
greater profit than any thing else. In the interim, 
take good care of your sheep. 

I heartily concur with the Farmer in condemning 
all illicit trade. Perjury is, no doubt, a most heinous 
and detestable crime ; and, for my part, I had rather 
suffer any thing, than have my wants relieved at the 
expense of truth and integrity. I know there are 
many pretended friends to liberty who will take of 
fence at this declaration; but I speak the sentiments 
of my heart without reserve. I do not write for a 
party. I should scorn to be of any. All I say is 
from a disinterested regard to the public weal. 

The Congress, I am persuaded, were of the same 
opinion. They, like honest men, have, as much as 
was in their power, provided against this kind of 
trade, by agreeing to use no East India tea whatever 
after the first day of March next. 

I shall now consider what has been said with respect 
to the payment of debts, and stopping of the courts of 
justice. Let what will happen, it will be your own 
faults if you are not able to pay your debts. I have 

48 Alexander Hamilton 

told you in what manner you may make as much out 
of your lands as ever : by bestowing more of your at 
tention upon raising flax and hemp, and less upon 
other things. Those articles (as I have more than 
once observed) will be in the highest demand. There 
will be no doing without them; and, of course, you 
will be able to get a very profitable price for them. 
How can it be, that the farmers should be at a loss 
for money to pay their debts at a time when the whole 
community must buy, not only their food, but all 
the materials for their clothes, from them? You 
have no reason to be uneasy on that account. 

As to the courts of justice, no violence can, nor 
will, be used, to shut them up; but, if it should be 
found necessary, we may enter into solemn agreement 
to cease from all litigations at law, except in particu 
lar cases. We may regulate lawsuits in such a man 
ner as to prevent any mischief that might arise from 
them. Restrictions may be laid on, to hinder merci 
less creditors from taking advantage of the times to 
oppress and ruin their debtors; but, at the same 
time, not to put it in the power of the debtors wan 
tonly to withhold their just dues from their creditors 
when they are able to pay them. The law ruins 
many a good honest family. Disputes may be set 
tled in a more friendly way. One or two virtuous 
neighbors may be chosen by each party to decide 
them. If the next Congress should think any regu 
lations concerning the courts of justice requisite, 
they will make them; and proper persons will be 
appointed to carry them into execution, and to see 
that no individuals deviate from them. It will be 

A Full Vindication 49 

your duty to elect persons whose fidelity and zeal 
for your interest you can depend upon, to represent 
you in that Congress, which is to meet in Philadelphia 
in May ensuing. 

The Farmer cries: " Tell me not of delegates, con 
gresses, committees, mobs, riots, insurrections, asso 
ciations ; — a plague on them all ! Give me the steady, 
uniform, unbiassed influence of the courts of justice. 
I have been happy under their protection; and, I 
trust in God, I shall be so again." 

I say : " Tell me not of the British commons, lords, 
ministry, ministerial tools, placemen, pensioners, 
parasites. I scorn to let my life and property depend 
upon the pleasure of any of them. Give me the 
steady, uniform, unshaken security of constitutional 
freedom. Give me the right to be tried by a jury 
of my own neighbors, and to be taxed by my own 
representatives only. What will become of the law 
and courts of justice without this ? The shadow may 
remain, but the substance will be gone. I would die 
to preserve the law upon a solid foundation; but 
take away liberty, and the foundation is destroyed." 

The last thing I shall take notice of is the com 
plaint of the Farmer, that the Congress will not allow 
you " a dish of tea to please your wives with, nor a 
glass of Madeira to cheer your spirits, nor a spoonful 
of molasses to sweeten your buttermilk with." You 
would have a right to complain, if the use of these 
things had been forbidden to you alone; but it has 
been equally forbidden to all sorts of people. The 
members of the Congress themselves are no more 
permitted to please their wives with a dish of tea, 

VOL. 1. —4. 

SO Alexander Hamilton 

nor to cheer their spirits with a glass of wine, nor to 
sweeten their buttermilk with a spoonful of molasses, 
than you are. They are upon a footing with you in 
this respect. 

By Him — but, with your leave, my friends, we '11 
try, if we can, to do without swearing. I say, it is 
enough to make a man mad to hear such ridiculous 
quibbles offered, instead of sound argument; but so 
it is, — the piece I am writing against contains nothing 
else. 

When a man grows warm he has a confounded itch 
for swearing. I have been going, above twenty 
times, to rap out an oath, By Him that made me; but 
I have checked myself with the reflection, that it is 
rather unmannerly to treat Him that made us, with 
so much freedom. 

Thus have I examined and confuted all the cavils 
and objections, of any consequence, stated by this 
Farmer. I have only passed over such things as are 
of little weight, the fallacy of which will easily appear. 
I have shown that the Congress have neither " ignor- 
antly misunderstood, carelessly neglected, nor basely 
betrayed you," but that they have devised and 
recommended the only effectual means to preserve 
your invaluable privileges. I have proved that their 
measures cannot fail of success, but will procure the 
most speedy relief for us. I have also proved that 
the farmers are the people who would suffer least, 
should we be obliged to carry all our measures into 
execution. 

Will you, then, my friends, allow yourselves to be 
duped by this artful enemy? Will you follow his 

A Full Vindication 51 

advices, disregard the authority of your Congress, 
and bring ruin on yourselves and your posterity? 
Will you act in such a manner as to deserve the 
hatred and resentment of all the rest of America? 
I am sure you will not. I should be sorry to think 
any of my countrymen would be so mean, so blind to 
their own interest, so lost to every generous and 
manly feeling. 

The sort of men I am opposing give you fair words 
to persuade you to serve their own turns; but they 
think and speak of you, in common, in a very disre 
spectful manner. I have heard some of their party 
talk of you as the most ignorant and mean-spirited 
set of people in the world. They say that you have 
no sense of honor or generosity; that you don't care 
a farthing about your country, children, nor any body 
else but yourselves; and that you are so ignorant as 
not to be able to look beyond the present, so that if 
you can once be persuaded to believe the measures of 
your Congress will involve you in some little present 
perplexities, you will be glad to do anything to avoid 
them, without considering the much greater miseries 
that await you at a little distance off. This is the 
character they give of you. Bad men are apt to 
paint others like themselves. For my part I will 
never entertain such an opinion of you, unless you 
should verify their words, by wilfully falling into 
the pit they have prepared for you. I flatter myself 
you will convince them of their error by showing the 
world you are capable of judging what is right and 
left, and have resolution to pursue it. 

All I ask is that you will judge for yourselves. I 

52 Alexander Hamilton 

don't desire you to take my opinion, nor any man's 
opinion, as the guide of your actions. I have stated 
a number of plain arguments. I have supported 
them with several well-known facts. It is your busi 
ness to draw a conclusion, and act accordingly. I 
caution you, again and again, to beware of the men 
who advise you to forsake the plain path marked out 
for you by the Congress. They only mean to deceive 
and betray you. Our representatives in General 
Assembly cannot take any wiser or better course to 
settle our differences than our representatives in the 
Continental Congress have taken. If you join with 
the rest of America in the same common measure, 
you will be sure to preserve your liberties inviolate, 
but if you separate from them, and seek for redress 
alone, and unseconded, you will certainly fall a prey 
to your enemies, and repent your folly as long as you 
live. 

May God give you wisdom to see what is your true 
interest, and inspire you with becoming zeal for the 
cause of virtue and mankind! 

THE FARMER REFUTED; 

OR, 

A more comprehensive and impartial View of the 
Disputes between Great Britain and the Colonies. 
Intended as a further Vindication of the Con 
gress, in answer to a Letter from a Westchester 
Farmer, entitled a View of the Controversy be 
tween Great Britain and her Colonies, including 
a Mode of determining the present Disputes, 
finally and effectually, etc. By a sincere friend 
to America. Tituli remedia pollicentur, sed 
pyxides ipsae venena continent — The title prom 
ises remedies, but the box itself poisons. Printed 
by James Rivington, 1775. 
ADVERTISEMENT. 

The writer of the ensuing sheets can, with truth, say more than the 
generality of those who either espouse or oppose the claim of the 
BRITISH PARLIAMENT; which is, that his political opinions have been 
the result of mature deliberation and rational inquiry. They have 
not been influenced by prejudice, nor by any interested or ambitious 
motives. They are not the spawn of licentious clamors, or popular 
declamation ; but the genuine offspring of sober reason. To those who 
are inclined to doubt his sincerity, he begs leave to recommend a little 
more charity. To those who are possessed of greater candor, and 
who yet may be disposed to ask how he can be sure that his opinions 
have not been influenced by prejudice, he answers, Because he remem 
bers the time when he had strong prejudices on the side he now opposes. 
His change of sentiment (he firmly believes) proceeded from the 
superior force of the arguments in favor of the American claims. 

Though he is convinced there are too many whose judgments are led 
captive by the most venal and despicable motives, yet he does not 
presume to think every man who differs from him either fool or 
knave. He is sensible there are men of parts and virtue, whose notions 
are entirely contrary to his. To imagine there are not wise and good 
men on both sides must be the effect of a weak head or a corrupt 
heart. He earnestly entreats the candid attention of the judicious 
and well meaning, and hopes that what he has written may be read 
with as much impartiality and as sincere a regard to truth as the 
importance of the controversy demands. 

THE FARMER REFUTED. 

FEBRUARY 5, 1775. 

SIR: — I resume my pen, in reply to the curious 
epistle you have been pleased to favor me with, and 
can assure you that notwithstanding I am naturally 
of a grave and phlegmatic disposition, it has been the 
source of abundant merriment to me. The spirit 
that breathes throughout is so rancorous, illiberal, 
and imperious; the argumentative part of it is so 
puerile and fallacious; the misrepresentation of facts 
so palpable and flagrant; the criticisms so illiterate, 
trifling, and absurd; the conceits so low, sterile, and 
splenetic, that I will venture to pronounce it one of 
the most ludicrous performances which has been 
exhibited to public view during all the present 
controversy. 

You have not even imposed on me the laborious 
task of pursuing you through a labyrinth of subtilty. 
You have not had ability sufficient, however violent 
your efforts, to try the depths of sophistry; but have 
barely skimmed along its surface. I should almost 
deem the animadversions I am going to make un 
necessary, were it not that without them you might 
exult in a fancied victory, and arrogate to yourself 
imaginary trophies. 
56 Alexander Hamilton 

But while I pass this judgment, it is not my inten 
tion to detract from your real merit. Candor obliges 
me to acknowledge that you possess every accom 
plishment of a polemical writer which may serve to 
dazzle and mislead superficial and vulgar minds: a 
peremptory, dictatorial air, a pert vivacity of ex 
pression, an inordinate passion for conceit, and a 
noble disdain of being fettered by the laws of truth. 
These, sir, are important qualifications; and these 
all unite in you in a very eminent degree. So that 
though you may never expect the plaudits of the 
judicious and discerning, you may console yourself 
with this assurance, that 

"Fools and witlings 'will' ev'ry sentence raise,1 
And wonder, with a foolish face of praise." 

You will, no doubt, be pleased with this further 
concession — to wit: that there is a striking resem 
blance between yourself and the renowned hero of 
the Dunciad. "Pert dulness" seems to be the chief 
characteristic of your genius as well as his. I might 
point out a variety of circumstances in which you 
both agree; but I shall content myself with having 
given the hint, and leave it to yourself and to your 

1 The false metre would indicate that Hamilton was quoting from 
memory, and quoting incorrectly. The lines he had in mind are from 
the famous passage about Addison in Pope's epistle to Arbuthnot, and 
read correctly as follows : 

" While wits and templars every sentence raise, 
And wonder with a foolish face of praise." 

If his idea was to modify the lines so as to make them more applica 
ble, he ought to have made it "Witlings and fools," etc. 

The Farmer Refuted 57 

other I admirers, to prosecute a comparison, which 
will reflect so high lustre on the object of admiration. 

Having thus briefly delivered my sentiments of 
your performance in general, I shall proceed to a 
particular examination of it, so far as may be requisite 
toward placing it in that just point of light in which 
it ought to stand. I flatter myself I shall find no 
difficulty in obviating the objections you have pro 
duced against the Full Vindication, and in showing 
that your View of the Controversy between Great 
Britain and the Colonies is not only partial and un 
just, but diametrically opposite to the first princi 
ples of civil society. In doing this I may occasionally 
interweave some strictures on the Congress Can 
vassed. 

First, then, I observe you endeavor to bring the 
imputation of inconsistency upon me, for writing " a 
long and elaborate pamphlet to justify decisions, 
against whose influence none but impotent attempts 
had been made." A little attention would have un 
folded the whole mystery. The reason assigned for 
what I did was, "lest those attempts," impotent as 
they were, in a general sense, "might yet have a 
tendency to mislead and prejudice the minds of a 
few." To prevent this, I wrote; and if I have been 
instrumental in preserving a single person from the 
baneful effects of your insidious efforts, I shall not 
regret the time I have devoted to that laudable 
purpose. To confirm or to add one friend to his 
country, would afford a more refined and permanent 

1 If we may judge from the style and turn of thought, you were 
pleased to be your own admirer in the card in reply. 

58 Alexander Hamilton 

satisfaction to me than could possibly animate the 
breast of the proudest ministerial minion, though 
elevated to the pinnacle of his wished-for preferment, 
and basking in the sunshine of court favor as the 
despicable wages of his prostitution and servility. 

You tell me : " I knew, that at the bar of impartial 
reason and common-sense the conduct of the Con 
gress must be condemned; but was too much inter 
ested, too deeply engaged in party views and party 
heats, to bear this with patience. / had no remedy 
(you say) but artifice, sophistry, misrepresentation, 
and abuse. ' ' These you call " my weapons, and these 
I wield like an old experienced practitioner.'* 

You ask: " Is this too heavy a charge? Can you 
lay your hand upon your heart, and upon your honor 
plead not guilty ?" Yes, sir, I can do more. I can 
make a solemn appeal to the tribunal of Heaven for 
the rectitude of my intentions. I can affirm, with 
the most scrupulous regard to truth, that I am of 
opinion the conduct of the Congress will bear the 
most impartial scrutiny; that I am not interested 
more than as the felicity and prosperity of this vast 
continent are concerned ; and that I am perfectly dis 
engaged from party of every kind. 

Here, I expect you will exclaim, with your usual 
vehemence and indecency: "You are now espousing 
the cause of a, party! It is the most daring impu 
dence and falsehood to assert the contrary! " I can 
by no means conceive, that an opposition to a small 
herd of malcontents, among whom you have thought 
proper to rank, and a zealous attachment to the gen 
eral measures of America, can be denominated the 

The Farmer Refuted 59 

effect of a party spirit. You, sir, and your adherents 
may be justly deemed a faction, because you compose 
a small number inimical to the common voice of your 
country. To determine the truth of this affirmation, 
it is necessary to take a comprehensive view of all 
the colonies. 

Throughout your letter, you seem to consider me as 
a person who has acted, and is still acting, some part 
in the formation and execution of public measures. 
You tacitly represent me as a Delegate, or member 
of the Committee. Whether this be done with a de 
sign to create a suspicion of my sincerity, or whether 
it be really your opinion, I know not. Perhaps it is 
from a complex motive. But I can assure you, if 
you are in earnest, that you are entirely mistaken. 
I have taken no other part in the affair than that of 
defending the proceedings of the Congress, in con 
versation, and by the pamphlet I lately published. 
I approved of them, and thought an undeviating com 
pliance with them essential to the preservation of 
American freedom. I shall therefore strenuously 
exert myself for the promotion of that valuable end. 

In the field of literary contention, it is common to 
see the epithets artifice, sophistry, misrepresentation, 
and abuse, mutually bandied about. Whether they 
are more justly applicable to you, or to me, the public 
must decide. With respect to abuse, I make not the 
least doubt but every reader will allow you to surpass 
me in that. 

Your envenomed pen has endeavored to sully the 
characters of our continental representatives with the 
presumptuous charges of ignorance, knavery, sedition, 

60 Alexander Hamilton 

rebellion, treason, and tyranny — a tremendous 
catalogue indeed! Nor have you treated their 
friends and adherents with any greater degree of 
complaisance. You have also delineated the mer 
cantile body as entirely devoid of principle ; and the 
several committees, as bands of robbers and petty 
tyrants. In short, except the few who are of your 
own complexion and stamp, " the virtuous friends of 
order and good government,'' you have not hesitated 
to exercise your obloquy and malevolence against the 
whole continent. 

These things being considered, it is manifest, that 
in my answer to your Free Thoughts I treated you 
with more lenity than you had a right to expect; and 
did by no means observe the strict law of retaliation. 
None but yourself will think you can, with the least 
propriety, complain of abuse. 

I congratulate myself upon the sentiments you en 
tertain of my last performance. Such is my opinion 
of your abilities as a critic, that I very much prefer 
your disapprobation to your applause. But with re 
spect to the brilliancy of thought you speak of, give 
me leave to inform you, that I aimed at nothing more 
than justness of thought. I addressed myself to the 
judgment, not to the imagination. In works where 
fancy is predominant, as is the case with yours, there 
is a better opportunity for displaying brilliancy of 
thought than where reason presides and directs. No 
wonder, then, if you have excelled me in this par 
ticular, since your plan is so much more favorable to 
it than mine. 

I shall, for the present, pass over that part of your 

The Farmer Refuted 61 

pamphlet in which you endeavor to establish the 
supremacy of the British Parliament over America. 
After a proper edaircissement of this point, I shall 
draw such inferences as will sap the foundation of 
everything you have offered. 

The first thing that presents itself is a wish, that 
" I had, explicitly, declared to the public my ideas of 
the natural rights of mankind. Man, in a state of 
nature (you say), may be considered as perfectly free 
from all restraint of law and government; and then, 
the weak must submit to the strong." 

I shall, henceforth, begin to make some allowance 
for that enmity you have discovered to the natural 
rights of mankind. For, though ignorance of them, 
in this enlightened age, cannot be admitted as a suf 
ficient excuse for you, yet it ought, in some measure, 
to extenuate your guilt. If you will follow my ad 
vice, there still may be hopes of your reformation. 
Apply yourself, without delay, to the study of the 
law of nature. I would recommend to your perusal, 
Grotius, Puffendorf , Locke, Montesquieu, and Burle- 
maqui. I might mention other excellent writers on 
this subject; but if you attend diligently to these, 
you will not require any others. 

There is so strong a similitude between your politi 
cal principles and those maintained by Mr. Hobbes, 
that, in judging from them, a person might very 
easily mistake you for a disciple of his. His opinion 
was exactly coincident with yours, relative to man in 
a state of nature. He held, as you do, that he was 
then perfectly free from all restraint of law and 
government. Moral obligation, according to him, is 

62 Alexander Hamilton 

derived from the introduction of civil society; and 
there is no virtue but what is purely artificial, the 
mere contrivance of politicians for the maintenance 
of social intercourse. But the reason he ran into 
this absurd and impious doctrine was, that he dis 
believed the existence of an intelligent, superintend 
ing principle, who is the governor, and will be the 
final judge, of the universe. 

As you sometimes swear by Him that made you, I 
conclude your sentiments do not correspond with his 
in that which is the basis of the doctrine you both 
agree in; and this makes it impossible to imagine 
whence this congruity between you arises. To grant 
that there is a Supreme Intelligence who rules the 
world and has established laws to regulate the actions 
of His creatures, and still to assert that man, in a 
state of nature, may be considered as perfectly free 
from all restraints of law and government, appears, to 
a common understanding, altogether irreconcilable. 

Good and wise men, in all ages, have embraced a 
very dissimilar theory. They have supposed that 
the Deity, from the relations we stand in to Himself 
and to each other, has constituted an eternal and 
immutable law, which is indispensably obligatory 
upon all mankind, prior to any human institution 
whatever. 

This is what is called the law of nature, " which, 
being coeval with mankind, and dictated by God 
himself, is, of course, superior in obligations to any 
other. It is binding over all the globe, in all coun 
tries, and at all times. No human laws are of any 
validity, if contrary to this; and such of them as are 

The Farmer Refuted 63 

valid derive all their authority, mediately or im 
mediately, from this original." — BLACKSTONE. 

Upon this law depend the natural rights of man 
kind : the Supreme Being gave existence to man, to 
gether with the means of preserving and beautifying 
that existence. He endowed him with rational fac 
ulties, by the help of which to discern and pursue 
such things as were consistent with his duty and in 
terest; and invested him with an inviolable right to 
personal liberty and personal safety. 

Hence, in a state of nature, no man had any moral 
power to deprive another of his life, limbs, property, 
or liberty; nor the least authority to command or 
exact obedience from him, except that which arose 
from the ties of consanguinity. 

Hence, also, the origin of all civil government, 
justly established, must be a voluntary compact be 
tween the rulers and the ruled, and must be liable to 
such limitations as are necessary for the security of 
the absolute rights of the latter; for what original 
title can any man, or set of men, have to govern 
others, except their own consent? To usurp domin 
ion over a people in their own despite, or to grasp at 
a more extensive power than they are willing to in 
trust, is to violate that law of nature which gives 
every man a right to his personal liberty, and can 
therefore confer no obligation to obedience. 

"The principal aim of society is to protect indi 
viduals in the enjoyment of those absolute rights 
which were vested in them by the immutable laws of 
nature, but which could not be preserved in peace 
without that mutual assistance and intercourse which 

64 Alexander Hamilton 

is gained by the institution of friendly and social 
communities. Hence it follows, that the first and 
primary end of human laws is to maintain and regu 
late these absolute rights of individuals. " — BLACK- 
STONE. 

If we examine the pretensions of Parliament by 
this criterion, which is evidently a good one, we 
shall presently detect their injustice. First, they are 
subversive of our natural liberty, because an au 
thority is assumed over us which we by no means 
assent to. And, secondly, they divest us of that 
moral security for our lives and properties, which 
we are entitled to, and which it is the primary end 
of society to bestow. For such security can never 
exist while we have no part in making the laws that 
are to bind us, and while it may be the interest of our 
uncontrolled legislators to oppress us as much as 
possible. 

To deny these principles will be not less absurd 
than to deny the plainest axioms. I shall not, there 
fore, attempt any further illustration of them. 

You say: "When I assert that since Americans 
have not, by any act of theirs, empowered the British 
Parliament to make laws for them, it follows they can 
have no just authority to do it, I advance a position 
subversive of that dependence which all colonies 
must, from their very nature, have on the mother 
country. " The premises from which I drew this con 
clusion are indisputable. You have not detected any 
fallacy in them, but endeavor to overthrow them by 
deducing a false and imaginary consequence. My 
principles admit the only dependence which can sub- 

The Farmer Refuted 65 

sist, consistent with any idea of civil liberty, or with 
the future welfare of the British empire, as will appear 
hereafter. 

"The dependence of the colonies on the mother 
country," you assert, "has ever been acknowledged. 
It is an impropriety of speech to talk of an independ 
ent colony. The words independent and colony 
convey contradictory ideas; much like killing and 
sparing.1 As soon as a colony becomes independent 
on the parent state it ceases to be any longer a 
colony, just as when you kill a sheep you cease to 
spare him." 

In what sense the dependence of the colonies on 
the mother country has been acknowledged, will ap 
pear from those circumstances of their political his 
tory which I shall, by and by, recite. The term 
colony signifies nothing more than a body of people 
drawn from the mother country to inhabit some dis 
tant place, or the country itself so inhabited. As to 
the degrees and modifications of that subordination 
which is due to the parent state, these must depend 
upon other things besides the mere act of emigration 
to inhabit or settle a distant country. These must 
be ascertained by the spirit of the constitution of the 
mother country, by the compacts for the purpose of 
colonizing, and more especially by the law of nature, 

1 I find, sir, you take a particular delight in persisting in absurdity. 
But if you are not totally incorrigible, the following interpretation of 
the unfortunate adverb will secure it from any future stripes. It is 
taken from Johnson's Dictionary : SPARINGLY, not abundantly, Bacon; 
2, frugally, parsimoniously; not lavishly, Hayward; with abstinence, 
Atterbury; cautiously, tenderly. Substitute frugally or not lavishly 
for sparingly, and you must blush at your own conceit. " Kill your 
sheep frugally or not lavishly." Where is the impropriety of this? 

VOL. I.— 5. 

66 Alexander Hamilton 

and that supreme law of every society — its own 
happiness. 

The idea of colony does not involve the idea of 
slavery. There is a wide difference between the de 
pendence of a free people and the submission of 
slaves. The former I allow, the latter I reject with 
disdain. Nor does the notion of a colony imply any 
subordination to our fellow-subjects in the parent 
state while there is one common sovereign estab 
lished. The dependence of the colonies on Great 
Britain is an ambiguous and equivocal phrase. It 
may either mean dependence on the people of Great 
Britain or on the king. In the former sense, it is 
absurd and unaccountable; in the latter, it is just 
and rational. No person will affirm that a French 
colony is independent on the parent state, though it 
acknowledge the king of France as rightful sovereign. 
Nor can it with any greater propriety be said that an 
English colony is independent while it bears alle 
giance to the king of Great Britain. The difference 
between their dependence is only that which dis 
tinguishes civil liberty from slavery, and results 
from the different genius of the French and English 
constitutions. 

But you deny that " we can be liege subjects to the 
king of Great Britain while we disavow the authority 
of Parliament." You endeavor to prove it thus1: 
" The king of Great Britain was placed on the throne 
by virtue of an Act of Parliament, and he is king of 
America by virtue of being king of Great Britain. 
He is therefore king of America by Act of Parlia- 

1 Vide "Congress Canvassed." 

The Farmer Refuted 67 

ment; and if we disclaim that authority of Parlia 
ment which made him our king, we, in fact, reject him 
from being our king, for we disclaim that authority 
by which he is king at all." 

Admitting that the king of Great Britain was en 
throned by virtue of an Act of Parliament, and that 
he is king of America because he is king of Great 
Britain, yet the Act of Parliament is not the efficient 
cause of his being the king of America. It is only the 
occasion of it. He is king of America by virtue of a 
compact between us and the kings of Great Britain. 
These colonies were planted and settled by the grants, 
and under the protection, of English kings, who en 
tered into covenants with us, for themselves, their 
heirs, and successors; and it is from these covenants 
that the duty of protection on their part, and the 
duty of allegiance on ours, arise. 

So that to disclaim the authority of a British Par 
liament over us does by no means imply the derelic 
tion of our allegiance to British monarchs. Our 
compact takes no cognizance of the manner of their 
accession to the throne. It is sufficient for us that 
they are kings of England. 

The most valid reasons can be assigned for our 
allegiance to the king of Great Britain, but not one 
of the least force or plausibility for our subjection to 
parliamentary decrees. 

We hold our lands in America by virtue of charters 
from British monarchs, and are under no obligations 
to the Lords or Commons for them. Our title is 
similar, and equal, to that by which they possess 
their lands ; and the king is the legal fountain of both. 

68 Alexander Hamilton 

This is one grand source of our obligation to alle 
giance. 

Another, and the principal source, is that protec 
tion which we have hitherto enjoyed from the kings 
of Great Britain. Nothing is more common than to 
hear the votaries of Parliament urge the protection 
we have received from the mother country as an argu 
ment for submission to its claims. But they enter 
tain erroneous conceptions of the matter. The king 
himself, being the supreme executive magistrate, is 
regarded by the constitution as the supreme protector 
of the empire. For this purpose he is the general 
issimo, or first in military command. In him is 
vested the power of making war and peace, of rais 
ing armies, equipping fleets, and directing all their 
motions. He it is that has defended us from our 
enemies, and to him alone we are obliged to render 
allegiance and submission. 

The law of nature, and the British constitution, 
both confine allegiance to the person of the king, and 
found it upon the principle of protection. We may 
see the subject discussed at large in the case of Calvin. 
The definition given of it by the learned Coke is this : 
"Legiance is the mutual bond and obligation be 
tween the king and his subjects; whereby subjects 
are called his liege subjects, because they are bound 
to obey and serve him; and he is called their liege 
lord, because he is bound to maintain and defend 
them." Hence it is evident, that while we enjoy 
the protection of the king it is incumbent upon us to 
obey and serve him, without the interposition of 
parliamentary supremacy. 

The Farmer Refuted 69 

The right of Parliament to legislate for us cannot be 
accounted for upon any reasonable grounds. The 
constitution of Great Britain is very properly called 
a limited monarchy; the people having reserved to 
themselves a share in the legislature, as a check 
upon the regal authority, to prevent its degenerating 
into despotism and tyranny. The very aim and in 
tention of the democratical part, or the House of 
Commons, is to secure the rights of the people. Its 
very being depends upon those rights. Its whole 
power is derived from them, and must be terminated 
by them. 

It is the unalienable birthright of every English 
man, who can be considered as a free agent, to par 
ticipate in framing the laws which are to bind him, 
either as to his life or property. But as many in 
conveniences would result from the exercise of this 
right in person, it is appointed by the constitution 
that he shall delegate it to another. Hence he is to 
give his vote in the election of some person he chooses 
to confide in as his representative. This right no 
power on earth can divest him of. It was enjoyed by 
his ancestors time immemorial, recognized and es 
tablished by Magna Charta, and is essential to the 
existence of the constitution. Abolish this privilege, 
and the House of Commons is annihilated. 

But what was the use and design of this privilege? 
To secure his life and property from the attacks of 
exorbitant power. And in what manner is this done ? 
By giving him the election of those who are to have 
the disposal and regulation of them, and whose in 
terest is in every respect connected with his. 

70 Alexander Hamilton 

The representative, in this case, is bound, by every 
possible tie, to consult the advantage of his constitu 
ents. Gratitude for the high and honorable trust 
reposed in him demands a return of attention and 
regard to the advancement of their happiness. Self- 
interest, that most powerful incentive of human 
actions, points and attracts toward the same object. 

The duration of his trust is not perpetual, but 
must expire in a few years, and if he is desirous of the 
future favor of his constituents, he must not abuse 
the present instance of it, but must pursue the end 
for which he enjoys it, otherwise he forfeits it and 
defeats his own purpose. Besides, if he consent to 
any laws hurtful to his constituents, he is bound by 
the same, and must partake the disadvantage of 
them. His friends, relations, children, all whose 
ease and comfort are dear to him, will be in a like 
predicament. And should he concur in any flagrant 
acts of injustice or oppression, he will be within the 
reach of popular vengeance; and this will restrain 
him within due bounds. 

To crown the whole, at the expiration of a few 
years, if their representatives have abused their trust, 
the people have it in their power to change them, 
and to elect others who may be more faithful and 
more attached to their interest. 

These securities, the most powerful that human 
affairs will admit of, have the people of Britain for 
the good deportment of their representatives to 
ward them. They may have proved, at some times, 
and on some occasions, defective; but, upon the 
whole, they have been found sufficient. 

The Farmer Refuted 71 

When we ascribe to the British House of Com 
mons a jurisdiction over the colonies, the scene is 
entirely reversed. All these kinds of security im 
mediately disappear; no ties of gratitude or interest 
remain. Interest, indeed, may operate to our pre 
judice. To oppress us may serve as a recommenda 
tion to their constituents, as well as an alleviation of 
their own incumbrances. The British patriots may, 
in time, be heard to court the gale of popular favor 
by boasting their exploits in laying some new im 
positions on their American vassals, and by that 
means lessening the burthens of their friends and 
f ello w-sub j ects . 

But what merits still more serious attention is 
this: there seems to be already a jealousy of our 
dawning splendor. It is looked upon as portentous 
of approaching independence. This, we have reason 
to believe, is one of the principal incitements to the 
present rigorous and unconstitutional proceedings 
against us. And though it may have chiefly origin 
ated in the calumnies of designing men, yet it does 
not entirely depend upon adventitious or partial 
causes, but is also founded in the circumstances of 
our country and situation. The boundless extent 
of territory we possess, the wholesome temperament 
of our climate, the luxuriance and fertility of our 
soil, the variety of our products, the rapidity of the 
growth of our population, the industry of our 
countrymen, and the commodiousness of our ports, 
naturally lead to a suspicion of independence, and 
would always have an influence pernicious to us. 
Jealousy is a predominant passion of human nature, 

72 Alexander Hamilton 

and is a source of the greatest evils. Whenever it 
takes place between rulers and their subjects, it 
proves the bane of civil sooiety . 

The experience of past ages may inform us, that 
when the circumstances of a people render them dis 
tressed their rulers generally recur to severe, cruel, 
and oppressive measures. Instead of endeavoring to 
establish their authority in the affection of their sub 
jects, they think they have no security but in their 
jear. They do not aim at gaining their fidelity 
and obedience by making them flourishing, prosper 
ous, and happy, but by rendering them abject and 
dispirited. They think it necessary to intimidate 
and awe them to make every accession to their own 
power, and to impair the people's as much as possible. 

One great engine to affect this in America would 
be a large standing army, maintained out of our own 
pockets, to be at the devotion of our oppressors. 
This would be introduced under pretext of defending 
us, but, in fact, to make our bondage and misery 
complete. 

We might soon expect the martial law, universally 
prevalent to the abolition of trials by juries, the 
Habeas Corpus act, and every other bulwark of per 
sonal safety, in order to overawe the honest assertors 
of their country's cause. A numerous train of court 
dependents would be created and supported at our 
expense. The value of all our possessions, by a 
complication of extorsive measures, would be grad 
ually depreciated till it became a mere shadow. 

This will be called too high-wrought a picture, 
a phantom of my own deluded imagination. The 

The Farmer Refuted 73 

highest eulogies will be lavished on the wisdom and 
justice of the British nation. But deplorable is the 
condition of that people who have nothing else than 
the wisdom and justice of another to depend upon. 

"Political writers," says a celebrated author,1 
** have established it as a maxim, that, in contriving 
any system of government, and fixing the several 
checks and controls of the constitution, every man 
ought to be supposed a knave, and to have no other 
end, in all his actions, but private interest. By this 
interest we must govern him, and by means of it 
make him co-operate to public good, notwithstanding 
his insatiable avarice and ambition. Without this 
we shall in vain boast of the advantages of any 
constitution, and shall find, in the end, that we have 
no security for our liberties, and possessions except 
the good-will of our rulers — that is, we should have 
no security at all. 

" It is therefore a just political maxfm, that every 
man must be supposed a knave. Though, at the same 
time, it appears somewhat strange, that a maxim 
should be true in politics which is false in fact. But 
to satisfy us on this head, we may consider that men 
are generally more honest in a private than in a 
public capacity, and will go greater lengths to serve 
a party than when their own private interest is alone 
concerned. Honor is a great check upon mankind. 
But where a considerable body of men act together, 
this check is in a great measure removed, since a 
man is sure to be approved by his own party for 
what promotes the common interest, and he soon 

« Hume, vol. 1., essay V. 

74 Alexander Hamilton , 

learns to despise the clamors of adversaries. To 
this we may add, that every court or senate, is de 
termined by the greater number of voices ; so that, 
if self-interest influences only the majority (as it will 
always do), the whole senate follows the allurements 
of this separate interest, and acts as if it contained 
not one member who had any regard to public inter 
est and liberty." What additional force do these 
observations acquire when applied to the dominion 
of one community over another! 

From what has been said, it is plain that we are 
without those checks upon the representatives of 
Great Britain which alone can make them answer 
the end of their appointment with respect to us— 
which is the preservation of the rights and the ad 
vancement of the happiness of the governed. The 
direct and inevitable consequence is, they have no 
right to govern us. 

Let us examine it in another light. The House of 
Commons receives all its authority from its electors, 
in consequence of the right they have to a share in 
the legislature. Its electors are freeholders, citizens, 
and others, in Great Britain. It follows, therefore, 
that all its authority is confined to Great Britain. 
This is demonstrative. Sophistry, by an artful play 
of ambiguous terms, may perplex and obscure it, but 
reason can never confute it. The power which one 
society bestows upon any man, or body of men, can 
never extend beyond its own limits. The people of 
Great Britain may confer an authority over them 
selves, but they can never confer any over the people 
of America, because it is impossible for them to give 

The Farmer Refuted 75 

that to another which they never possessed them 
selves. Now I should be glad to see an attempt to 
prove that a freeholder, citizen, or any other man in 
Great Britain, has any inherent right to the life, 
property, or liberty, of a freeholder, citizen, or any 
other man in America. He can have no original 
and intrinsic right, because nature has distributed 
an equality of rights to every man. He can have no 
secondary or derivative right, because the only thing 
which could give him that is wanting — the consent 
of the natural proprietor. It is incumbent upon 
you to demonstrate the existence of such a right, or 
anything else you may produce will be of little avail. 
I do not expect you will be discouraged at the ap 
parent difficulty. It is the peculiar province of an 
enterprising genius to surmount the greatest obsta 
cles, and you have discovered an admirable dexterity 
in this way. You have put to flight some of my best 
arguments, with no greater pains than a few posi 
tive assertions and as many paltry witticisms; and 
you become altogether irresistible by adding, with a 
proper degree of confidence, You know the case to be 
as I state it. 

When I say that the authority of Parliament is 
confined to Great Britain, I speak of it in its primi 
tive and original state. Parliament may acquire an 
incidental influence over others, but this must be by 
their own free consent; for, without this, any power 
it might exercise would be mere usurpation, and by 
no means a just authority. 

The best way of determining disputes and of in 
vestigating truth, is by descending to elementary 

76 Alexander Hamilton 

principles. Any other method may only bewilder 
and misguide the understanding, but this will lead to 
a convincing and satisfactory crisis. By observing 
this method, we shall learn the following truths : — 

That the existence of the House of Commons de 
pends upon the people's right to a share in the legisla 
ture, which is exercised by means of electing the 
members of that House. That the end and intention 
of this right is to preserve the life, property, and 
liberty of the subject from the encroachments of 
oppression and tyranny. 

That this end is accomplished by means of the inti 
mate connection of interest between those members 
and their constituents, the people of Great Britain. 

That with respect to the people of America there is 
no such intimate connection of interest, but the con 
trary, and therefore that end could not be answered 
to them; consequently, the end ceasing, the means 
must cease also. 

The House of Commons derives all its power from 
its own real constituents, who are the people of Great 
Britain; and that, therefore, it has no power but 
what they originally had in themselves. 

That they had no original right to the life, prop 
erty, or liberty of Americans, nor any acquired from 
their own consent, and of course could give no au 
thority over them. 

That therefore the House of Commons has no such 
authority. 

What need is there of a multiplicity of arguments 
or a long chain of reasoning to inculcate these lumi 
nous principles? They speak the plainest language 

The Farmer Refuted 77 

to every man of common-sense, and must carry con 
viction where the mental eye is not bedimmed by 
the mist of prejudice, partiality, ambition, or avarice. 
Let us now see what has been offered in opposition to 
them. 

But, by the way, let me remark, that I have 
levelled my battery chiefly against the authority of 
the House of Commons over America, because if that 
be proved not to exist, the dispute is at an end. The 
efficacy of Acts of Parliament depends upon the 
due authority of the respective branches to bind 
the different orders and ranks of the nation. 

It is said that "in every government there must 
be a supreme absolute authority lodged somewhere. 
In arbitrary governments, this power is in the mon 
arch; in aristocratical governments, the nobles; in 
democratical, in the people, or the deputies of their 
electing. Our own government being a mixture of 
all these kinds, the supreme authority is vested in 
the king, nobles, and people — i. e., the King, House 
of Lords, and House of Commons elected by the people. 
The supreme authority extends as far as the British 
dominions extend. To suppose a part of the British 
dominions which is not subject to the power of the 
British legislature, is no better sense than to suppose 
a country, at one and the same time to be, and not to 
be, a part of the British dominions. If, therefore, 
the colony of New York is a part of the British do 
minions, the colony of New York is subject to, and 
dependent on, the supreme legislative authority of 
Great Britain/' 

This argument is the most specious of any the 

78 Alexander Hamilton 

advocates for parliamentary supremacy are able to 
produce ; but when we come to anatomize and closely 
examine, every part of it, we shall discover that it is 
entirely composed of distorted and misapplied prin 
ciples, together with ambiguous and equivocal terms. 
The first branch is: That "in every government, 
there must be a supreme, absolute authority lodged 
somewhere." This position, when properly ex 
plained, is evidently just. In every civil society 
there must be a supreme power to which all the 
members of that society are subject, for otherwise 
there could be no supremacy or subordination — that 
is, no government at all. But no use can be made 
of this principle beyond matter of fact. To infer 
from thence, that unless a supreme, absolute au 
thority be vested in one part of an empire over all 
the other parts there can be no government in the 
whole, is false and absurd. Each branch may enjoy 
a distinct, complete legislature, and still good govern 
ment may be preserved everywhere. It is in vain 
to assert that two or more distinct legislatures cannot 
exist in the same state. If by the same state, be 
meant the same individual community, it is true. 
Thus, for instance, there cannot be two supreme 
legislatures in Great Britain, nor two in New York. 
But if by the same state be understood a number of 
individual societies or bodies politic united under 
one common head, then I maintain that there may 
be one distinct, complete legislature in each. Thus 
there may be one in Great Britain, another in Ire 
land, and another in New York; and still these 
several parts may form but one state. In order to 

The Farmer Refuted 79 

do this there must indeed be some connecting, per 
vading principle; but this is found in the person 
and prerogative of the king. He it is that conjoins 
all these individual societies into one great body 
politic. He it is that is to preserve their mutual 
connection and dependence, and make them all co 
operate to one common end — the general good. His 
power is equal to the purpose, and his interest binds 
him to the due prosecution of it. 

Those who aver that the independency of America 
on the British Parliament implies two sovereign au 
thorities in the same state, deceive themselves, or 
wish to deceive others, in two ways : by confounding 
the idea of the same state with that of the same in 
dividual society; and by losing sight of that share 
which the king has in the sovereignty, both of Great 
Britain and America. Perhaps, indeed, it may with 
propriety be said that the king is the only sovereign 
of the empire. The part which the people have in 
the legislature may more justly be considered as a 
limitation of the sovereign authority, to prevent its 
being exercised in an oppressive and despotic manner. 
Monarchy is universally allowed to predominate in 
the constitution. In this view, there is not the least 
absurdity in the supposition, that Americans have a 
right to a limitation similar to that of the people of 
Great Britain. At any rate, there can never be said 
to be two sovereign powers in the same state, while 
one common king is acknowledged by every member 
of it. 

Let us, for a moment, imagine the legislature of 
New York independent on that of Great Britain. 

8o Alexander Hamilton 

Where would be the mighty inconvenience? How 
would government be frustrated or obstructed by 
this means? In what manner would they interfere 
with each other ? In none that I can perceive. The 
affairs of government might be conducted with the 
greatest harmony, and by the mediation of the king 
directed to the same end. He (as I before observed) 
will be the great connecting principle. The several 
parts of the empire, though otherwise independent on 
each other, will all be dependent on him. He must 
guide the vast and complicated machine of govern 
ment, to the reciprocal advantage of all his domin 
ions. There is not the least contradiction in this; no 
imperium in imperio, as is maintained : for the power 
of every distinct branch will be limited to itself, and 
the authority of his Majesty over the whole will, like 
a central force, attract them all to the same point. 

The second part of your paragraph is this: " In ar 
bitrary governments this (supreme absolute) power 
is in the monarch; in aristocratical governments, in 
the nobles; in democratical, in the people, or the 
deputies of their electing. Our own government, 
being a mixture of all these kinds, the supreme au 
thority is vested in the king, nobles, and people — 
that is, in the King, House of Lords, and House of 
Commons elected by the people. " 

You are mistaken when you confine arbitrary gov 
ernment to a monarchy. It is not the supreme 
power being placed in one, instead of many, that 
discriminates an arbitrary from a free government. 
When any people are ruled by laws, in framing which 
they have no part, that are to bind them, to all in- 

The Farmer Refuted 81 

tents and purposes, without, in the same manner, 
binding the legislators themselves, they are, in the 
strictest sense, slaves; and the government, with 
respect to them, is despotic. Great Britain is itself 
a free country, but it is only so because its inhabi 
tants have a share in the legislature. If they were 
once divested of that they would cease to be free. So 
that, if its jurisdiction be extended over other coun 
tries that have no actual share in its legislature, it 
becomes arbitrary to them, because they are destitute 
of those checks and controls which constitute that 
moral security which is the very essence of civil 
liberty. 

I will go farther and assert that the authority of the 
British Parliament over America would, in all proba 
bility, be a more intolerable and excessive species of 
despotism than an absolute monarchy.1 The power 
of an absolute prince is not temporary, but perpetual. 
He is under no temptation to purchase the favor of 
one part of his dominions at the expense of another, 
but it is his interest to treat them all upon the same 

1 Mr Hume, in enumerating these political maxims, which will be 
eternally true, speaks thus: " It may easily be observed, that though 
free governments have been commonly the most happy, for those 
who partake of their freedom, yet are they most ruinoiis and oppressive 
to their provinces." He goes on to give many solid reasons for this; 
and, among other things, observes, that " a free state necessarily makes 
a great distinction (between herself and the provinces) , and must con 
tinue to do so, till men learn to love their neighbors as well as them 
selves." He confirms his reflections by many historical facts, and 
concludes them thus: "Compare the pais conquis of France with Ire 
land, and you will be convinced of this truth; though this latter king 
dom, being in a good measure peopled from England, possesses so 
many rights and privileges as should naturally make it challenge 
better treatment." 

VOL. I. — 6. 

82 Alexander Hamilton 

footing. Very different is the case with regard to the 
Parliament. The Lords and Commons, both, have a 
private and separate interest to pursue. They must 
be wonderfully disinterested, if they would not make 
us bear a very disproportional part of the public 
burthens, to avoid them as much as possible them 
selves. The people of Britain must, in reality, be an 
order of superior beings, not cast in the same mould 
with the common degenerate race of mortals, if the 
sacrifice of our interest and ease to theirs be not ex 
tremely welcome and alluring. But should experi 
ence teach us that they are only mere mortals, fonder 
of themselves than their neighbors, the philanthropy 
and integrity of their representatives will be of a 
transcendent and matchless nature, should they not 
gratify the natural propensities of their constituents, 
in order to ingratiate themselves and enhance their 
popularity. 

When you say that " our government being a mix 
ture of all these kinds, the supreme authority is vested 
in the king, nobles, and people— that is, the King, 
House of Lords, and House of Commons elected by the 
people " you speak unintelligibly. A person who had 
not read any more of your pamphlet than this pas 
sage, would have concluded you were speaking of 
our Governor, Council, and Assembly, whom, by a 
rhetorical figure, you styled " king, nobles, and peo 
ple." For how could it be imagined you would call 
any government our own, with this description, that 
it is vested in the king, nobles, and people, in which 
our own people have not the least share? If our own 
government be vested in the king, nobles, and people, 

The Farmer Refuted 83 

how comes it to pass that our own people have no part 
in it? The resolution of these questions will afford 
a proper field in which to display your ingenuity. 
You must endeavor to transmute the people of 
America into those of Great Britain, or your descrip 
tion will be considered as mere jargon by every man 
of sense. Perhaps you may be able, in imitation of 
that celebrated sophist Spinosa, to prove that they 
are only modally different, but substantially the same. 
Or, if you please, that syllogism of the schools, by 
which a man is proved a horse, may serve as an excel 
lent model. If I recollect right, it is in these words: 

Homo est animal; 
Equus est animal; 
Ergo, homo est equus, — 

which is rendered thus : A man is an animal; A horse 
is an animal; Therefore, a man is a horse. By the 
same method of argumentation, you may prove that, 
as Britons and Americans are generically the same, 
they are numerically so, likewise, as your description 
implies. You may form a syllogism thus: 

Britons are men; 

Americans are the same; 

Therefore, Britons and Americans are the same. 

This argument will be as good as the one I am next 
going to examine. 

" The supreme authority," you say, " extends as far 
as the British dominions extend. To suppose a part 
of the British dominions which is not subject to the 
power of the British legislature, is no better sense 
than to suppose a country at one and the same time 

84 Alexander Hamilton 

to be, and not to be, a part of the British dominions. 
If, therefore, the colony of New York be a part of the 
British dominions, the colony of New York is subject 
and dependent on the supreme legislative authority 
of Great Britain." 

By " this supreme authority," I suppose you mean 
the Parliament of Great Britain. I deny that it ex 
tends as far as the British dominions extend, and I 
have given many substantial reasons for this denial, 
whereas you have never offered any to prove that it 
does. You have begged the question, and taken that 
for granted which is the very point in debate. As to 
your general position, that there must be a supreme, 
absolute authority lodged somewhere, I have ex 
plained in what sense it ought to be understood, and 
shown that the several parts of the empire may each 
enjoy a separate, independent legislature with regard 
to each other, under one common head, the king. 

The seeming proof you have subjoined is entirely 
fallacious, and depends upon the use of the terms 
British dominions and British legislature in an equivo 
cal sense. The former may signify countries subject 
either to the king or to the legislature of Great Brit 
ain. When we say French dominions, we mean 
countries subject to the king of France. In like 
manner, when we say British dominions, the most 
proper signification is, countries subject to the king 
of Great Britain. At least there is no impropriety in 
using it in this sense.1 

1 Or, if there is, all your objection amounts to this: that we have 
adopted an improper mode of expression; and, for the future, we 
may, in the language of the honorable House of Assembly, call the 
colonies his Majesty's American dominions. 

The Farmer Refuted 85 

If by the British legislature you mean nothing 
more than the Parliament of Great Britain, it is well; 
but if you affix a different idea to it, you are not 
arbitrarily to impose it upon others. If there be any 
chimera in your fond imagination which you express 
by that term, you must allow others to think it such. 
In short, if by the term you mean an authority resi 
dent in one part of his Majesty's dominions to make 
laws for every other part of them, you ought not to 
apply it in this sense till you have proved that such 
an authority does really exist; especially in a con 
troversy about that very matter. 

By the British dominions I mean the countries sub 
ject to his Britannic Majesty, in his royal capacity. 
By the British legislature I will suppose you intend 
simply the Parliament of Great Britain. Let us now 
try whether " to suppose there may be a part of his 
Britannic Majesty's dominions which is not subject to 
the Parliament be no better sense than to suppose a 
country, at one and the same time to be, and not to 
be, a part of the British dominions. " It is impossible 
for any thing to be and not to be; but it involves no 
contradictions to say that a country may be in sub 
jection to his Britannic Majesty and, in that sense, 
a part of the British dominions, without being at all 
dependent on the Parliament of Great Britain.1 The 

1 I doubt not you will here be disposed to cavil, by urging that if we 
deny the authority of Parliament we also reject his Britannic Majesty, 
since he composes a part of it ; but let it be considered that the Parlia 
ment, as such, is a political institution, not a physical being. We may 
deny his Majesty, in his political capacity, as a part of the legislature of 
Great Britain, and yet acknowledge him in a similar political capacity, 
as a part of the legislature of New York. This is an obvious distinction, 
and cannot be contested without an affront to common-sense. 

86 Alexander Hamilton 

colony of New York, therefore, may be a branch of 
the British empire, though not subordinate to the 
legislative authority of Britain. 

Upon the whole, if by the British dominions you 
mean territories subject to the Parliament, you ad 
here to your usual fallacy, and suppose what you are 
bound to prove. I deny that we are dependent on 
the legislature of Great Britain ; and yet I maintain 
that we are a part of the British empire — but in this 
sense only, as being the freeborn subjects of his 
Britannic Majesty. 

Thus I have fully examined that argument, which 
is esteemed the bulwark of the doctrine of parlia 
mentary supremacy, and, I flatter myself, clearly re 
futed it. The main pillar being now broken down, 
the whole structure may easily be demolished. I 
shall, therefore, proceed with alacrity in the com 
pletion of the work. But it is worthy of observation 
that a cause must be extremely weak which admits 
of no better supports. 

Your next argument (if it deserve the name) is this : 
" Legislation is not an inherent right in the colonies ; 
many colonies have been established and subsisted 
long without it. The Roman colonies had no legisla 
tive authority. It was not till the latter period of 
their republic that the privileges of Roman citizens, 
among which that of voting in assemblies of the peo 
ple at Rome was the principal one, were extended to 
the inhabitants of Italy. All the laws of the empire 
were enacted at Rome. Neither their colonies nor 
conquered countries had any thing to do with 
legislation." 

The Farmer Refuted 87 

The fundamental source of all your errors, soph 
isms, and false reasonings, is a total ignorance of the 
natural rights of mankind. Were you once to become 
acquainted with these, you could never entertain a 
thought, that all men are not, by nature, entitled to a 
parity of privileges. You would be convinced that 
natural liberty is a gift of the beneficent Creator to 
the whole human race, and that civil liberty is 
founded in that, and cannot be wrested from any 
people without the most manifest violation of justice. 
Civil liberty is only natural liberty, modified and se 
cured by the sanctions of civil society. It is not a thing, 
in its own nature, precarious and dependent on hu 
man will and caprice, but it is conformable to the 
constitution of man, as well as necessary to the well- 
being of society. 

Upon this principle colonists, as well as other men, 
have a right to civil liberty. For if it be conducive to 
the happiness of society (and reason and experience 
testify that it is), it is evident that every society, of 
whatsoever kind, has an absolute and perfect right to 
it, which can never be withheld without cruelty and 
injustice. The practice x of Rome toward her colo 
nies cannot afford the shadow of an argument against 
this. That mistress of the world was often unjust. 
And the treatment of her dependent provinces is one 
of the greatest blemishes in her history. Through 
the want of that civil liberty for which we are so 

1 If her practice proves any thing, it equally proves that she had 
a right to plunder them as much as possible. This doctrine, I presume, 
will not be disagreeable to some ears. There are many who would re 
joice to see America plundered in a like manner, provided they could 
be appointed the instruments. 

88 Alexander Hamilton 

warmly contending, they groaned under every species 
of wanton oppression. If we are wise we shall take 
warning from thence, and consider a like state of de 
pendence as more to be dreaded than pestilence and 
famine. 

The right of colonists, therefore, to exercise a legis 
lative power, is an inherent right. It is founded 
upon the rights of all men to freedom and happiness. 
For civil liberty cannot possibly have any existence 
where the society for whom laws are made have no 
share in making them, and where the interest of their 
legislators is not inseparably interwoven with theirs. 
Before you asserted that the right of legislation was 
derived 4< from the indulgence or grant of the parent 
state," you should have proved two things: that all 
men have not a natural right to freedom; and that 
civil liberty is not advantageous to society. 

" The position, " you say, " that we are bound by no 
laws but those to w^hich we have assented, either by 
ourselves or by our representatives, is a novel posi 
tion, unsupported by any authoritative record of the 
British constitution, ancient or modern. It is re 
publican in its very nature, and tends to the utter 
subversion of the English monarchy. 

" This position has arisen from an artful change of 
terms. To say that an Englishman is not bound by 
any laws but those to which the representatives of the 
nation have given their consent, is to say what is 
true. But to say that an Englishman is bound by 
no laws but those to which he hath consented, in 
person, or by his representatives, is saying what 
never was true and never can be true. A great part 

The Farmer Refuted 89 

of the people have no vote in the choice of representa 
tives, and therefore are governed by laws to which 
they never consented, either by themselves or by 
their representatives. ' ' 

The foundation of the English constitution rests 
upon this principle: that no laws have any validity 
or binding force without the consent and approbation 
of the people, given in the persons of their representa 
tives, periodically elected by themselves. This con 
stitutes the democratical part of the government. 

It is also undeniably certain, that no Englishman 
who can be deemed a free agent in a political view can 
be bound by laws to which he has not consented, 
either in person or by his representative. Or, in 
other words, every Englishman (exclusive of the mer 
cantile and trading part of the nation) who possesses 
a freehold to the value of forty shillings per annum 
has a right to share in the legislature, which he exer 
cises by giving his vote in the election of some person 
he approves of as his representative. 

"The true reason," says Blackstone, "of requiring 
any qualification with regard to property in voters, is 
to exclude such persons as are in so mean a situation 
that they are esteemed to have no will of their own. 
If these persons had votes, they would be tempted to 
dispose of them under some undue influence or other. 
This would give a great, an artful, or a wealthy man a 
larger share in elections than is consistent with gen 
eral liberty. If it were probable that every man 
would give his vote freely and without influence of 
any kind, then, upon the true theory and genuine 
principles of liberty, every member of the community, 

90 Alexander Hamilton 

however poor, should have a vote in electing these 
delegates, to whose charge is committed the disposal 
of his property, his liberty, and his life. But since 
that can hardly be expected in persons of indigent 
fortunes, or such as are under the immediate do 
minion of others, all popular states have been obliged 
to establish certain qualifications, whereby some who 
are suspected to have no will of their own are ex 
cluded from voting, in order to set other individuals, 
whose wills may be supposed independent, more 
thoroughly upon a level with each other." 

Hence, it appears that such " of the people as have 
no vote in the choice of representatives, and there 
fore are governed by laws to which they have not 
consented, either by themselves or by their repre 
sentatives/' are only those " persons who are in so 
mean a situation that they are esteemed to have no 
will of their own. " Every free agent, every free man, 
possessing a freehold of forty shillings per annum, is, 
by the British constitution, entitled to a vote in the 
election of those who are invested with the disposal 
of his life, his liberty, and property. 

It is therefore evident, to a demonstration, that un 
less a free agent in America be permitted to enjoy the 
same privilege, we are entirely stripped of the benefits 
of the constitution, and precipitated into an abyss 
of slavery. For we are deprived of that immunity 
which is the grand pillar and support of freedom. 
And this cannot be done without a direct violation 
of the constitution, which decrees to every free agent 
a share in the legislature. 

It deserves to be remarked here, that those very 

The Farmer Refuted 91 

persons in Great Britain who are in so mean a situation 
as to be excluded from a part in elections, are in more 
eligible circumstances than they would be in who 
have every necessary qualification. 

They compose a part of that society to whose 
government they are subject. They are nourished 
and maintained by it, and partake in every other 
emolument for which they are qualified. They 
have, no doubt, most of them, relations and con 
nections among those who are privileged to vote and 
by that means are not entirely without influence in 
the appointment of their rulers. They are not gov 
erned by laws made expressly and exclusively for 
them, but by the general laws of their country, 
equally obligatory on the legal electors and on the 
law-makers themselves. So that they have nearly 
the same security against oppression which the body 
of the people have. 

To this we may add, that they are only under a 
conditional prohibition, which industry and good for 
tune may remove. They may, one day, accumulate 
a sufficient property to enable them to emerge out 
of their present state. Or, should they die in it, their 
situation is not entailed upon their posterity by a 
fixed and irremediable doom. They, agreeably to 
the ordinary vicissitudes of human affairs, may ac 
quire what their parents were deficient in. 

These considerations plainly show that the people 
in America, of all ranks and conditions, opulent as 
well as indigent (if subjected to the British Parlia 
ment), would be upon a less favorable footing than 
that part of the people of Great Britain who are in 

92 Alexander Hamilton 

so mean a situation that they are supposed to have no 
will of their own. The injustice of this must be evi 
dent to every man of common-sense. 

I shall now proceed to take such a survey of the 
political history of the colonies as may be necessary to 
cast a full light upon their present contest and at the 
same time, to give the public a just conception of the 
profound and comprehensive knowledge you have of 
the dispute, the fairness and candor with which you 
have represented facts, and the immaculate purity of 
your intentions. 

But previous to this, the following observations 
may not be destitute of utility. 

His Holiness the Pope, by virtue of being Christ's 
Vicegerent upon earth, piously assumed to himself a 
right to dispose of the territories of infidels as he 
thought fit. And in process of time all Christian 
princes learned to imitate his example, very liberally 
giving and granting away the dominions and property 
of Pagan countries. They did not seem to be satis 
fied with the title which Christianity gave them to the 
next world only, but chose to infer from thence an 
exclusive right to this world also. 

I must refer it to sounder casuists than I am to de 
termine concerning the consistency or justice of this 
principle. It is sufficient for my purpose to observe 
that it is the only foundation upon which Queen 
Elizabeth and her successors undertook to dispose of 
the lands in America. Whatever right, therefore, we 
may suppose to have existed, it was vested entirely in 
the crown; the nation had no concern in it. It is 
an invariable maxim, that every acquisition of foreign 

The Farmer Refuted 93 

territory is at the absolute disposal of the king; and 
unless he annex it to the realm, it is no part of it; 
and if it be once alienated, it can never be united to 
it without the concurrence of the proprietors. 

Were there any room to doubt that the sole right of 
the territories in America was vested in the crown, a 
convincing argument might be drawn from the prin 
ciple of English tenure. By means of the feudal system 
the king became, and still continues to be, in a legal 
sense, the original proprietor, or lord paramount, of 
all the lands in England.1 Agreeably to this rule, he 
must have been the original proprietor of all the lands 
in America, and was therefore authorized to dispose 
of them in what manner he thought proper. 

The great inquiry, therefore, is concerning the 
terms on which these lands were really dispensed. 

"The first charter granted by the crown for the 
purpose of colonization, is" not " that of King James 
the First to the two Virginia companies," as you 
assert. Previous to that there was one from Queen 
Elizabeth to Sir Walter Raleigh, for all the territory 
he might discover and plant between the thirty-third 
and fortieth degrees of north latitude which was not 
actually possessed by any Christian prince or in 
habited by any Christian people; to have, hold, 
occupy, and enjoy the same, to him, his heirs and 
assigns for ever, with all prerogatives, jurisdictions, 
royalties, privileges, franchises, thereunto belonging, 
by sea or land; only reserving to herself, her heirs 
and successors, the fifth part of all gold and silver ore 
that might be acquired in those regions. 

1 See Blackstone, vol. I. 

94 Alexander Hamilton 

By this grant, Queen Elizabeth relinquished the 
whole legislative and executive power to Sir Wal 
ter, upon no other condition than simple homage, 
and the above-mentioned fifth part of gold and sil 
ver ore ; which shows that the crown considered 
itself as invested with the absolute and entire dis 
posal of the territories in America, and the passive 
conduct of the nation declares its acquiescence in the 
same. 

After many successless efforts to plant a colony in 
Virginia, this charter was forfeited and abrogated by 
the attainder of Sir Walter Raleigh; and then suc 
ceeded that of King James the First to the two Vir 
ginia companies, dated the loth of April, 1606. This 
was afterward altered and improved by a second 
charter, issued in 1609. There was also a third, 
dated March 12, 1611-12. The mention of this last 
would not have answered your purpose, and therefore 
you chose to pass it over in silence. 

In neither of these three is there the least reser 
vation made of any authority to Parliament. The 
colonies are considered in them as entirely without 
the realm, and, consequently, without the jurisdic 
tion of its legislature. 

In the first charter from King James there are the 
following clauses : 

"We do ordain, establish, and decree, etc., that 
each of the said colonies shall have a council, which 
shall govern and order all matters and all causes 
which shall arise, grow, or happen to or within the 
same, according to such laws, ordinances and instruc 
tions, as shall be, in that behalf, given and signed 

The Farmer Refuted 95 

with our hand, or sign manual, and pass under the 
privy seal of our realm of England. 

"And that, also, there shall be a council estab 
lished here in England, which shall consist of thirteen 
persons, to be for that purpose appointed; which 
shall have the superior managing and directing only 
of, and for, all matters, that shall or may concern the 
government of the said several colonies." 

" Also, we do for us, our heirs, etc., declare, that all 
and every the persons, being our subjects, which shall 
dwell and inhabit within every, or any, the said sev 
eral colonies, and every of their children which shall 
happen to be born within any of the said several 
colonies, shall have and enjoy all liberties, franchises, 
and immunities within any of our other dominions, to 
all intents and purposes, as if they had been abiding 
and born within our realm of England." 

This latter declaration (to which there is one corre 
spondent, or similar, in every American grant) plainly 
indicates that it was not the royal intention to com 
prise the colonies within the realm of England. The 
powers committed to the two councils demonstrate 
the same, for they would be incompatible with the 
idea of any other than distinct states. 

The king could neither exercise, himself, nor em 
power others to exercise, such an authority as was 
really vested in the council, without a breach of the 
constitution, if the colonies had been a part of the 
realm, or within the jurisdiction of Parliament. Such 
an exertion of power would have been unconstitu 
tional and illegal, and of course inadmissible, but we 
find it was never called in question by the legislature, 

96 Alexander Hamilton 

and we may conclude from thence that America was 
universally considered as being without the jurisdic 
tion of Parliament. 

The second charter explains and amplifies the priv 
ileges of the company, erecting them into "one 
body or commonalty perpetual," and confirming to 
them the property of their former territories, with 
the addition of all the islands lying within one hun 
dred miles of the shores of both seas; together with 
all "commodities, jurisdictions, royalties, privileges, 
franchises, and pre-eminences,1' to be held by the 
king, his heirs and successors, " in free and common 
soccage." They were only to pay one fifth part of 
all the gold and silver ore they might find, in lieu of 
all services. 

Their government was vested in a council, first 
appointed by the king; which, upon every necessary 
occasion, was to be summoned together by the com 
pany's treasurer. But immediately after the persons 
appointed are named in the charter, it is declared, 
that " the said council and treasurer, or any of them, 
shall be henceforth nominated, chosen, continued, dis 
placed, changed, altered, or supplied, as death or other 
several occasions shall require, out of the company of 
the said adventurers, by the voice of the greater part 
of the said company and adventurers/' every mem 
ber newly elected to be sworn into office by the 
Lord Chancellor. 

This council had "full power and authority to 
make, ordain, and establish all manner of orders, 
laws, directions, instructions, forms, and ceremonies of 
government and magistracy fit and necessary for and 

The Farmer Refuted 97 

concerning the government of the said colony; and 
the same to abrogate, revoke, or change, at all times, 
not only within the precincts of the said colony, but 
also on the seas, in going or coming to or from said 
colony." 

This charter is also silent with respect to Parlia 
ment, the authority of which is evidently precluded 
by the whole tenor of it. 

You, sir, took no notice of the circumstance that 
the council was to be nominated, chosen, continued, 
etc., out of the Virginia company itself, agreeably to 
the voice of the majority. You omitted this, and 
gave quite a different turn to the matter ; but herein 
you acted not at all discordant with your usual prac 
tice. Nor did you esteem it politic to transcribe the 
following clause : " that the said company, and every 
of them, their factors and assigns, shall be free of all 
subsidies and customs in Virginia, for the space of 
one and twenty years, and from all taxes and impo 
sitions forever, upon any goods or merchandises, at 
any time or times hereafter, either upon importation 
thither or exportation from thence." 

The third charter is a still farther enlargement of 
their territory and privileges, and is that by which 
their present form of government is modelled. The 
following extract will show the nature of it : " We do 
hereby ordain and grant, that the said treasurer and 
company of adventurers and planters aforesaid shall 
and may, once every week, and oftener, at their 
pleasure, hold and keep a court or assembly, for the 
better order and government of the said plantation; 
and that any five persons of our council for the time 

98 Alexander Hamilton 

being, of which company the treasurer, or his deputy, 
to be always one, and the number of fifteen persons, 
at the least, of the generality of the said company 
assembled together in such a manner as hath been 
heretofore used and accustomed, shall be reputed to 
be, and shall be, a sufficient court for the handling, 
ordering, and dispatching of all such casual and par 
ticular occurrences, as shall, from time to time, hap 
pen, touching and concerning the said plantation. 
And, nevertheless, for the handling, ordering, and dis 
posing of the matters and affairs of greater weight 
and importance, such as shall, in any sort, concern 
the public weal and the general good of the said 
plantation, as, namely, the manner of government, 
from time to time, to be used, the ordering and dis 
posing of the lands and possessions, and the settling 
and establishing of a trade there, or such like, there 
shall be held and kept, every year for ever, one great 
general and solemn assembly. In all and every of 
which said great and general courts, so assembled, 
our will and pleasure is, and we do, for us, our heirs 
and successors for ever, give and grant to the said 
treasurer and company, or the greater number of 
them, so assembled, that they shall and may have 
full power and authority, from time to time, and at all 
times hereafter, to elect and choose discreet persons 
to be of our said council, for the first colony of Vir 
ginia ; and to nominate and appoint such officers as 
they shall think fit and requisite for the government, 
managing, ordering, and dispatching of the affairs of 
the said company; and shall likewise have full power 
and authority to ordain and make such laws and 

The Farmer Refuted 99 

ordinances for the good and welfare of the said 
plantation as to them, from time to time, shall be 
thought requisite and meet; so always, as the same 
be not contrary to the laws and statutes of this our 
realm of England." 

By this charter, King James divested himself 
wholly both of the legislative and executive au 
thority, but, for his own security, prescribed a 
model for their civil constitution. Their laws were 
not to be contrary to the laws and statutes of his 
realm of England; which restriction was inserted 
into all the subsequent charters, with some little 
variation, such as, that their laws should be " con 
sonant to reason, and not repugnant, or contrary, 
but, as near as conveniently may be, agreeable to the 
laws, statutes, and rights of this our kingdom of 
England." 

This mode of expression, so indefinite in itself, 
shows that the use made of the clause by some 
ministerial advocates, is by no means natural or 
warrantable. It could only be intended to set forth 
. the British constitution as a pattern for theirs; and 
accordingly we find, that upon the arrival of Sir 
George Yardly in Virginia, soon after this patent 
was procured, the government was regulated upon 
a new plan, that it might " resemble the British con 
stitution, composed of two Houses of Parliament and 
a sovereign. The number of the council was in 
creased, intending this body should represent the 
House of Lords, while the House of Commons was 
composed of burgesses, assembled from every planta 
tion and settlement in the country." 

ioo Alexander Hamilton 

There might be a great dissimilarity between the 
laws of Virginia and those of Great Britain, and yet 
not an absolute contrariety; so that the clause in 
question is not explicit or determinate enough to 
authorize the conclusion drawn from it. Besides, 
if the colonies were within the realm of England 
there would be no necessity for any provision in 
favor of its laws; and if they were without (as is 
clearly implied by the clause itself), it must be a 
contradiction to suppose its jurisdiction could ex 
tend beyond its own limits. 

But the true interpretation may be ascertained, 
beyond a doubt, by the conduct of those very 
princes who granted the charters. They were cer 
tainly the best judges of their own intention, and 
they have left us indubitable marks of it. 

In April, 1621, about nine years after the third 
Virginia charter was issued, a bill was introduced 
into the House of Commons, for indulging the sub 
jects of England with the privilege of fishing upon 
the coast of America; but the House was informed 
by the Secretary of State, by order of his Majesty 
King James, that "America was not annexed to the 
realm, and that it was not fitting that Parliament 
should make laws for those countries." 

In the reign of his successor, Charles the First 
(who granted the Massachusetts and Maryland 
charters), the same bill was again proposed in the 
House, and was, in the like manner, refused the 
royal assent, with a similar declaration that " it was 
unnecessary, that the colonies were without the realm 
and jurisdiction of Parliament"; circumstances 

The Farmer Refuted 101 

which evidently prove that these clauses were not 
inserted to render the colonies dependent on the 
Parliament, but only (as I have observed) to mark 
out a model of government for them. If, then, the 
colonies were, at first, without the realm and jurisdic 
tion of Parliament, no human authority could after 
ward alter the case, without their own voluntary, 
full, and express approbation. 

The settlement of New England was the next in 
succession, and was instigated by a detestation of 
civil and ecclesiastical tyranny. The principal de 
sign of the enterprise was to be emancipated from 
their sufferings, under the authority of Parliament 
and the laws of England. For this purpose, the 
Puritans had before retired to foreign countries, 
particularly to Holland. But Sir Robert Naughton, 
Secretary of State, having remonstrated to his 
Majesty concerning the impolicy and absurdity of 
dispeopling his own dominions by means of religious 
oppression, obtained permission for the Puritans to 
take up their abode in America, where they found 
an asylum from their former misfortunes. 

Previous to their embarkation at Holland, they 
had stipulated with the Virginia Company * for a 
tract of land in contiguity with Hudson's River ; but 
when they arrived in America (by some misconduct 
of the pilot), they found themselves at Cape Cod, 
which was without the boundaries of the Virginia 
patent. There the season compelled them to re 
main, and there they have prosecuted their settle 
ments. 

1 This was after they had received their third charter. 

102 Alexander Hamilton 

They looked upon themselves as having reverted 
to a state of nature, but being willing still to enjoy 
the protection of their former sovereign, they exe 
cuted the following instrument: 

"In the name of God, Amen! We, whose names 
are underwritten, the loyal subjects of our dread 
Sovereign Lord, King James, of Great Britain, etc., 
King,1 Defender of the Faith, etc., having under 
taken for the glory of God, and the advancement of 
the Christian faith, and the honor of our King and 
country, a voyage to plant the first colony in the 
northern part of Virginia, do, by these presents, 
mutually, in the presence of God and one another, 
covenant and combine ourselves together into a 
civil body politic, for our better order and preserva 
tion, and furtherance of the ends aforesaid; and by 
virtue hereof to enact, constitute, and frame, such 
just and equal laws, ordinances, acts, constitutions, 
and officers, from time to time, as shall be thought 
most meet and convenient for the general good of 
the colony; unto which we promise all due submis 
sion and obedience. 

" In witness whereof we have hereunto subscribed 
our names, at Cape Cod, November n, 1620." 

This was the original constitution of New Ply 
mouth. It deserves to be remarked here, that 

1 This ought to silence the infamous calumnies of those who represent 
the first settlers in New England as enemies to kingly government, and 
who are, in their own opinions, wondrous witty, by retailing the idle 
and malicious stories that have been propagated concerning them; 
such as their having erased King, Kingdom, and the like, out of their 
Bibles, and inserted in their stead, Civil Magistrate, Parliament, and 
Republic. 

The Farmer Refuted 103 

these first settlers possessed their lands by the most 
equitable and independent title, that of a fair and 
honest purchase from their natural owners, the In 
dian tribes. King James soon after erected a council 
at Plymouth, in the county of Devon, "for the 
planting, ruling, ordering, and governing of New 
England in America"; and granted to "them, their 
successors and assigns, all that part of America, 
lying, and being in breadth, from forty degrees of 
north latitude from the equinoctial line, to the forty- 
eighth degree of the said northerly latitude, in 
clusively, and in length of, and within all the breadth 
aforesaid, throughout all the main land, from sea to 
sea, together with all the firm lands, soils, grounds, 
havens, ports, rivers, waters, fishings, minerals, 
precious stones, quarries, and all and singular other 
commodities, jurisdictions, royalties, privileges, fran 
chises, and pre-eminences, both within the said tract 
of land upon the main, and also within the islands 
and seas adjacent, — to be held of his Majesty, his 
heirs and successors, in free and common soccage; 
and the only consideration to be the fifth part of all 
gold and silver ore, for and in respect of all and all 
manner of duties, demands, and services.'1 

This council was vested with the sole power of 
legislation; the election and appointment of all 
officers, civil and military; authority to coin money, 
make war and peace, and a variety of other signal 
privileges. The colony of New Plymouth was com 
prehended within the grant. In consequence of 
which, its inhabitants, a few years after, purchased 
the claim of the patentees, with all their rights and 

iO4 Alexander Hamilton 

immunities, and became an independent state by 
charter. 

The same motives that induced the settlement of 
New Plymouth did also produce that of Massachu 
setts. It was first colonized by virtue of a patent 
from the council at Plymouth, and in a year after by 
a charter from King Charles the First dated the 4th 
of March, in the fourth year of his reign; by which 
the adventurers and inhabitants were formed into 
" one body politic and corporate, by the name of the 
Governor and Company of the Massachusetts Bay, 
in New England," and clothed with powers and 
privileges resembling those of the colony of New 
Plymouth. 

It happened some time before this, that there was 
a dissolution of the Virginia Company by a royal 
proclamation dated i5th of July, 1624, by which the 
colony became more immediately dependent on the 
king. The Virginians were greatly alarmed at this, 
and forthwith presented a remonstrance to the 
Throne; in which they signified an apprehension of 
" designs formed against their rights and privi 
leges." In order to banish their fears, the Lords of 
the Council (in a letter dated the 22d of July, 1634) 
gave them an assurance, by his Majesty's direction, 
" that all their estates, trade, freedom, and privileges, 
should be enjoyed by them in as extensive a manner 
as they enjoyed them before the recall of the com 
pany's patent." Agreeably to this, their former 
constitution was confirmed and continued. 

The Maryland charter is the next in order, of 
which you, sir, have made no mention. It was 

The Farmer Refuted 105 

granted by King Charles the First to Lord Balti 
more, and contains such ample and exalted privileges, 
that no man in his senses can read it without being 
convinced it is repugnant to every idea of dependence 
on Parliament. 

It bestows on him "all the country of Maryland, 
and the islands adjacent, together with all their 
commodities, jurisdictions, privileges, prerogatives, 
royal rights, etc., etc., of what kinds soever, as well 
by sea as land; and constitutes him, his heirs and 
assigns, true and absolute lords and proprietaries of 
the said country, and of all the premises aforesaid, 
saving always the faith and allegiance and the sov 
ereign dominion, due to himself, his heirs and suc 
cessors, — to be holden of the Kings of England, in 
free and common soccage, by fealty only, and not in 
capite; paying two Indian arrows every year, and 
also the fifth part of all gold and silver ore which 
shall from time to time happen to be found: Grant 
ing also full and absolute power to the said Lord 
Baltimore, his heirs, etc., to ordain, make, enact, 
and publish any laws whatsoever, by and with the 
advice, assent, and approbation of the freemen of the 
said province, or the greater part of them, or of 
their delegates or deputies, whom, for the enacting of 
the said laws, when, and as often as need shall re 
quire, we will, that the said now Lord Baltimore, 
and his heirs, shall assemble in such sort and form 
as to him and them shall seem best. Provided, 
nevertheless, that the said laws be consonant to 
reason, and be not repugnant, or contrary, but, 
as near as conveniently may be, agreeable to the 

io6 Alexander Hamilton 

laws, statutes, and rights of this our kingdom of 
England." 

In another place it is ordained that he, the " said 
Lord Baltimore, may, from time to time for ever, have 
and enjoy the customs and subsidies within the said 
ports, harbors, etc., within the province aforesaid, 
payable or due for merchandises and wares there to 
be laden and unladen; the said subsidies and cus 
toms to be reasonably assessed (upon any occasion) 
by themselves and the people there, as aforesaid, to 
whom we give power by these presents, for us, our 
heirs and successors, upon just cause and in due pro 
portion, to assess and impose the same." 

I confine myself to these extracts to avoid pro 
lixity, and pass over the enumeration of those many 
extensive prerogatives this charter confers: such as 
the appointment of all officers, civil and military; 
the power of making war and peace; the establish 
ment of boroughs and cities; with all necessary im 
munities, and the like. 

In the fourteenth year of Charles the Second, the 
two colonies, Connecticut and New Haven, peti 
tioned the king to unite them into one colony, which 
was complied with. Privileges, as valuable and 
extensive as any that had been before granted, were 
comprised in their charter. There was only a re 
servation of allegiance to the king, without the 
smallest share of the legislative or executive power. 
The next year, Providence and Rhode Island pro 
cured a charter, with privileges exactly correspond 
ent to those of Connecticut. 

You are pleased to assert, "that the charters of 

The Farmer Refuted 107 

Rhode Island and Connecticut are simply matters of 
incorporation ' ' ; and produce an extract in confirma 
tion of this assertion. 

I should be astonished at so extraordinary a de 
viation from truth, if there were not many instances 
similar to it. Not only the whole tenor of their 
charters, but their constant practice and form of 
government hitherto, declare the reverse of your 
assertion. But, that I may not unnecessarily pro 
long this letter by a quotation of the different parts 
of the respective charters, give me leave to present 
you with an account of the constitution of these 
colonies, which was laid before the House of Lords 
in January, 1734. 

"Connecticut and Rhode Island," say the Com 
missioners of Trade and Plantations, "are charter 
governments, where almost the whole power of the 
crown is delegated to the people, who make annual 
election of their Assembly, their Councils, and their 
Governors; likewise to the majority of which As 
semblies, Councils, and Governors, respectively, 
being collective bodies, the power of making laws is 
granted; and, as their charters are worded, they can, 
and do, make laws, even without the Governor's 
assent, no negative voice being reserved to them, as 
Governors, in said charters. These colonies have 
the power of making laws for their better govern 
ment and support; and are not under any obligation, 
by their respective constitutions, to return authentic 
copies of their laws to the crown, for approbation or 
disallowance ; nor to give any account of their pro 
ceedings ; nor are their laws repealable by the crown ; 

io8 Alexander Hamilton 

but the validity of them depends upon their not 
being contrary, but, as nearly as may be, agreeable to 
the laws of England/' 

As to the expression, as other our liege people of 
this our realm of England, or any other corporation 
or body politic within the same, if any stress be laid 
on the particle other, it will imply not only that the 
colonies were simple matters of corporation, but 
that the inhabitants of them were considered as 
being within the realm of England. But this can 
not be admitted as true without contradicting other 
clauses of the same charters. Thus, in the preamble 
to that of Rhode Island, it is said that the first 
planters " did, by the consent of our royal progenitors, 
transport themselves out of this kingdom of England 
into America." And in each of the charters the 
king stipulates that all the children born in America 
shall enjoy " all the liberties and immunities of free 
and natural subjects, within any of his dominions, as 
if they and every of them were born within the realm 
of England. " 

The vague and improper manner in which this 
particle is used in many other places of the several 
charters will not allow it the least weight in the 
present instance. In the eleventh article of the 
third Virginia charter there is this expression: " All 
such, and so many of our loving subjects, or any other 
strangers that will," etc. The same rule of inference 
that makes Rhode Island and Connecticut simple cor 
porations, will also transform the king's loving sub 
jects into mere strangers, which I apprehend cannot 
be done without some degree of absurdity. 

The Farmer Refuted 109 

In the fifteenth year of Charles the Second, Caro 
lina was erected into a principality. A patent dated 
March 24, 1663, was granted to eight lord pro 
prietors, vesting them with all its rights, privileges, 
prerogatives, royalties, etc., and the whole legisla 
tive and executive authority, together with the 
power of creating a nobility. The form of govern 
ment was determined by a compact between the 
people and the proprietors, which contained one 
hundred and twenty articles; and "these were to 
be and remain the sacred and unalterable rule and 
form of government in Carolina for ever." A Pala 
tine was to be erected from among the proprietaries, 
who was to govern the principality during his life; 
and at his demise, the surviving lords were to suc 
ceed him according to the order of seniority. The 
legislative power was to reside in the Parliament of 
that country, consisting of the Palatine as sovereign; 
an upper House, in which the proprietors or their 
deputies, the governor and the nobility, were to sit; 
and a lower House, composed of the delegates of the 
people. There was likewise a court established, the 
members of which were three proprietaries, and the 
Palatine as president, and in this court the whole 
executive authority was lodged. 

There were also several other courts: the Chief 
Justice's, the High Constable's, the Chancellor's, and 
the High Steward's Court. The principal officers of 
the State, in number, titles, and power, resembled 
those of the realm of England. The proprietors of 
Carolina considered themselves as possessed of every 
requisite toward forming a separate independent 

no Alexander Hamilton 

state, and were always extremely jealous of any en 
croachments. They even disputed the king's au 
thority to establish Courts of Vice-Admiralty within 
their precincts, though for the examination and 
punishment of offences committed without them, 
and always appointed an admiral of their own. One 
of their governors was deposed for "accepting a 
commission under King William, as Judge of the 
Admiralty, when he had, at the same time, a com 
mission from the Lords proprietaries for the same 
office." 

The Philadelphia charter was next granted, and 
contained almost an equality of privileges with that 
of Maryland. There was, indeed, a reverse in favor 
of Parliament, perfectly singular and unprecedented 
in any foregoing charter, and which must either be 
rejected, or the general tenor of the grant becomes 
unintelligible. 

It happened that the charter of Massachusetts was 
vacated by a decision in Chancery, and a new one 
was conferred by William and Mary. The agents 
for that colony did not accept it till they had first 
consulted the most judicious civilians and politicians 
upon the contents of it, and then drew up an instru 
ment in which they assigned the reasons of their 
acceptance. The following extract will serve to 
show their sense of it: "The colony," say they, "is 
now made a province; and the General Court has, 
with the King's approbation, as much power in 
New England as the King and Parliament have in 
England. They have all English privileges and 
liberties, and can be touched by no law and by no 

The Farmer Refuted in 

tax, but of their own making. All the liberties of 
their religion are for ever secured." 

You say, that "the power to levy taxes is re 
strained to provincial and local purposes only, and 
to be exercised over such only as are inhabitants 
and proprietors of the said province." 

They are empowered " to levy proportionable and 
reasonable assessments, rates, and taxes, for our 
service in the necessary defence and support of the 
government of the said province or territory, and 
the protection and preservation of the inhabitants 
there." The defence and support of government, 
and their own protection and preservation, are the 
purposes for which they are to raise supplies; and, 
in my humble opinion, there are no others to which 

»any society is under an obligation to contribute its 
wealth or property. 

I shall only make one more observation upon this 
charter — which is, that there was a reservation in it 
of liberty for the people of England to fish upon 
their coasts, which would have been useless and 
absurd, had that province been a part of the realm, 
and within the jurisdiction of Parliament. 

Were it necessary to elucidate still more a point 
which is so conspicuous from the several charters 
of the colonies, as well as the express declara 
tions of those princes by whom they were granted, 
to wit : " that the colonies are without the realm 
and jurisdiction of Parliament," I might enumer 
ate many striking circumstances besides those 
I have already mentioned. But as the case is 
by this time sufficiently clear, I shall confine 

ii2 Alexander Hamilton 

myself to the recital of only one or two more 
transactions. 

An act of the twenty-fifth of Charles the Second 
was the first that ever imposed duties on the colonies 
for any purpose; and these, as the preamble itself 
recites, were simply as a regulation of trade, and 
were of a prohibitory nature. Notwithstanding this, 
it was the source of great dissatisfaction; and was 
one of the principal causes of the insurrection in 
Virginia, under Colonel Bacon, which after his 
death subsided; and then the province sent agents 
to England, to remonstrate " against taxes and im 
positions being laid on the colony by any authority 
but that of the General Assembly." In conse 
quence of this, a declaration was obtained, tinder 
the privy seal of King Charles, dated nineteenth of 
April, 1676, to this effect: that "taxes ought not to 
be laid upon the proprietors and inhabitants of the 
colony, but by the common consent of the General 
Assembly." 

About three years after, when King Charles had 
occasion to raise a permanent revenue for the sup 
port of Virginia, he did not attempt to do it by 
means of a parliamentary donation, but framed a 
bill, and sent it there by Lord Culpepper, who was 
at that time governor, to receive the concurrence of 
their legislature. It was there passed into a law, and 
"enacted by the King's most excellent Majesty, by and 
with the consent of the General Assembly of the colony 
of Virginia." If the Virginians had been subjects 
of the realm, this could not have been done without 
a direct violation of Magna Charta, which provides 

The Farmer Refuted 113 

that no English subject shall be taxed without the 
consent of Parliament. 

Thus, sir, I have taken a pretty general survey of 
the American charters, and proved, to the satis 
faction of every unbiassed person, that they are 
entirely discordant with that sovereignty of Parlia 
ment for which you are an advocate. The disin- 
genuity of your extracts (to give it no harsher name) 
merits the severest censure, and will, no doubt, 
serve to discredit all your former, as well as future, 
labors in your favorite cause of despotism. 

It is true, that New York has no charter. But if 
it could support its claim to liberty in no other way, 
it might, with justice, plead the common principles 
of colonization : for it would be unreasonable to ex 
clude one colony from the enjoyment of the most 
important privileges of the rest. There is no need, 
however, of this plea. THE SACRED RIGHTS OP 
MANKIND ARE NOT TO BE RUMMAGED FOR AMONG 
OLD PARCHMENTS OR MUSTY RECORDS. THEY ARE 

WRITTEN, AS WITH A SUNBEAM, IN THE WHOLE 

VOLUME OF HUMAN NATURE, BY THE HAND OF THE 
DIVINITY ITSELF, AND CAN NEVER BE ERASED OR 
OBSCURED BY MORTAL POWER. 

The nations of Turkey, Russia, France, Spain, and 
all other despotic kingdoms in the world, have an 
inherent right, whenever they please, to shake off 
the yoke of servitude (though sanctioned by the im 
memorial usage of their ancestors), and to model 
their government upon the principles of civil liberty. 

I will now venture to assert, that I have demon 
strated, from the voice of nature, the spirit of the 

VOL. I.— 8. 

ii4 Alexander Hamilton 

British constitution, and the charters of the colonies 
in general, the absolute non-existence of that par 
liamentary supremacy for which you contend. I 
am not apt to be dogmatical, or too confident of my 
own opinions; but if I thought it possible for me to 
be mistaken, when I maintain that the Parliament 
of Great Britain has no sovereign authority over 
America, I should distrust every principle of my 
understanding, reject every distinction between 
truth and falsehood, and fall into a universal 
skepticism. 

Hitherto, I have reasoned against the whole au 
thority of Parliament, without even excepting the 
right we have conceded, of regulating trade. I con 
sidered it, in its original state, as founded in the 
British constitution, the natural rights of society, 
and the several charters of the colonies. The power 
of regulating our trade was first exercised in the 
reign of Charles the Second. I shall not examine 
upon what principle. It is enough, we have con 
sented to it. But I shall proceed to consider the 
argument you make use of to establish the propriety 
of allowing special duties to be imposed by way of 
tribute for the protection of our commerce. 

You argue thus : " Notwithstanding the large 
landed estates possessed by the British subjects in 
the different parts of the world, they must be consid 
ered as a commercial manufacturing people. The 
welfare, perhaps the existence, of Great Britain as 
an independent or sovereign state depends upon her 
manufactures and trade ; and many people in America 
think that her manufactures and commerce depend 

The Farmer Refuted 115 

in a great measure on her intercourse with her colo 
nies ; insomuch that if this should be neglected her 
commerce would decline and die away, her wealth 
would cease, and her maritime power be at an end. 
If these observations be just, they establish the 
right of the British Parliament to regulate the com 
merce of the whole empire, beyond possibility of 
contradiction; a denial of it would be a denial of a 
right in the British empire to preserve itself. They 
prove also that all parts of the empire must be sub 
ject to the British Parliament, for otherwise the 
trade of the whole cannot be regulated. They 
point out also the best mode of raising such a revenue 
as is necessary for the support and defence of the 
government, viz. : by duties on imports and ex 
ports, because these are attended with the least 
inconvenience to the subject, and may be so man 
aged as to raise a revenue and regulate the trade at 
the same time. 

"When it is considered that Great Britain is a 
maritime power, that the present flourishing state of 
her trade and of the trade of her colonies depends in 
a great measure upon the protection which they re 
ceive from the navy, that her own security depends 
upon her navy, and that it is principally a naval 
protection we receive from her, there will appear a 
peculiar propriety in laying the chief burthen of 
supporting her navy upon her commerce, and in 
requesting us to bear a part of the expense, pro 
portional to our ability, and to that protection and 
security which we receive from it.'* 

The supposition that a cessation of commerce 

n6 Alexander Hamilton 

between Great Britain and the colonies would be ruin 
ous and destructive to the former is ushered in as the 
principal argument for her right to regulate the com 
merce of the whole empire. I am willing to allow it 
its full weight, but I cannot conceive how you can 
pretend, after making such use of it, to deny it the 
force it ought to have, when it is urged as affording a 
moral certainty that our present measures will be 
successful. If you tacitly adopt the principle, and 
reason from it in one case, with what propriety can 
you reject it in the other? If the preservation of 
the British empire depends in any material degree 
upon the right of Parliament to regulate the trade 
of the colonies, what will be the consequence if the 
trade ceases altogether? You must either acknow 
ledge that you have adduced a very weak and 
foolish argument, or that the commercial connection 
between Great Britain and the colonies is essential 
to her security and prosperity. You have either 
failed in proving your point, or you have furnished 
me with an ample confutation of all your reasoning 
against the probability of success, from the restric 
tions laid on our commerce. If our trade be neces 
sary to the welfare of Great Britain, she must, of 
course, be ruined by a discontinuance of it. 

But it is granted that Great Britain has a right to 
regulate the trade of the empire. The Congress 
have acknowledged it so far as concerned their con 
stituents. You infer from thence that all parts of 
the empire must be subject to her. They need only 
be so far subject as is necessary for the end pro 
posed, that is, the regulation of their trade. If you 

The Farmer Refuted 117 

require any further subjection, you require means 
that are disproportionate to the end, which is un 
reasonable, and not at all allowable. 

With respect to the justice of submitting to im 
positions on our trade for the purpose of raising a 
revenue to support the navy by which it is protected, 
I answer that the exclusive regulation of our com 
merce for her own advantage is a sufficient tribute 
to Great Britain for protecting it. By this means a 
vast accession of wealth is annually thrown into her 
coffers. It is a matter of notoriety that the balance 
of trade is very much against us. After ransacking 
Spain, Portugal, Holland, the English, French, 
Spanish, Dutch, and Danish plantations, for money 
and bills of exchange, as remittances for the com 
modities we take from Great Britain, we are still 
always greatly in arrears to her. At a moderate 
computation, I am well informed that the profits 
she derives from us every year exceed two millions 
and a half sterling; and when we reflect that this 
sum will be continually increasing as we grow more 
and more populous, it must be evident that there is 
not the least justice in raising a revenue upon us by 
the imposition of special duties. 

The right of Great Britain to regulate our trade 
upon this plan, it is now acknowledged, is not an 
inconsiderable matter. It is as much as any free 
people can concede, and as much as any just people 
would require. We are not permitted to procure 
manufactures anywhere else than from Great Britain, 
or Ireland. Our trade is limited and prescribed, 
in every respect, as is most for her interest. This 

n8 Alexander Hamilton 

is a plentiful source of wealth to her, as I have 
heretofore shown, and shall hereafter confirm by 
the testimony of some British writers. 

But I have found out an argument, which I im 
agine will go very near convincing yourself of the 
absurdity of what you have offered on this head. It 
is short, but conclusive. " The principal profits of 
our trade centre in Great Britain." I How can you, 
my dear sir, after making this confession, entertain a 
single thought that it is incumbent upon us to suffer 
her to raise a revenue upon our trade ? Are not the 
principal profits a sufficient recompense for protect 
ing it? Surely you would not allow her the whole. 
This would be rather too generous. However ar 
dent your affection to her, and however much it may 
be your glory to advance her imperial dignity, you. 
ought to moderate it so far as to permit us to enjoy 
some little benefit from our trade. Only a small 
portion of the profits will satisfy us. We are willing 
to let her have the principal share, and this you 
acknowledge she already has. But why will you 
advise us to let her exhaust the small pittance we 
have reserved as the reward of our own industry in 
burthensome revenues? This might be liberality 
and generosity, but it would not be prudence; and 
let me tell you, in this selfish, rapacious world a little 
discretion is at worst only a venial sin. It will be 
expedient to be more cautious for the future. It is 
difficult to combat truth, and unless you redouble 
your vigilance you will (as in the present instance) 
be extremely apt to ensnare yourself. 

1 See page 1 9 of your own letter. 

The Farmer Refuted 119 

I shall now briefly examine the excellent mode you 
have proposed for settling our disputes finally and 
effectually. All internal taxation is to be vested in 
our own Legislatures, and the right of regulating 
trade by duties, bounties, etc., to be left to the Par 
liament, together with the right of enacting all 
general laws for all the colonies. You imagine that 
we should then " have all the security for our rights, 
liberties, and properties, which human policy can 
give us." 

Here we widely differ in sentiment. My opinion 
is that we should have no " security besides the good 
will of our rulers — that is, no security at all." Is 
there no difference between one system of laws and 
another? Are not some more favorable and bene 
ficial to the subject, better calculated to preserve 
his life and personal liberty than others? It is evi 
dent they are. Suppose, instead of the present sys 
tem established among us, the French laws were to 
be introduced for the good of all the colonies, should 
we have the same security for our lives which we 
now have? I presume we should not. I presume, 
also, that a revolution in our laws might and would 
gradually take place. 

A fondness for power is implanted in most men, 
and it is natural to abuse it when acquired. This 
maxim, drawn from the experience of all ages, makes 
it the height of folly to intrust any set of men with 
power which is not under every possible control; 
perpetual strides are made after more as long as 
there is any part withheld. We ought not, there 
fore, to concede any greater authority to the British 

i2O Alexander Hamilton 

Parliament than is absolutely necessary. There 
seems to be a necessity for vesting the regulation of 
our trade there, because in time our commercial in 
terests might otherwise interfere with hers. But 
with respect to making laws for us, there is not the 
least necessity, or even propriety, in it. Our Legis 
latures are confined to ourselves, and cannot inter 
fere with Great Britain. We are best acquainted 
with our own circumstances, and therefore best 
qualified to make suitable regulations. It is of no 
force to object that no particular colony has power 
to enact general laws for all the colonies. There is 
no need of such general laws. Let every colony 
attend to its own internal police, and all will be well. 
How have we managed heretofore ? The Parliament 
has made no general laws for our good, and yet our 
affairs have been conducted much to our ease and 
satisfaction. If any discord has sprung up among 
us, it is wholly imputable to the incursions of Great 
Britain. We should be peaceable and happy, if un 
molested by her. We are not so destitute of wisdom 
as to be in want of her assistance to devise proper 
and salutary laws for us. 

The legislative power of Parliament would at any 
rate be useless to us ; and as utility is the prime end 
of all laws, that power has no reason for which it 
should exist. It is not even requisite for preserving 
the connection between Great Britain and the colo 
nies, for that is sufficiently secured in two ways : by 
being united under the same king, and by the im 
portant privilege of regulating our commerce, to 
which we have submitted. 

The Farmer Refuted 121 

That it may be prejudicial to us no reasonable 
man can deny. We may trace the evils of it through 
the whole administration of justice. Judicial pro 
ceedings may be so ordered as to render our lives and 
properties dependent on the will and caprice of 
court favorites and tools. A wide field for bribery 
and corruption of every kind would be opened, and 
the most enormous exactions would take shelter 
under the garb of law. It is unnecessary to enter 
into a particular detail of the different methods in 
which all this might be effected; every man's own 
imagination will suggest to him a multiplicity of 
instances. 

Rigorous, oppressive, and tyrannical laws may be 
thought expedient as instruments to humble our 
rebellious tempers, and oblige us to submit to further 
exactions of authority, till the claim to bind us in 
all cases whatsoever be fully complied with. This, 
no doubt, would be a work of time. The steps 
would be gradual, and perhaps imperceptible; but 
they would be sure and effectual. That thirst of 
power which influenced the Parliament to assert an 
unlimited authority over us, without the least 
plausible foundation for it (as I have clearly proved), 
will authorize us to apprehend the worst. 

The power of legislating for us, and of raising a 
revenue upon the articles of commerce, would be a 
sufficient degree of slavery. It is absurd to say that 
Great Britain could not impose heavy burthens on 
our commerce, without immediately feeling the 
effect herself. She may enrich herself by reducing 
us to the most lamentable state of penury and 

122 Alexander Hamilton 

wretchedness. We are already forbid to purchase 
the manufactures of any foreign countries. Great 
Britain and Ireland must furnish us with the neces 
saries we want. Those things we manufacture 
among ourselves may be disallowed. We should 
then be compelled to take the manufactures of 
Great Britain upon her own conditions. We could 
not, in that case, do without them. However ex 
cessive the duties laid upon them, we should be 
under an inevitable necessity to purchase them. 
How would Great Britain feel the effects of those 
impositions, but to her own advantage? If we 
might withdraw our custom and apply to other na 
tions, if we might manufacture our own materials, 
those expedients would serve as a refuge to us, and 
would indeed be a security against any immoderate 
exactions. But these resources would be cut off. 
There would be no alternative left us. We must sub 
mit to be drained of all our wealth, for those neces 
saries which we are not permitted to get elsewhere. 
As to our trade with foreign countries, the bur 
thens imposed on that, however grievous, would in 
like manner affect Great Britain only by increasing 
her public treasure. Her own inhabitants would 
pay no part of them; they would fall solely upon 
ourselves. There is no immediate connection be 
tween her trade and ours, of this kind; they are 
separate and independent; and, of course, the in- 
cumbrances on the one would not injure the other. 
The superfluity of our products must be exported, 
to enable us to pay our debts to her; and we must 
submit to be loaded at her discretion. If we look 

The Farmer Refuted 123 

forward to a period not far distant, we shall per 
ceive that the productions of our country will in 
finitely exceed the demands which Great Britain 
and her connections can possibly have for them; 
and, as we shall then be greatly advanced in popula 
tion, our wants will be proportionately increased. 
These circumstances will open an ample field for 
extortion and oppression. 

The legislative authority of Parliament would 
always be ready to silence our murmurs by tyran 
nical edicts. These would be enforced by a formid 
able army, kept up among us for the purpose. The 
slightest struggles to recover our lost liberty would 
become dangerous, and even capital. Those hated 
things, Continental Conventions, by which there 
might be a communion of councils and measures, 
would be interdicted. Non-importation and non- 
exportation agreements would, in effect, be made 
seditious, illegal, and treasonable.1 No remedy 
would be left, but in the clemency of our oppressors ; 
a wretched one, indeed, and such as no prudent man 
would confide in ! In whatever light we consider the 
matter, we shall find that we must effectually seal 
our bondage by adopting the mode you recommend. 

Agreeably to your concessions, Great Britain is 
abundantly recompensed for the naval protection 
she affords, by the principal profits of our trade. It 
can therefore, with no color of justice, be urged 
upon us to permit her to raise a revenue through 
that channel. 

1 I believe these were the epithets bestowed on them by General 
Gage. 

124 Alexander Hamilton 

But, after all, let us suppose that the emolument 
which arises from the simple and abstracted regula 
tion of our trade is inadequate to the protection we 
derive from the parent State : does it follow that her 
just demands cannot be satisfied, unless we put it 
in her power to ruin us? When did the colonies 
refuse to contribute their proportion toward de 
fraying the expenses of government? During the 
war our contributions were so liberal and generous 
that we were thought to have done more than our 
part, and restitution was accordingly made. Mas 
sachusetts, that injured, insulted, and calumniated 
country, was foremost in displaying its loyalty, and 
was parsimonious neither of its men nor money. 
But notwithstanding this no confidence, it seems, is 
due to our virtue or fidelity; but every thing is to 
be trusted to the wisdom and disinterestedness of a 
British Parliament. 

We do not expect, nor require, that all should de 
pend upon our integrity or generosity, but only a 
part; and this, every rule of equity entitles us to. 
We have assented to the exercise of a power which 
gives a certainty to Great Britain of a vast annual 
income; any further aids that may be necessary 
ought to be intrusted to our fidelity. When the 
circumstances of two parties will not admit of precise 
boundaries to the duty of each, it is not a dictate of 
justice to put one entirely into the power of the 
other. If the mother country would desist from 
grasping at too much, and permit us to enjoy the 
privileges of freemen, interest would concur with 
duty, and lead us to the performance of it. We 

The Farmer Refuted 125 

should be sensible of the advantages of a mutual in 
tercourse and connection, and should esteem the 
welfare of Britain as the best security for our own. 
She may, by kind treatment, secure our attachment 
in the powerful bands of self-interest. This is the 
conduct that prudence and sound policy point out; 
but, alas ! to her own misfortune as well as ours, she 
is blind and infatuated. 

If we take futurity into the account, as we no 
doubt ought to do, we shall find, that in fifty or sixty 
years, America will be in no need of protection from 
Great Britain. She will then be able to protect her 
self both at home and abroad. She will have a 
plenty of men, and a plenty of materials, to provide 
and equip a formidable navy. She will, indeed, 
owe a debt of gratitude to the parent State for past 
services ; but the scale will then begin to turn in her 
favor; and the obligation for future services will 
be on the side of Great Britain. It will be the in 
terest of the latter to keep us without a fleet, and, by 
this means, to continue to regulate our trade as 
before. But, in thus withholding the means of pro 
tection which we have within our own reach, she will 
chiefly consult her own advantage, and oblige herself 
much more than us. At that era, to enjoy the privi 
lege of enriching herself by the direction of our com 
merce, and, at the same time, to derive supports, 
from our youthful vigor and strength, against all her 
enemies, and thereby to extend her conquests over 
them, will give her reason to bless the times that 
gave birth to these colonies. 

By enlarging our views and turning our thoughts 

126 Alexander Hamilton 

to future days, we must perceive that the special 
benefits we receive from the British nation are of a 
temporary and transient nature ; while, on the other 
hand, those it may reap from us by an affectionate 
and parental conduct will be permanent and durable, 
and will serve to give it such a degree of stability and 
lasting prosperity as could not be expected in the 
common fluctuating course of human affairs. Such 
reflections will teach us that there is no propriety in 
making any concessions to Great Britain, which may 
be at all inconsistent with our safety. 

You employ several contemptible artifices to var 
nish and recommend your scheme. Your conduct, 
in every respect, affords a striking instance of the 
depravity of human nature. You insinuate that the 
Pennsylvania Farmer admits the right of Parliament 
to regulate our trade in the same sense you do. 
The very letter your extracts are taken from is ex 
pressly levelled against the revenue act, with regard 
to paper, glass, etc. The design of that, and all his 
subsequent papers, is to prove that all duties im 
posed upon the articles of commerce for the purpose 
of raising a revenue are to be considered in the same 
light as what you call internal taxes, and ought 
equally to be opposed. 

By the " legal authority to regulate trade,'* he 
means nothing more than what the Congress have 
allowed : an authority to confine us to the use of our 
own manufactures; to prescribe our trade with 
foreign nations, and the like. This is the power he 
speaks of as being " lodged in the British Parlia 
ment." And as to general duties, he means such as 

The Farmer Refuted 127 

the people of Great Britain are to pay as well as 
ourselves. Duties, for the purpose of a revenue 
raised upon us only he calls special duties, and says : 
" They are as much a tax upon us as those imposed 
by the Stamp Act." 

The following passage will show the sentiments of 
this ingenious and worthy gentleman and at the 
same time will serve to illustrate what I have hereto 
fore said. 

" If you once admit," says he, " that Great Britain 
may lay duties upon her expor tat ions to us, for the 
purpose of levying money on us only, she will then 
have nothing to do, but to lay duties on the articles 
which she prohibits us to manufacture, and the 
tragedy of American liberty is finished. We have 
been prohibited from procuring manufactures, in all 
cases, anywhere but from Great Britain (excepting 
linens, which we are permitted to import directly 
from Ireland). We have been prohibited in some 
cases from manufacturing for ourselves, and may be 
prohibited in others. We are therefore exactly in 
the situation of a city besieged, which is surrounded 
by the besiegers in every part but one. If that is 
closed up no step can be taken, but to surrender at 
discretion. If Great Britain can order us to come to 
her for the necessaries we want, and can order us to 
pay what taxes she pleases before we take them 
away, or when we land them here, we are as abject 
slaves as France and Poland can show, in wooden 
shoes, and with uncombed hair.1 

1 The peasants of France wear wooden shoes ; and the vassals of 
Poland are remarkable for matted hair which never can be combed. 

128 Alexander Hamilton 

"Perhaps the nature of the necessities of depen 
dent States, caused by the policy of a governing one 
for her own benefit, may be elucidated by a fact 
mentioned in history. When the Carthaginians 
were possessed of the island of Sardinia, they made 
a decree that the Sardinians should not raise corn, 
nor get it any other way than from the Carthaginians. 
Then, by imposing any duties they would upon it, 
they drained from the miserable Sardinians any 
sums they pleased; and whenever that miserable 
and oppressed people made the least movement to 
assert their liberty, their tyrants starved them to 
death or submission. This may be called the most 
perfect kind of political necessity/* 

You would persuade us also that Mr. Pitt's senti 
ments accord with yours, about the regulation of 
trade; but this is as false as the other. When he 
tells them " to exercise every power but that of tak 
ing money out of our pockets," he does not mean 
that they shall barely refrain from a manual opera 
tion upon our pockets; but they shall exact money 
from us in no way whatsoever. To tax the com 
modities Great Britain obliges us to take from her 
only is as much taking money out of our pockets as 
to tax our estates, and must be equally excluded 
by Mr. Pitt's prohibition. 

You all along argue upon a supposititious denial 
of the right of Parliament to regulate our trade. 
You tell us: "It will never give up the right of 
regulating the trade of the colonies"; and, in an 
other place: "If we succeed in depriving Great 
Britain of the power of regulating our trade, the 

The Farmer Refuted 129 

colonies will probably be soon at variance with each 
other. Their commercial interests will interfere1; 
there will be no supreme power to interpose; and 
discord and animosity must ensue." 

I leave others to determine whether you are more 
defective in memory or honesty: but in order to 
show that you are starting difficulties where there 
are really none, I will transcribe, for your perusal, 
part of the fourth resolve of the Congress. After 
asserting the right of the several provincial legisla 
tures to an exclusive power of legislation "in all 
cases of taxation and internal policy," they conclude 
thus: "But from the necessity of the case, and a 
regard to the mutual interests of both countries, we 
cheerfully consent to the operation of such acts of 
the British Parliament, as are bona fide restrained to 
the regulation of our external commerce, for the pur 
pose of securing the commercial advantages of the 
whole empire to the mother country, and the com 
mercial benefits of its respective members; exclud 
ing every idea of taxation, internal or external, for 
raising a revenue on the subjects in America without 
their consent." 

It seems to me not impossible that our trade may 
be so regulated as to prevent the discord and ani 
mosity, at the prospect of which you are so terrified, 
without the least assistance from a revenue. 

Thus have I not only disproved the existence of 
that parliamentary authority of which you are so 
zealous an abettor, but also shown that the mode 

1 1 do not see any reason to believe this would be the case; but as 
it is of no importance to controvert it, I shall pass it over. 

VOL. I.— Q. 

Alexander Hamilton 

you have proposed for the accommodation of our 
disputes would be destructive to American freedom. 
My next business is to vindicate the Congress by a 
few natural inferences, and such reflections on the 
state of our commercial connection with the mother 
country as are necessary to show the insignificancy 
of your objections to my former arguments on this 
head. 

Since it has been proved, that the British Parlia 
ment has no right either to the legislation or taxa 
tion of America, and since neither could be ceded 
without betraying our liberties, the Congress would 
have acted inconsistent with their duty to their 
country had they done it. Their conduct, therefore, 
so far from being reprehensible, was perfectly jus 
tifiable and laudable. 

The regulation of our trade, in the sense it is now 
admitted, is the only power we can, with justice to 
ourselves, permit the British Parliament to exercise ; 
and it is a privilege of so important a nature, so 
beneficial and lucrative to Great Britain, that she 
ought, in equity, to be contented with it, and not 
attempt to grasp at any thing more. The Congress, 
therefore, have made the only concession which the 
welfare and prosperity of America would warrant, 
or which Great Britain, in reason, could expect. 

All your clamors, therefore, against them for not 
having drawn some proper line are groundless and 
ridiculous. They have drawn the only line which 
American freedom will authorize, or which the re 
lation between the parent state and the colonies 
requires. 

The Farmer Refuted 131 

It is a necessary consequence, and not an assumed 
point, that the claim of Parliament to bind us by 
statutes in all cases whatsoever is unconstitutional, un 
just, and tyrannical; and the repeated attempts to 
carry it into execution evince a fixed, inveterate de 
sign to exterminate the liberties of America. 

Mr. Grenville, during his administration, was the 
projector of this scheme. His conduct, as a min 
ister, has been severely arraigned by his successors 
in office, and by the nation in general; but, notwith 
standing this, a measure which disgraces his char 
acter more than any thing else has been steadily 
pursued ever since. 

The Stamp Act was the commencement of our 
misfortunes; which, in consequence of the spirited 
opposition made by us, was repealed. The Revenue 
Act, imposing duties on paper, glass, etc., came next, 
and was also partly repealed on the same account. 
A part, however, was left to be the instrument of 
some future attack. The present minister, in con 
junction with a mercenary tribe of merchants, at 
tempted to effect, by stratagem, what could not be 
done by an open, undisguised manner of proceeding. 
His emissaries, everywhere, were set to work. They 
endeavored, by every possible device, to allure us 
into the snare. The act, passed for the purpose, was 
misrepresented; and we were assured, with all the 
parade of pretended patriotism, that our liberties 
were in no danger. The advantage we should re 
ceive from the probable cheapness of English tea 
was played off with every exaggeration of falsehood, 
and specious declamations on the criminality of 

132 Alexander Hamilton 

illicit trade served as a gilding for the whole. Thus 
truth and its opposite were blended. The men who 
could make just reflections on the sanctity of an 
oath were yet base enough to strike at the vitals of 
those rights which ought to be held sacred by every 
rational being. 

It so happened that the first tea ship arrived at 
Boston. The Assembly of that province, justly 
alarmed at the consequences, made repeated applica 
tions to the consignees for the East India Company, 
requesting them to send back the tea. They as 
often refused to comply. The ship was detained till 
the time was elapsed ; after which the tea must have 
been landed, and the duties paid, or it would have 
been seized by the Custom-House. To prevent this, 
a part of the citizens of Boston assembled, pro 
ceeded to the ship, and threw the tea into the river.1 

The scheme of the ministry was disappointed on 
all hands. The tea was returned from all the colo 
nies except South Carolina. It was landed there; 
but such precautions were taken as equally served 
to baffle their attempt. 

This abortion of their favorite plan, inflamed the 
ministerial ire. They breathed nothing but ven 
geance against America. Menaces of punishment 
resounded through both Houses of Parliament. 
The Commons of Great Britain spoke more in the 
supercilious tone of masters than in the becoming 
language of fellow-subjects. To all the judicious 
reasonings of a Burke, or Barre, no other answer was 

1 I shall examine the justice and policy of this procedure in some 
future publication. 

The Farmer Refuted 133 

returned than the idle tale of lenity and severity. 
Much was said on their past forbearance, and of their 
future resentment. This was the burthen of the 
song. The Quixote minister, too, promised to bring 
America to his feet. Humiliating idea, and such as 
ought to be spurned by every free-born American! 

Boston was the first victim to the meditated ven 
geance. An act was passed to block up her ports 
and destroy her commerce, with every aggravating 
circumstance that can be imagined. It was not left 
at her option to elude the stroke by paying for the 
tea; but she was also to make such satisfaction to 
the officers of his Majesty's revenue, and others who 
might have suffered, as should be judged reasonable 
by the governor. 

Nor is this all. Before her commerce could be re 
stored, she must have submitted to the authority 
claimed and exercised by the Parliament.1 

Had the rest of America passively looked on while 
a sister colony was subjugated, the same fate would 
gradually have overtaken all. The safety of the 

1 This must be evident to every person who has read the act. The 
prefatory part of it is in these words: "Whereas, dangerous commo 
tions and insurrections have been fomented and raised in the town 
of Boston, etc.; in which commotions and insurrections, certain 
valuable cargoes of tea, etc., were seized and destroyed : And whereas, 
in the present condition of the said town and harbor, the commerce of 
his Majesty's subjects cannot be safely carried on there, nor the customs 
payable to his Majesty dully collected," etc. 

The commotions specified are those in which the tea was destroyed; 
the commerce obstructed was that of the East India Company; and 
the customs which could not be collected were those on the tea. These 
are the evils the act is intended to punish and remove; accordingly it 
provides that "whenever it shall appear to his Majesty, in his privy 
council, that peace and obedience to the laws (i. e., the laws of Parlia 
ment) shall be so far restored in the said town of Boston that the 

134 Alexander Hamilton 

whole depends upon the mutual protection of every 
part. If the sword of oppression be permitted to 
lop off one limb without opposition, reiterated 
strokes will soon dismember the whole body. Hence, 
it was the duty and interest of all the colonies to 
succor and support the one which was suffering. It 
is sometimes sagaciously urged, that we ought to 
commiserate the distresses of the people of Massa 
chusetts, but not intermeddle in their affairs, so far 
as perhaps to bring ourselves into like circumstances 
with them. This might be good reasoning, if our 
neutrality would not be more dangerous than our 
participation; but I am unable to conceive how the 
colonies in general would have any security against 
oppression, if they were once to content themselves 
with barely pitying each other, while Parliament was 
prosecuting and enforcing its demands. Unless 
they continually protect and assist each other, they 
must all inevitably fall a prey to their enemies. 

Extraordinary emergencies require extraordinary 
expedients. The best mode of opposition was that 
in which there might be a union of councils. This 

trade of Great Britain may safely be carried on there, and his Majesty's 
customs duly collected," then his Majesty may, at his discretion, so far 
open the port as to him seems necessary. So that until the Bostonians 
shall submit to let the trade of Great Britain be carried on upon her 
own terms, and suffer his Majesty's customs (the duty upon tea, or 
any other Parliament may impose) to be duly collected, they must 
remain in their present distressed situation : that is, unless they resign 
their freedom and put on the ignominious yoke tendered them by 
Parliament, they are never to recover their lost trade. Hence it 
appears how weak, ungenerous, and contemptible that objection is, 
which supposes the Bostonians might have avoided their present 
calamities by paying for the tea. The truth is, they had no alternative 
but submission to all the unjust claims of Parliament. 

The Farmer Refuted 135 

was necessary to ascertain the boundaries of our 
rights, and to give weight and dignity to our measures, 
both in Great Britain and America. A Congress 
was accordingly proposed, and universally agreed to. 

You, sir, triumph in the supposed illegality of this 
body: but granting your supposition were true, it 
would be a matter of no real importance. When 
the first principles of civil society are violated, and 
the rights of a whole people are invaded, the com 
mon forms of municipal law are not to be regarded. 
Men may then betake themselves to the law of na 
ture; and, if they but conform their actions to that 
standard, all cavils against them betray either ignor 
ance or dishonesty. There are some events in so 
ciety, to which human laws cannot extend, but when 
applied to them, lose all their force and efficacy. In 
short, when human laws contradict or discounten 
ance the means which are necessary to preserve the 
essential rights of any society, they defeat the proper 
end of all laws, and so become null and void. 

But you have barely asserted, not proved, this 
illegality. If by the term you mean a contrariety to 
law, I desire you to produce the law against it. I 
maintain there is none in being. If you mean that 
there is no law, the intention of which may authorize 
such a convention, I deny this also. It has been 
always a principle of the law, that subjects have a 
right to state their grievances, and petition the king 
for redress. This is explicitly acknowledged by the 
act of the first of William and Mary; and "all 
prosecutions and commitments for such petitioning" 
are declared to be illegal. So far, then, the Congress 

136 Alexander Hamilton 

was a body founded in law; for if subjects have such 
a right, they may undoubtedly elect and depute per 
sons from among themselves to act for them.1 

As to the particular agreements entered into with 
respect to our commerce, the law makes no pro 
vision for or against them; they are perfectly in 
different in a legal sense. We may or may not 
trade, as is most suitable to our own circumstances. 

The deputies chosen in the several provinces met 
at Philadelphia according to appointment, and 
framed a set of resolves declarative of the rights of 
America; all which I have by general arguments 
proved are consonant to reason and nature, to the 
spirit of the British Constitution, and to the in 
tention of our charters. They made the only con 
cession (as I have also shown) that their duty to 
themselves and their country would justify, or that 
the connection between Great Britain and the col 
onies demanded. 

They solicited the king for a redress of grievances, 
but justly concluding from past experience, from the 
behavior and declarations of the majority in both 
Houses of Parliament, and from the known character 
and avowed designs of the minister, that little or no 
dependence was to be placed upon bare entreaties, 
they thought it necessary to second them by re 
strictions on trade. 

In my former defence of the measures of the 

1 All lawyers agree that the spirit and reason of a law is one of the 
principal rules of interpretation; if so, it cannot be doubted that when 
a people are aggrieved, and their circumstances will not allow them 
unitedly to petition in their own persons, they may appoint representa 
tives to do it for them. 

The Farmer Refuted 137 

Congress, I proved, in a manner you never will be 
able to invalidate, that petitions and remonstrances 
would certainly be unavailing. I will now examine 
your frivolous and prevaricating reply. 

You answer thus : " In the commotions occasioned 
by the Stamp Act, we referred to petitions and re 
monstrances; our grievances were pointed out, and 
redress solicited with temper and decency. They 
were heard; they were attended to; and the dis 
agreeable act repealed. The same mode of applica 
tion succeeded with regard to the duties laid upon 
glass, painters' colors, etc. You say, indeed, that 
our addresses on this occasion were treated with con 
tempt and neglected. But, I beseech you, were not 
our addresses received, read, and debated upon? 
And was not the repeal of those acts the consequence ? 
The fact you know is as I state it. If these acts were 
not only disagreeable to the Americans, but were 
also found to militate against the commercial in 
terests of Great Britain, it proves what I asserted 
above; that duties which injure our trade will soon 
be felt in England, and then there will be no diffi 
culty in getting them repealed." 

I entirely deny the fact to be as you state it; and 
you are conscious it is not. Our addresses were not 
heard, attended to, and the disagreeable act repealed 
in consequence of them. If this had been the case, 
why was no notice taken of them in the repealing 
act? Why were not our complaints assigned as the 
inducement to it? On the contrary, these are the 
express words of the first repeal, to which the second 
is also similar: "Whereas the continuance of the 

138 Alexander Hamilton 

said act would be attended with many inconveniences, 
and may be productive of consequences greatly detri 
mental to the commercial interests of Great Britain: 
May it therefore please your most excellent Majesty, 
by and with the advice and consent, etc., that from 
and after the first day of May, 1766, the above- 
mentioned act, and the several matters and things 
therein contained, shall be, and is, and are, hereby 
repealed and made void, to all intents and purposes 
whatsoever." 

The inconveniences and the ill consequences to 
Great Britain are the only reasons given for the revo 
lution of the act. How then can you pretend to say 
it was in compliance with our petitions? You must 
think the complaisance of your readers very great 
to imagine they will credit your assertions at the 
expense of their own understandings. 

Neither is the use you make of the assigned 
reasons at all just. The consequences, so detri 
mental to the commercial interests of Great Britain, 
are not such as would have resulted from the natural 
operation of the act, had it been submitted to; but 
from the opposition made by us, and the cessation of 
imports which had taken place. 

A non-importation (to which you have so violent 
an aversion) was the only thing that procured us 
redress on preceding occasions. We did not for 
merly, any more than now, confine ourselves to 
petitions only, but took care to adopt a more pre 
vailing method; to wit, — a suspension of trade. 

But what proves to a demonstration that our 
former petitions were unsuccessful is, that the grand 

The Farmer Refuted 139 

object they aimed at was never obtained. This was 
an exemption from parliamentary taxation. Our 
addresses turned entirely upon this point. And so 
far were they from succeeding, that immediately 
upon the repeal of the Stamp Act, a subsequent act 
was passed, declaring the right of Parliament to 
bind us by statutes in all cases whatsoever. This 
declaration of the unlimited, universal authority of 
Parliament, was a direct denial of the leading claim 
held up in our petition, and of course a rejection of 
the petition itself. 

The same observations are applicable to the Rev 
enue Act, which, had our addresses been success 
ful, would have been wholly, not partially, revoked; 
and we should not, at this time, have had any occa 
sion to renew our complaints, but should have been 
in a state of security and tranquillity. 

In my former reflections on this head, I urged 
many considerations to show that there is less reason 
now than ever to expect deliverance by means of 
remonstrance and entreaty. And, indeed, if we 
consider the vindictive spirit diffused through the 
words and actions of our oppressors, we must be 
convinced of this. It impeaches the understandings 
of the ministry and the Parliament in the grossest 
manner, to suppose they have renewed their at 
tempts, and taken such violent methods to carry 
them into execution, merely to have the pleasure of 
undoing the whole, in condescension to our prayers 
and complaints. The taxation of America is an 
object too near at heart to be resigned unless from 
necessity; and if they would not have abandoned 

140 Alexander Hamilton 

the principle, there could be no reason to expect 
they would have desisted from the exercise of it in 
the present instance. For the duty on tea is in 
itself very trifling; and, since that is opposed, 
they could not hope to vary the mode in any way 
that would be less offensive and less obnoxious to 
opposition. 

In answer to the instance I produced from the un 
successful application of the Boston Assembly, you 
tell me that "the governor against whom the com 
plaint was made was called to a public trial before 
the only court where the cause was cognizable, the 
King in Council, but the Boston Assembly could not 
support their charge, and the governor was ac 
quitted." The truth is, their charge was extremely 
well supported in the eye of strict justice, but it was 
destitute of the mere formalities of law, and on this 
score it was rejected. They accused him of treach 
ery and falsehood, and produced his own letters 
against him. It was not admitted as a legal charge, 
or crimen; nor the party's letters as an evidence, or 
testis; and by these evasions the criminal escaped 
the punishment he deserved, and instead of it, has 
been advanced to higher honors, while the com 
plainants were unrelieved and insulted. I remember 
when the particulars of this transaction were first 
published, there was one circumstance mentioned: 
that the petition in question was pronounced at St. 
James' to be " a seditious, vexatious, and scandalous 
libel" 

You tell me: "There is also this reason why we 
should, at least, have tried the mode of petition and 

The Farmer Refuted 141 

remonstrance, to obtain a removal of the grievances 
we complain of, — the friends of America and Eng 
land have strongly recommended it as the most 
decent and probable means of succeeding." I wish 
you had been so kind as to have particularized those 
friends you speak of. I am inclined to believe you 
would have found some difficulty in this. There 
have been some publications in the newspapers, 
said to be extracts of letters from England ; but who 
are the authors of them? How do you know they 
were not written in America? or, if they came from 
England, that the writers of them were really sin 
cere friends? I have heard one or two persons 
named as the authors of some of these letters; but 
they were those whose sincerity we have the greatest 
reason to distrust. The general tenor of advice from 
those with whose integrity we are best acquainted, 
has been, to place no dependence on the justice or 
clemency of Great Britain, but to work our deliver 
ance by a spirited and self-denying opposition. Re 
strictions on our trade have been expressly pointed 
out and recommended as the only probable source 
of redress. 

You say : "If the information from England be 
true, we have by our haughty demands detached 
most of our friends there from our interest, and 
forced them to take part against us." Pray, sir, 
where did you get this information? Is there 
any inhabitant of the invisible world that brings in 
telligence to you in a supernatural way? There 
have been no arrivals from England preceding the 
time you wrote your letter, that have brought any 

i42 Alexander Hamilton 

account of the proceedings of the Congress being re 
ceived there, or of the consequences resulting from 
them. Your information must have either come to 
you in a miraculous manner, or it must be a fiction 
of your own imagination. 

But there are other powerful reasons against trust 
ing to petitions only, in our present circumstances. 
The town of Boston is in a very critical situation. 
Men, under sufferings, are extremely apt, either to 
plunge into desperation, or to grow disheartened and 
dejected. If the colonies, in general, appear remiss, 
or unwilling to adopt vigorous measures, in order to 
procure the most speedy relief, the people of Massa 
chusetts might perhaps have been hurried on to a 
rash and fatal conduct, or they might have become 
languid and lifeless. Delays are extremely danger 
ous in affairs of such vast consequence. 

The dispute might have been spun out by minis 
terial artifice, till the generality of the people became 
careless and negligent, and, of course, fitter to be 
imposed upon, and less forward to assert their rights 
with firmness and spirit. THE HAND OF BRIBERY 

MIGHT HAVE BEEN STRETCHED ACROSS THE ATLANTIC, 

and the number of domestic vipers increased among 
us. The ministry and their agents here are active 
and subtile; nothing would have been neglected that 
might have a tendency to deceive the ignorant and 
unwary, or to attract the dishonest and avaricious. 
How great an influence places, pensions, and honors 
have upon the minds of men, we may easily discover, 
by contrasting the former with the present conduct 
of some among ourselves. Many who, at the time 

The Farmer Refuted 143 

of the Stamp Act, were loudest in the cause of liberty, 
and the most ardent promoters of the spirited pro 
ceedings on that occasion, have now, from patriots 
of the first magnitude, dwindled into moderate men, 
friends to order and good government, dutiful and 
zealous servants to the ministry. 

Had our petitions failed, we should have found 
our difficulties multiplied much more than we can 
imagine; and since there was the highest proba 
bility of a failure, it would have been madness to 
have hazarded so much upon so unpromising a 
footing. 

It betrays an ignorance of human nature to sup 
pose that a design formed and ripened for several 
years against the liberties of any people, might be 
frustrated by the mere force of entreaty. Men must 
cease to be as fond of power as they are before this 
can be the case. 

I therefore infer that if the Congress had not con 
certed other, more efficacious measures, they would 
have trifled away the liberties of their country, and 
merited censure instead of approbation. Commer 
cial regulations were the only peaceable means from 
which we could have the least hope of success. 
These they have entered into ; and these, I maintain, 
must succeed, if they are not treacherously or pusil- 
lanimously infringed. 

You tell me, " I overrate the importance of these 
colonies to the British empire"; and proceed to 
make such assertions as must convince every intel 
ligent person that you are either a mortal foe to 
truth or totally ignorant of the matter you undertake. 

144 Alexander Hamilton 

The following extracts will show whether my repre 
sentations have been just or not. 

" Our plantations spend mostly our English man 
ufactures — and those of all sorts almost imaginable, 
in prodigious quantities ; and employ near two thirds 
of all our English shipping; so that we have more 
people in England, by reason of our plantations in 
America.1 

" We may safely advance, that our trade and navi 
gation are greatly increased by our colonies, and that 
they really are a source of treasure and naval power 
to this kingdom, since they work for us, and their 
treasure centres here. Before their settlement, our 
manufactures were few, and those but indifferent; the 
number of English merchants very small; and the 
whole shipping of the nation much inferior to what 
now belongs to the northern colonies only. These 
are certain facts. But since their establishment, our 
condition has altered for the better, almost to a de 
gree beyond credibility. Our manufactures are pro 
digiously increased, chiefly by the demand for them 
in the plantations, where they at least take off one 
half, and supply us with many valuable commodities 
for exportation, which is as great emolument to the 
mother kingdom as to the plantations themselves." 2 

The same author says, in another place : " Before 
the settlement of these colonies, our manufactures 
were few, and those but indifferent. In those days, 
we had, not only our naval stores, but our ships, from 
our neighbors." 

" I shall sum up my whole remarks," says another 

1 Postlethwait. 2 Ibid. 

The Farmer Refuted 145 

writer, " on our American colonies, with this observa 
tion: that, as they are a certain annual revenue of 
several millions sterling to their mother country, they 
ought carefully to be protected, duly encouraged, 
and every opportunity that presents improved for 
their increment and advantage; as every one they 
can possibly reap, must at last return to us with 
interest." x 

These quotations clearly prove that the colonies 
are of the last importance to Great Britain. They 
not only take off vast quantities of her manufactures, 
but furnish her with materials to extend her trade 
with foreign nations. They also supply her with na 
val stores, and, in a great measure, with a navy it 
self. The present flourishing state of her commerce, 
is chiefly to be attributed to the colonies who work 
for her, and whose treasure centres in her. How un 
just, therefore, is it in her not to be satisfied with the 
advantages she has hitherto received from us, but 
to aim at depriving us of our freedom and happiness! 
And what ruinous consequences must flow from a 
cessation of our trade, on which her manufactures 
so much depend! What prodigious numbers must 
be thrown out of employ and reduced to beggary 
and misery! 

" But she is a great nation; has vast resources; 
may easily supply the want of our trade by making 
very small concessions to Portugal, Russia, Turkey, 
etc. Should our non-importation distress her manu 
factures, every man may employ himself to labor 
on a farm; and the price of grain would be much 

1 Les mercatoria. 

VOL. J. — IO. 

146 Alexander Hamilton 

advanced in France, Spain, and the Mediterranean. 
Notwithstanding the present high cultivation of the 
lands in England, that kingdom is capable of being 
improved, by agriculture and commerce, so as to 
maintain double the number of people that it does 
at present. The improvements in Scotland within 
the last thirty years are amazing. The enterprising 
spirit of the people has opened an easy intercourse 
between all parts of the country, and they have been 
enriched by commerce to a surprising degree." 

I can hardly prevail upon myself to give a serious 
answer to such ridiculous rant ; but it may be requis 
ite for the sake of the uninformed, and of course it 
would be improper to decline it. 

The national debt is now about one hundred and 
forty millions sterling — a debt unparalleled in the 
annals of any country besides. The surplus of the 
annual revenues, after paying the interest of this 
debt, and the usual expenses of the nation, is upon an 
average about one million and a quarter sterling * ; 
so that with all their present resources they would 
not be able to discharge the public debt in less than 
one hundred and twelve years, should the peace con 
tinue all that time. It is well known that most of 
the necessaries of life are at present heavily taxed in 
Great Britain and Ireland. The common people are 
extremely impoverished, and find it very difficult 
to procure a subsistence. They are totally unable to 
bear any new impositions; and of course there can 

1 See a calculation made by Blackstone. He says, the year '65, 
two millions were paid, and three millions in the succeeding years; 
i. e., five millions in four years. 

The Farmer Refuted 147 

be no new internal sources opened. These are stub 
born facts, and notorious to every person that has 
the least acquaintance with the situation of the two 
kingdoms. Had there been the vast resources you 
speak of, why have they not been improved to ex 
onerate the people and discharge the enormous debt 
of the nation ? The guardians of the state have been 
a supine, negligent, and stupid pack indeed, to have 
overlooked, in the manner they have done, those 
numerous expedients they might have fallen upon 
for the relief of the public. It cannot be expected 
but that a war will take place in the course of a few 
years, if not immediately; and then, through the 
negligence of her rulers, Great Britain, already tot 
tering under her burthens, will be obliged to increase 
them till they become altogether insupportable, and 
she must sink under the weight of them. These 
considerations render it very evident that the mighty 
resources you set forth in such pompous terms have 
nothing but an imaginary existence, or they would 
not have been left so uncultivated in such neces 
sitous and pressing circumstances. 

You think you have nothing to do but to mention 
the names of a few countries, Portugal, Russia, Tur 
key, etc., and you have found out an easy remedy 
for the inconveniences flowing from the loss of our 
trade. Yet in truth Great Britain carries on as ex 
tensive a commerce with those countries, and all 
others, as their circumstances will permit. Her 
trade is upon the decline with many of them. France 
has in a great measure supplanted her in Spain, Por 
tugal, and Turkey, and is continually gaining 

148 Alexander Hamilton 

ground. Russia is increasing her own manufactures 
fast; and the demand for those of Great Britain 
must decrease in proportion. 

"Most of the nations of Europe have interfered 
with her, more or less, in divers of her staple manu 
factures, within half a century; not only in her 
woollen, but in her lead and tin manufactures, as 
well as her fisheries." x 

A certain writer in England, who has written on 
the present situation of affairs with great temper, 
deliberation, and apparent integrity, has these ob 
servations : " The condition of the great staple manu 
factures of our country is well known; those of the 
linen and the silk are in the greatest distress, and the 
woollen and the linen are now publicly bandied and 
contending against one another. One part of our 
people is starving at home on the alms of their 
parishes, and another running abroad to this very 
country that we are contending with. The produce 
of North America, that used to be sent yearly to 
Great Britain, is reckoned at about four millions 
sterling; the manufactures of Great Britain, and 
other commodities returned from hence, at nearly 
the same sum ; the debts due from America to British 
merchants here at about six millions, or a year and 
a half of that commerce. Supposing, therefore, the 
Americans to act in this case as they did in the time 
of the Stamp Act; we shall then have yearly, until 
the final settlement of this affair, manufactures to 
the value of four millions sterling, left and heaped 
on the hands of our merchants and master manu- 

1 Postlethwait. 

The Farmer Refuted 149 

f acturers ; or we shall have workmen and poor people 
put out of employ and turned adrift in that propor 
tion. There will likewise be drawn from our home 
consumption, and out of our general trade and 
traffic, North American commodities to the same 
value ; and debts, to the immense sums above men 
tioned, will be withheld from private people here. 
What effects these things will produce, considering 
the present state of our trade, manufactures, and 
manufacturers, the condition of our poor at home, 
and the numbers of people running abroad, it don't 
want many words to explain and set forth. They 
were before severely felt for the time that they lasted, 
and it is apprehended that the present situation of 
the public is yet more liable to the impression. 
These are some of the difficulties and distresses which 
we are, for a trial of skill, going to bring on ourselves, 
and which will be perpetually magnifying and in 
creasing as long as the unnatural contest shall 
continue." 

From these facts and authorities it appears un 
questionable, that the trade of Great Britain, in 
stead of being capable of improvement among 
foreign countries, is rather declining ; and instead of 
her being able to bear the loss of our commerce, she 
stands in need of more colonies to consume her 
manufactures. 

It is idle to talk of employing those who might be 
thrown out of business upon farms. All the lands in 
England, of any value, have been long ago disposed 
of, and are already cultivated as high as possible. 
The laborious farmers find it an exceeding difficult 

150 Alexander Hamilton 

task to pay their yearly taxes and supply their 
families with the bare necessaries of life; and it 
would be impracticable to give employment in agri 
culture to any more than are already engaged. We 
can have no doubt of this, if we consider the small 
extent of territory of Great Britain, the antiquity of 
its settlement, and the vast number of people it con 
tains. It is rather overstocked with inhabitants; 
and were it not for its extensive commerce, it could 
not maintain near the number it does at present. 
This is acknowledged on all hands. None but your 
self would hazard the absurdity of a denial. The 
emigrations from Great Britain, particularly from 
the north part of it, as well as the most authentic 
accounts, prove the contrary of your representations. 
Men are generally too much attached to their native 
country to leave it, and dissolve all their connections, 
unless they are driven to it by necessity. The 
swarms that every year come over to America, will 
never suffer any reasonable man to believe, upon the 
strength of your word, that the people in Scotland, 
or Ireland are even in tolerable circumstances. 

I cannot forbear wondering, when you talk of the 
price of grain being advanced in France, Spain, and 
the Mediterranean, and insinuate that Great Britain 
may be able to supply them. It will be well if she 
can raise grain enough for herself, so as not to feel 
the want of those considerable quantities she fre 
quently gets from us. I am apt to think she will ex 
perience some inconveniences on this account. 

With respect to Ireland you think yourself under 
no obligation to point out where she may find pur- 

The Farmer Refuted 151 

chasers for her linens so numerous and wealthy as 
we are ; but unless you could do this, you must leave 
that country in very deplorable circumstances. It 
is not true, that she may do just as well with her 
linens upon her hands, as we can with our flaxseed 
upon ours. Linen is a staple manufacture of hers, 
and the sole means of subsistence to a large part of 
her inhabitants. Flaxseed, as an article of com 
merce, is comparatively of little importance to us; 
but we shall stand in need of all the flax we can raise, 
to manufacture linens for ourselves, and therefore 
shall not lose our seed by ceasing to export it- I 
shall say more of this hereafter. 

Nor is it by any means a just inference, that be 
cause Ireland formerly subsisted without a linen 
manufactory, she would not, therefore, severely feel 
any present obstruction to the sale of the article 
in question. Her burthens are now much more 
grievous than they formerly were ; and of course her 
resources ought to be proportionately greater, or 
she must sink under the pressure of them. The 
linen manufactory is, at this time, one of her most 
valuable resources, and could not be materially in 
jured or impeded without producing the most melan 
choly effects. The distressed condition of Ireland 
will not admit of any diminution of her means, but 
pressingly demands an enlargement of them. 

It is of little moment to contest the possibility 
that that country might procure a sufficiency of flax 
elsewhere than from us, till it can be shown where 
she may find a mart for her linens equal to the 
American ; and this you are not willing even to 

152 Alexander Hamilton 

attempt. Yet I have credible information that she 
could not obtain from Holland much more than 
usual (for the reasons I before assigned), and that 
she has always had as much from the Baltic as 
she could conveniently get. With regard to Can 
ada, any considerable supply from thence would be 
a work of time, and no relief to her immediate 
exigencies. 

I observed, in my former pamphlet, that "the 
Dutch may withhold their usual supplies; they may 
choose to improve the occasion for the advancement 
of their own trade ; they may take advantage of the 
scarcity of materials in Ireland to increase and put 
off their own manufactures. " You answer it by say 
ing: " You never yet knew a Hollander who would 
withhold any thing that would fetch him a good 
price." The force of my observation turns upon its 
being his interest to do it. You should have shown, 
that it would be more profitable to him to sell it to 
the Irish than to retain it for the purposes men 
tioned; otherwise, that very avarice you ascribe to 
him will operate as I supposed. 

You are unmercifully witty upon what I said con 
cerning the West Indies ; but the misfortune of it is, 
you have done nothing else than "blunder round 
about my meaning." I will endeavor to explain 
myself in a manner more level to your capacity. 

The lands in the West Indies are extremely valua 
ble, because they produce the sugar-cane, which is a 
very lucrative plant ; but they are small in quantity, 
and therefore their proprietors appropriate only 
small portions to the purpose of raising food. They 

The Farmer Refuted 153 

are very populous, and therefore the food raised 
among themselves goes but little way. They could 
not afford sufficient sustenance to their inhabitants, 
unless they were chiefly or entirely applied to the 
production of necessaries ; because they are so small 
in quantity, and so thickly inhabited. 

These are truths which every person acquainted 
with the West Indies must acquiesce in; and should 
they be deprived of external succors, they must 
either starve or suspend the cultivation of the sugar 
cane. The latter is the better side of the dilemma, 
but that would cut off an annual income of several 
millions sterling to Great Britain; for it cannot 
admit of a doubt, that the chief part of the profits of 
the English West Indies ultimately centres there. 

But, in order to disappoint my malice, you tell me 
that Canada raises four hundred thousand bushels 
of wheat a year; and this, you imagine, will pretty 
well supply the wants of the West Indies. But give 
me leave to inform you, that it would not satisfy a 
tenth part of them. The single island of Jamaica 
would require much more. At a moderate computa 
tion, I believe there are four hundred thousand 
people in the British West Indies only. Let us allow 
a pound of wheat a day, upon an average, to each,1 
and make a calculation accordingly. 

At a pound a day, every person must be supposed 
to consume three hundred and sixty-five pounds a 
year; that is, about twelve bushels. Now, as there 

1 This allowance cannot be thought too much, if we consider that 
the negroes live chiefly upon grain, and must continue to do so, be 
cause the quantity of flesh and fish would be proportionably diminished 
when our supplies failed. 

154 Alexander Hamilton 

are as many people as there are bushels of wheat 
raised in Canada, and as each person would consume 
twelve bushels, it follows that the quantity you men 
tion would not be above a twelfth part sufficient. 

But can we imagine that all the wheat of Canada 
would be devoted to the use of the British West In 
dies ? If our ports were to be blocked up, would not 
the French and Spanish islands be in great distress 
for provisions? And have not the Canadians any 
near connections among them? Would they not 
naturally sympathize with them, and do all in their 
power to afford relief ? And could they find no means 
to accomplish their inclinations? To answer these 
questions is easy. The islands belonging to the 
French and Spaniards will be greatly distressed; 
the Canadians will be very ready and desirous to 
assist them ; and they will contrive some expedients 
to communicate a large share of what their country 
yields. 

What you say concerning the lumber exported 
from Canada is totally false. That country labors 
under many inconveniences which have hitherto 
prevented the exportation of that article, but in very 
small quantities, and of a particular kind. The 
places where the lumber grows are so far distant from 
the seaports that the expense of transportation is too 
great to make it worth while to ship any other than 
butt staves, and these must be brought quite from 
Lake Champlain. This disadvantage, together with 
the number of hands it would require, and the time 
necessary to enter extensively into any branch of 
trade, and to remove all the impediments naturally 

The Farmer Refuted 155 

in the way, would render the situation of the West 
Indies truly pitiable, were they once necessitated to 
depend upon Canada only, for supplies of lumber. 

The attention of Mississippi is entirely engrossed 
in raising corn and indigo. The advantage arising 
from these articles is much greater than would re 
sult from lumber; and of course the people of that 
country will never attend to the latter in preference 
to the former. 

Thus have I proved, in a full, clear, and conclusive 
manner, that a cessation of our trade with Great 
Britain, Ireland, and the West Indies would be pro 
ductive of the most fatal consequences to them all; 
and that, therefore, the peace, happiness, and safety 
of the British empire are connected with the redress 
of our grievances ; and, if they are at all consulted, 
our measures cannot fail of success. 

As to the justice of proceeding in the manner we 
have done, it must depend upon the necessity of such 
a mode of conduct. If the British Parliament are 
claiming and exercising an unjust authority, we are 
right in opposing it by every necessary means. If 
remonstrances and petitions have been heretofore 
found ineffectual (and we have no reasonable ground 
to expect the contrary at present), it is prudent and 
justifiable to try other methods, and these can only 
be restrictions on trade. Our duty to ourselves and 
posterity supersedes the duties of benevolence to our 
fellow-subjects in Great Britain, Ireland, and the 
West Indies. 

You can never confute the arguments I before 
made use of on this head, unless you can prove the 

156 Alexander Hamilton 

right of Parliament to act as it has done, or the 
likelihood of succeeding by petitions. Your feeble 
endeavors to effect this, I have sufficiently baffled. 
You must now collect new forces and make a 
more vigorous effort, or you must quit the field in 
disgrace. 

Such vociferation as this is not to be admitted in 
stead of argument: "Are the Irish and the West 
Indians accountable for our mad freaks? Do you 
expect to extend the tyranny of the Congress over 
the whole British empire, by the legerdemain of 
calling it American freedom? Do you think that 
the Irish and West Indians are in duty bound to 
enter into our non-importation, non-consumption, 
and non-exportation agreements, till our grievances, 
real or pretended, are removed? And that they de 
serve to be starved if they do not? Enjoy your 
folly and malevolence if you can." 

The resistance * we are making to parliamentary 
tyranny cannot wear the aspect of mad freaks to any 
but such mad imaginations as yours. It will be 
deemed virtuous and laudable by every ingenuous 
mind. When I said that the people of Great Britain, 
Ireland, and the West Indies were to be considered 
as politically criminal for remaining neutral while 
our privateers were attacked, I did not mean that 
they ought to enter into any of the above-mentioned 
agreements, but that it was their duty to signify 
in a public manner their disapprobation of the 

1 I mean the general resistance. That there have been some ir 
regularities committed in America I freely confess. It would be 
miraculous and inconsistent with human nature for a people in such 
critical and trying circumstances to act perfectly right. 

The Farmer Refuted 157 

measures carrying on, and to use all their influence 
to have them laid aside. Had they interested them 
selves in the affair with any degree of zeal and earn 
estness, we should not probably have had occasion to 
act as we do, and they would not have been in dan 
ger of their present calamities. Their obligation to 
assist us in the preservation of our rights is of the very 
same nature with ours to carry on a trade with them. 

But you insist upon it, we should not be able to 
live without the manufactures of Great Britain, and 
that we should be ruined by a prohibition of our ex 
ports. "The first winter after our English goods 
are consumed we shall be starving with cold ' ' ; after 
all our endeavors, " the requisite quantity of wool to 
clothe the inhabitants of this continent could not be 
obtained in twenty years." As to cotton, it "must 
come from the Southern colonies; and the expense 
of bringing it by land would be too great for the poor. 
Besides, we have nobody to manufacture our mate 
rials after we have got them." All these, you think, 
are insuperable obstacles, and would, if duly con 
sidered, induce us to bend our necks tamely and 
quietly to the proffered yoke, as much less dreadful 
than the evils attendant upon our measures will in 
evitably be. 

Nature has disseminated her blessings variously 
throughout this continent. Some parts of it are 
favorable to some things, others to others; some 
colonies are best calculated for grain, others for flax 
and hemp, others for cotton, and others for live stock 
of every kind. By this means a mutually advan 
tageous intercourse may be established between 

158 Alexander Hamilton 

them all. If we were to turn our attention from 
external to internal commerce, we should give 
greater stability and more lasting prosperity to our 
country than she can possibly have otherwise. We 
should not then import the luxuries and vices of 
foreign climes; nor should we make such hasty 
strides to public corruption and depravity. 

Let all those lands which are rich enough to pro 
duce flax and hemp be applied to that purpose ; and 
let such parts as have been a long time settled still 
continue to be appropriated to grain, or other things 
they are fit for. We shall want as much of the 
former articles as can be raised, and perhaps as much 
of the latter as may be requisite toward the due im 
provement of the poorer part of our soil. Let it be 
considered that the colonies which are adapted to 
the production of materials for manufactures will 
not be employed in raising grain, but must take 
what they use chiefly from the other colonies, and, 
in return, supply their materials. By this means, 
and by dedicating no more of our land to the raising 
of wheat, rye, corn, etc., than is incapable of produc 
ing other things, we shall find no superfluity of those 
articles, and shall make a very beneficial use of all 
our lands. This is practicable ; difficulties may be 
started, but none which perseverance and industry 
may not overcome. 

The clothes we already have in use, and the goods 
at present in the country, will, with care, be suffi 
cient to last three years.1 During that time we 

1 1 may be thought here to contradict my former assertion, to wit, 
that in eighteen months all the goods we have among us will be con- 

The Farmer Refuted 159 

shall be increasing our sheep as much as possible. 
It is unfair to judge of the future from the past. 
Hitherto we have paid no great attention to them; 
we have killed and exported as fast as we could 
obtain a sale. When we come to attend properly 
to the matter, to kill but few and to export none, we 
shall, in the course of two or three years, have large 
numbers of sheep, and wool enough to go a con 
siderable way toward clothing ourselves. 

Flax and hemp we should undoubtedly have in 
abundance. The immense tracts of new rich land, 
which may be planted with these articles, would 
yield immense quantities of them. What large sup 
plies of seed do we annually export to Ireland! 
When we come to withhold these, and make the 
cultivation of flax and hemp a matter of serious at 
tention, we shall soon procure a plenty of them. In 
speaking of this matter, you confine your views to 
the single small province of New York. You say: 
"We sow already as much flax as we can conven 
iently manage. Besides, it requires a rich, free soil; 
nor will the same ground in this country produce 
flax a second time till after an interval of five or six 
years. If the measures of the Congress should be 
carried into full effect, I confess we may, in a year 
or two, want a large quantity of hemp for the exe 
cutioner. But I fear we must import it. It ex 
hausts the soil too much to be cultivated in the old 
settled parts of the province." 

There is land enough in the other provinces, that 

sumed ; but I only meant that all the goods in the hands of the mer 
chants would be purchased and taken off. 

160 Alexander Hamilton 

is rich, free, and new; nor is it at all liable to the 
objections you make. As to this particular pro 
vince, and any others in the same circumstances, 
let only such parts as are fit be planted with the 
articles in question, and let the rest be managed 
as before. Much more may be produced in this 
than has been hitherto; but if it could not afford 
a sufficiency for itself, let it exchange its grain 
with other colonies that superabound with such 
materials. 

If we sow already as much flax as we can con 
veniently manage, it is because the chief of our 
attention is engrossed by other things ; but the sup 
position is, that there will be less demand for them, 
and more for flax ; and, by attending less to present 
objects, we shall have it in our power for the future 
to sow and manage much more flax than in the time 
past. 

With respect to cotton, you do not pretend to 
deny that a sufficient quantity of that might be pro 
duced. Several of the Southern colonies are so fav 
orable to it that, with due cultivation, in a couple of 
years they would afford enough to clothe the whole 
continent. 

As to the expense of bringing it by land, the best 
way will be to manufacture it where it grows, and 
afterward transport it to the other colonies. Upon 
this plan I apprehend the expense would not be 
greater than to build and equip large ships to import 
the manufactures of Great Britain from thence. 

The difficulty of transportation would be attended 
with one great advantage. It would give employ- 

The Farmer Refuted 161 

ment and bread to a number of people ; and would, 
among other things, serve to prevent there being 
those terrific bands of thieves, robbers, and highway 
men, which you endeavor to draw up in such for 
midable array against the Congress. 

It would, however, be hardly possible to block up 
our ports in such a manner as to cut off all communi 
cation between the colonies by water. 

There would remain some avenues in spite of all 
that could be done; and we should not be idle in 
making proper use of them. 

I mentioned before the vast quantities of skins in 
America, which would never let us want a warm and 
comfortable suit. This is one of our principal re 
sources; and this you have passed over in silence. 
A suit made of skins would not be quite so elegant 
as one of broadcloth; but it would shelter us from 
the inclemency of the winter full as well. 

Upon the whole, considering all the resources we 
have, and the time we shall have to prepare them 
before we are in actual want, there can be no room 
to doubt that we may live without the manufac 
tures of Great Britain, if we are careful, frugal, and 
industrious. 

But it is said we have no persons to manufacture 
our materials after we have provided them. Among 
the swarms of emigrants that have within these few 
years past come to the continent, there are numbers 
of manufacturers in the necessary branches. These, 
for want of encouragement in their own occupations, 
have been obliged to apply themselves to other 
methods of getting a living, but would be glad of an 

VOL. I.— II. 

1 62 Alexander Hamilton 

opportunity to return to them. Besides these we 
should soon have a plenty of workmen from Great 
Britain and Ireland. Numbers who would be 
thrown out of employ there, would be glad to flock 
to us for subsistence. They would not stay at home 
and be miserable while there was any prospect of 
encouragement here. Neither is there any great 
difficulty in acquiring a competent knowledge of the 
manufacturing arts. In a couple of years many of 
our own people might become proficient enough to 
make the coarser kinds of stuffs and linens. 

But, if it should be necessary, we have other re 
sources besides all these. It will be impossible for 
the ships of Great Britain to line the vast extended 
coast of this continent in such a manner as to pre 
clude the admission of foreign aids and supplies. 
After every possible precaution against it, we shall 
still be able to get large quantities of goods from 
France and Holland.1 

I shall conclude this head with one more observa 
tion, which is this : That all such as may be deprived 
of business by the operation of our measures in Amer 
ica may be employed in cultivating lands. We 
have enough and to spare. It is of no force to object, 
that " when our exports are stopped our grain would 
become of little worth.'* They can be occupied in 
raising other things that will be more wanted, to 
wit, materials for manufactures; and only a suffi- 

1 You may perhaps tell me here, that I contradict the sentiments I 
formerly delivered, respecting unlawful trade. But it is by no means 
the case. I despise the practice of avaricious smugglers very heartily ; 
but when a whole people are invaded, there can be no law of any force 
against their procuring every needful succor. 

The Farmer Refuted 163 

ciency of provisions for their own use. In such a 
country as this, there can be no great difficulty in 
finding business for all its inhabitants. Those ob 
stacles which, to the eye of timidity or disaffection 
seem like the Alps, would, to the hand of resolution 
and perseverance become mere hillocks. 

Once more I insist upon it, that Great Britain 
can never force us to submission by blocking up our 
ports, and that the consequences of such a procedure 
to herself, Ireland, and the West Indies, would be 
too fatal to admit of it. If she is determined to en 
slave us, it must be by force of arms; and to at 
tempt this, I again assert, would be nothing less 
than the grossest infatuation, madness itself. 

Whatever may be said of the disciplined troops of 
Great Britain, the event of the contest must be ex 
tremely doubtful. There is a certain enthusiasm in 
liberty, that makes human nature rise above itself in 
acts of bravery and heroism. It cannot be expected 
that America would yield, without a magnanimous, 
persevering, and bloody struggle. The testimony of 
past ages, and the least knowledge of mankind, must 
suffice to convince us of the contrary. We have a 
recent instance, in Corsica, to what lengths a 
people will go in defence of its liberties; and if we 
take a view of the colonies in general, we must per 
ceive that the pulse of Americans beats high in their 
country's cause. Let us, then, suppose the arms of 
Great Britain triumphant, and America mutilated, 
exhausted, and vanquished. What situation will 
Great Britain then be in? What laurels will she 
reap from her conquests? Alas, none! Every true 

164 Alexander Hamilton 

friend to that deluded country must shudder at the 
prospect of her self -destroy ing success. The condi 
tion we should be left in would disable us from pay 
ing the six millions sterling, which is due for the 
manufactures of Great Britain. Instead of the 
present millions derived annually from our trade, 
we should be so distressed and reduced as to be, 
for many years to come, a burthen, and not an ad 
vantage. Millions are soon dispensed in support 
ing fleets and armies. Much British treasure and 
blood would be expended in effecting our ruin. 

This, then, would be the situation of Great Britain. 
Her public debt would be augmented several mil 
lions. Her merchants, who are one of the principal 
sources of her opulence, would, many of them, be 
come bankrupt by the loss of the vast sums due 
them in America. Her manufactures would stag 
nate and decay, and her revenues would be con 
siderably diminished. This continent, which is now 
a rich source of wealth and strength, would be de 
bilitated and depressed. 

Would the ancient rivals and enemies of Great 
Britain be idle at such a conjuncture as this ? Would 
they not eagerly seize the opportunity to recover 
their former losses, and revenge the evils they have 
sustained on former occasions? It will be said: 
This is possible, but it may not happen. I answer: 
Causes must fail of their usual effects if it does not. 
Princes and nations must cease to be ambitious and 
avaricious. The French, from being a jealous, poli 
tic, and enterprising people, must be grown negligent, 
stupid, and inattentive to their own interest. They 

The Farmer Refuted 165 

never could have a fairer opportunity, or a greater 
temptation, to aggrandize themselves and triumph 
over Great Britain, than would be here presented. 
Let us imagine England immersed in a war with 
France, Spain, or any other potent neighbor; with 
her public debt increased, some of her best springs 
dried up, and America ruined — not only unable to 
afford her any assistance, but, perhaps, fired with re 
sentment and a sense of accumulated injuries, ready 
to throw itself into the arms of her enemies. In 
these circumstances, what would be the fate of this 
unhappy kingdom ? Every man of discernment must 
be convinced that ruin would be unavoidable. 

But what reason have we to believe the arms of 
Great Britain would prevail? It will be replied: 
Because she can send against us some of the best 
troops in the world, either with respect to valor or 
discipline; and because we have only a raw, un 
experienced militia to oppose them. Discipline and 
military skill are certainly matters of great import 
ance, and give those to whom they belong a vast 
superiority; but they do not render them invincible. 
Superior numbers, joined to natural intrepidity and 
that animation which is inspired by a desire of free 
dom and a love of one's country, may very well over 
balance those advantages. 

I imagine it will be readily allowed that Great 
Britain could not spare an army of above fifteen 
thousand men to send against the colonies. These 
would have to subdue near six hundred thousand. 
The established rule of computing the number of 
men capable of bearing arms in any nation, is by 

1 66 Alexander Hamilton 

taking a fifth part of the whole people. By the best 
calculations, we are supposed, in America, to exceed 
three millions. The fifth part of three millions is 
six hundred thousand. But in order to be certain 
of our computations, let us suppose there are only 
five hundred thousand fighting men in the colonies. 
Then there will be upward of thirty Americans to 
one British soldier. A great disparity indeed ! And 
such as never can be compensated by any disci 
pline or skill whatever! It will be objected that 
these five hundred thousand cannot act together. 
I grant it ; nor is there any occasion that they should. 
Forty thousand will be a sufficient number to make 
head at a time ; and these must be kept up by fresh 
supplies as fast as there is any diminution. 

Let it be remembered that there are no large 
plains for the two armies to meet in and decide the 
contest by some decisive stroke; where any advan 
tage gained by either side might be prosecuted till a 
complete victory was obtained. The circumstances 
of our country put it in our power to evade a pitched 
battle. It will be better policy to harass and ex 
haust the soldiery by frequent skirmishes and in 
cursions than to take the open field with them, by 
which means they would have the full benefit of 
their superior regularity and skill. Americans are 
better qualified for that kind of fighting, which is 
most adapted to this country, than regular troops. 
Should the soldiery advance into the country, as 
they would be obliged to do if they had any inclina 
tion to subdue us, their discipline would be of little 
use to them. We should, in that case, be at least 

The Farmer Refuted 167 

upon an equality with them, in any respect; and as 
we should have the advantage on many accounts, 
they would be likely to gain nothing by their 
attempts. 

Several of the colonies are now making prepara 
tion for the worst (and indeed the best way to avoid 
a civil war is to be prepared for it). They are dis 
ciplining men as fast as possible, and in a few months 
will be able to produce many thousands not so much 
inferior in the essentials of discipline as may perhaps 
be imagined. A little actual service will put them 
very nearly upon a footing with their enemies. The 
history of the Swedes and Russians, under Charles 
XII. and Peter the Great, will teach us how soon 
a people, possessed of natural bravery, may be 
brought to equal the most regular troops. The 
Swedes at first obtained very signal advantages, but 
after a while the Russians learned to defeat them 
with equal numbers. It is true there was one of 
the greatest men the world has seen at the head of 
the latter; but there was one who emulated the 
Macedonian conqueror at the head of the former. 
Charles was, perhaps, never surpassed by any man 
in courage or skill ; and his soldiers were well worthy 
of such a general. There is also this important cir 
cumstance in our favor, when compared with the 
Russians. They were barbarous and untractable. 
We are civilized and docile. They were ignorant 
even of the theory of war. We are well acquainted 
with it, and therefore should more easily be brought 
to the practice of it, and be sooner taught that order 
and method which we are deficient in. 

1 68 Alexander Hamilton 

It is sometimes urged that we have no experienced 
officers to command us. We labor under some dis 
advantage in this respect, but not so great as is 
believed. There are many who have served in the 
last war with reputation, dispersed throughout the 
colonies. These might have the superior direction 
of matters; and there are men enough of known 
sense and courage who would soon make excellent 
officers. During the disputes between the unfortu 
nate Charles and the Parliament, many country 
gentlemen served in the armies of the latter, and 
signalized themselves for their military virtues. It 
is worthy of observation that the present state of the 
army is not the most favorable. As is always the 
consequence of a long peace, there are many effem 
inate striplings among the officers, who are better 
calculated to marshal the forces of Venus than 
to conduct the sturdy sons of Mars. There are, 
comparatively, but few veterans, either among the 
leaders or the common soldiers. 

You ask me : What resources have the colonies to 
pay, clothe, arm, and feed their troops? I refer you 
to the accounts of Virginia and Marblehead for an 
answer to this question. Our troops, on the spot 
with us, will be much more easily maintained than 
those of Great Britain at such a distance. We are 
not so poor and encumbered as to be unable to 
support those who are immediately employed in de 
fending our liberties. Our country abounds in pro 
visions. We have already materials enough among 
us, to keep us in clothes longer than Great Britain 
would have any appetite to continue her hostilities. 

The Farmer Refuted 169 

Several of the colonies are pretty well stored with 
ammunition. France, Spain, and Holland would 
find means to supply us with whatever we wanted.1 
Let it not be said that this last is a bare possibility; 
that France and Spain have promised not to inter 
fere in the dispute ; and that Holland has long been 
a faithful ally to the British nation. There is the 
highest degree of probability in the case. A more 
desirable object to France and Spain than the dis 
union of these colonies from Great Britain cannot 
be imagined. Every dictate of policy and interest 
would prompt them to forward it by every possible 
means. They could not take any so effectual 
method to destroy the growing power of their great 
rival. The promises of princes and statesmen are 
of little weight. They never bind longer than till a 
strong temptation offers to break them; and they 
are frequently made with a sinister design. If we 
consult the known character of the French, we shall 
be disposed to conclude that their present seemingly 
pacific and friendly disposition is merely a piece of 
finesse, intended to dupe the administration into 
some violent measures with the colonies, that they 
may improve them to their own advantage. The 
most that can be expected is, that they would refrain 
from any open rupture with Great Britain. They 
would undoubtedly take every clandestine method 
to introduce among us supplies of those things 
which we stood in need of to carry on the dispute. 

1 This is certainly a very remarkable prediction for a boy of eighteen, 
and shows as well as anything the penetrating mind which Talleyrand 
appreciated when he said of Hamilton, "II a divine 1'Europe." 

170 Alexander Hamilton 

They would not neglect any thing in their power to 
make the opposition on our part as vigorous and 
obstinate as our affairs would admit of. 

With respect to Holland, notwithstanding express 
engagements to the contrary, her merchants, during 
the last war, were constantly supplying the French 
and Spaniards with military stores and other things 
they had occasion for. The same, or perhaps more 
powerful, motives would influence them to assist us 
in a like manner. 

But it seems to me a mark of great credulity to 
believe, upon the strength of their assurance, that 
France and Spain would not take a still more inter 
esting part in the affair. The disjunction of these 
colonies from Great Britain, and the acquisition 
of a free trade with them, are objects of too in 
viting a complexion to suffer those kingdoms to re 
main idle spectators of the contention. If they 
found us inclined to throw ourselves upon their pro 
tection, they would eagerly embrace the opportunity 
to weaken their antagonist and strengthen them 
selves. Superadded to these general and prevailing 
inducements, there are others of a more particular 
nature. They would feel no small inconvenience in 
the loss of those supplies they annually get from us ; 
and their islands in the West Indies would be in the 
greatest distress for want of our trade. 

From these reflections it is more than probable 
that America is able to support its freedom, even by 
the force of arms, if she be not betrayed by her own 
sons. And in whatever light we view the matter, 
the consequences to Great Britain would be too de- 

The Farmer Refuted 171 

structive to permit her to proceed to extremities, 
unless she has lost all just sense of her own interest. 

You say: " The grand Congress, the piddling com 
mittees, through the continent, have all disclaimed 
their subjection to the sovereign authority of the 
empire. They deny the authority of Parliament to 
make any laws to bind them at all. They claim an 
absolute independency. Great Britain has no choice 
but to declare the colonies independent states, or to 
try the force of arms in order to bring them to a 
sense of their duty." 

It is the common trick of ministerial writers, to 
represent the Congress as having made some new 
demands, which were unknown to former times; 
whereas, in truth, they have, in substance, acknow 
ledged the only dependence on Parliament which 
was ever intended by their predecessors. Nor is it 
true, that they have claimed an absolute independ 
ency. It is insulting common-sense to say so, when 
it is notorious that they have acknowledged the 
right of Parliament to regulate the trade of the col 
onies. Any further dependence on it is unnecessary 
and dangerous. They have professed allegiance 
to the British king, and have bound themselves, 
on any emergency, to contribute their proportion 
of men and money, to the defence and protection 
of the whole empire. Can this be called absolute 
independency? Is it better for Great Britain to 
hazard the total loss of these colonies, than to hold 
them upon these conditions? Is it preferable to 
make enemies of the people of America, instead of 
being connected with them by the equal tie of fellow- 

172 Alexander Hamilton 

subjects? Is it not madness to run the risk of losing 
the trade of these colonies, from which the mother 
country drew x " more clear profit than Spain has 
drawn from all her mines," because they insist only 
upon all the essential rights of freemen? You may 
call it effrontery, consummate assurance, or what 
you please, to say so; but every man, capable of 
taking a full prospect of all the probable mischiefs 
which may result from an open rupture between 
Great Britain and the colonies, will coincide with me 
when I affirm that nothing but the most frantic ex 
travagance can influence the administration to at 
tempt the reduction of America by force of arms. 

It is sufficiently evident, from the respective 
charters, that the rights we now claim are coeval 
with the original settlement of these colonies. These 
rights have been, at different times, strenuously as 
serted, though they have been suffered to be violated 
in several instances, through inattention, or, perhaps, 
an unwillingness to quarrel with the mother country. 
I shall decline producing any other proofs of the 
sense of the other provinces than those already 
mentioned, and shall confine myself to a few ex 
tracts from the resolves of some assemblies of this 
province. 

In 1691, there was an act passed by the General 
Assembly, which contained the following clauses.2 

"Be it enacted, by the Governor, Council, and 

1 See Shipley's speech. 

2 This act is very remarkable. It was drawn up by Messrs. Tazewell 
and Emmett, two gentlemen appointed by the governor for the purpose, 
and remained six years in England before there was a negative put 
upon it. 

The Farmer Refuted 173 

Representatives, met in General Assembly, and it is 
hereby enacted and declared by the authority of the 
same, that the supreme legislative power and au 
thority, under their Majesties, William and Mary, 
King and Queen of England, etc., shall for ever be, 
and reside, in a Go vernor-in- Chief and Council, ap 
pointed by their Majesties, their heirs and succes 
sors, and the people by their representatives met and 
convened in General Assembly. 

"That no freeman shall be taken or imprisoned, 
or be deprived of his freehold, or life, or liberty, or 
free customs, or outlawed, or exiled, or any other- 
ways destroyed ; nor shall be passed upon, adjudged, 
or condemned, but by the lawful judgment of his peers, 
and by the law of the province. 

" That no aid, tax, tallage, custom, loan, benevolence, 
gift, excise, duty, or imposition whatsoever, shall be 
laid, assessed, imposed, levied, or required of, or on, 
any of their Majesties' subjects within this province, 
etc., or their estates, upon any manner of color or 
pretence whatsoever, but by the act and consent of the 
Governor and Council, and Representatives of the 
people, in General Assembly met and convened." 

This act shows clearly the sense of his Majesty's 
representative, his Council, and the Assembly of this 
province, above eighty years ago, which was, that the 
supreme legislative authority, and the exclusive 
power of taxation, should for ever be, and reside, in 
a Governor-in-Chief and Council appointed by their 
Majesties, their heirs and successors; and the people, 
by their representatives met and convened in Gen 
eral Assembly. 

174 Alexander Hamilton 

We may also infer from hence, that the other colo 
nies actually enjoyed similar privileges at that time ; 
for it would have been the height of presumption, 
in this province, to claim such important immunities, 
had not the others been in possession of the like. 

This act, of itself, confutes all that has been said 
concerning the novelty of our present claims; and 
proves, that the injurious reflections on the Con 
gress, for having risen in their demands, are ma 
licious and repugnant to truth. 

You have produced some expressions of the Con 
gress and Assembly of this province, in 1765, which 
you lay great stress upon. The true meaning of 
them may be gathered from the following passage, 
which is taken from the same piece that contains the 
expressions in question. The Congress speak thus: 
"It is humbly submitted, whether there be not a 
material distinction, in reason and sound policy at 
least, between the necessary exercise of parlia 
mentary jurisdiction in general Acts for the amend 
ment of the common law and the regulation of trade 
and commerce through the whole empire, and the 
exercise of that jurisdiction by imposing taxes on 
the colonies." 

They allow only a power of making general acts 
for the amendment of the common law and for the 
general regulation of trade. As to any special laws 
to bind the colonies, in particular, they never in 
tended submission to these; nor could they intend 
a right to impose special duties of any kind for the 
purpose of raising a revenue, which is to all intents 
and purposes a species of taxation. 

The Farmer Refuted 175 

The resolves of our Assembly, the last day of De 
cember, 1771, about three years afterward, will 
serve as a full explanation. 

" As it is not only the common birthright of all his 
Majesty's subjects, but is also essential to the pre 
servation of the peace, strength, and prosperity of the 
British empire, that an exact equality of constitutional 
rights among all his Majesty's subjects in the several 
parts of the empire be uniformly and invariably main 
tained and supported ; and as it would be inconsistent 
with the constitutional rights of his Majesty's sub 
jects in Great Britain to tax them, either in person 
or estate, without the consent of their representa 
tives in Parliament assembled : It is therefore 

" RESOLVED, nemine contradicente : 

11 That it is the opinion of this Committee, that no 
tax under any name, or denomination, or on any pre 
tence, or for any purpose whatsoever, can or ought to 
be imposed, or levied, upon the persons, estates, or 
property of his Majesty's good subjects within this 
colony, but of their free gift, by their representatives 
lawfully convened in General Assembly. 

11 That it is the opinion of this Committee, that 
this colony lawfully and constitutionally has, and 
enjoys, an internal legislature, in which the Crown 
and the people of this colony are constitutionally 
represented; and that the power and authority of the 
said legislature cannot lawfully or constitutionally be 
suspended, abridged, abrogated, or annulled, by any 
power or prerogative whatsoever; the prerogative of 
the crown, ordinarily exercised for prorogations and 
dissolutions, only excepted." 

176 Alexander Hamilton 

A supreme authority in the Parliament to make 
any special laws for this province, consistent with 
the internal legislature here claimed, is impossible 
and cannot be supposed, without falling into that 
solecism in politics, of imperium in imperio. 

I imagine sir, I have, by this time pretty fully 
and satisfactorily answered every thing contained in 
your letter of any consequence. The parts I have 
left unattended to are such as cannot operate, 
materially, to the prejudice of the cause I espouse; 
but I should not have neglected them, had it not 
been that I have already taken a very ample range, 
and it would perhaps be imprudent to delay a 
conclusion. 

Whatever opinion may be entertained of my sen 
timents and intentions, I attest that Being, whose 
all-seeing eye penetrates the inmost recesses of the 
heart, that I am not influenced (in the part I take) 
by any unworthy motive ; that, if I am in an error, 
it is my judgment, not my heart, that errs; that I 
earnestly lament the unnatural quarrel between the 
parent state and the colonies, and most ardently 
wish for a speedy reconciliation — a perpetual and 
mutually beneficial union; that I am a warm advo 
cate for limited monarchy, and an unfeigned well- 
wisher to the present Royal Family. 

But, on the other hand, I am inviolably attached 
to the essential rights of mankind and the true inter 
ests of society. I consider civil liberty, in a genuine, 
unadulterated sense, as the greatest of terrestrial 
blessings. I am convinced that the whole human 
race is entitled to it, and that it can be wrested from 

The Farmer Refuted 177 

no part of them without the blackest and most 
aggravated guilt. 

I verily believe, also, that the best way to secure a 
permanent and happy union between Great Britain 
and the colonies, is to permit the latter to be as free 
as they desire. To abridge their liberties, or to exer 
cise any power over them which they are unwilling 
to submit to, would be a perpetual source of discon 
tent and animosity. A continual jealousy would 
exist on both sides. This would lead to tyranny on 
the one hand, and to sedition and rebellion on the 
other. Impositions, not really grievous in them 
selves, would be thought so, and the murmurs arising 
from thence would be considered as the effect of a 
turbulent, ungovernable spirit. These jarring prin 
ciples would at length throw all things into disorder, 
and be productive of an irreparable breach and a 
total disunion. 

That harmony and mutual confidence may speedily 
be restored between all the parts of the British em 
pire, is the favorite wish of one who feels the warmest 
sentiments of good-will to mankind, who bears no 
enmity to you, and who is 

A SINCERE FRIEND TO AMERICA. 

VOL. I.— 12. 

REMARKS ON THE QUEBEC BILL 
REMARKS ON THE QUEBEC BILL1 

NO. I 

IN compliance with my promise to the public,2 and 
in order to rescue truth from the specious dis 
guise with which it has been clothed, I shall now 
offer a few remarks on the act entitled " An act for 
making more effectual provision for the government 
of the province of Quebec in North America"; 
whereby I trust it will clearly appear that arbitrary 
power and its great engine, the Popish religion, are, 
to all intents and purposes, established in that 
province. 

While Canada was under the dominion of France, 
the French laws and customs were in force there, 

1 An Act to Regulate the Government of Quebec. Passed by Parlia 
ment in 1774. 

5 Hamilton wrote for Holt's Journal for some time before he pub 
lished his answers to the Farmer. His first article was on the destruc 
tion of the tea at Boston, and he continued to write in the newspapers 
during the year. After the appearance of the " Farmer " pamphlets he 
became locally famous, and his "promise" probably refers to some 
pledge made by him in the Journal. The Quebec Bill was odious to 
the colonists on account of its liberty toward the Catholic population 
of Canada, and it was to this feeling that Hamilton appealed, in these 
remarks, in order to still further arouse hostility to England. The bill 
also formed a bad precedent by its arbitrary method of handling colo 
nial affairs. 
1 82 Alexander Hamilton 

which are regulated in conformity to the genius and 
complexion of a despotic constitution, and expose 
the lives and properties of subjects to continual de 
predation from the malice and avarice of those in 
authority. But when it fell under the dominion of 
Great Britain, these laws, so unfriendly to the 
happiness of society, gave place, of course, to the 
milder influence of the English laws, and his Ma 
jesty, by proclamation, promised to all those who 
should settle there a full enjoyment of the rights of 
British subjects. In violation of this promise, the 
act before us declares : " That the said proclamation 
and the commission under the authority whereof the 
government of the said province is at present admin 
istered, be, and the same are, hereby revoked, an 
nulled, and made void, from and after the first day 
of May, one thousand seven hundred and seventy- 
five." This abolition of the privileges stipulated by 
the proclamation was not inflicted as a penalty for 
any crime by which a forfeiture had been incurred, 
but merely on pretence of the present form of gov 
ernment having been found by experience to be in 
applicable to the state and circumstances of the 

I have never heard any satisfactory account con 
cerning the foundation of this pretence, for it does 
not appear that the people of Canada, at large, ever 
expressed a discontent with their new establishment, 
or solicited a restoration of their old. They were, 
doubtless, the most proper judges of the matter, and 
ought to have been fully consulted before the altera 
tion was made. If we may credit the general cur- 

The Quebec Bill 183 

rent of intelligence which we have had respecting the 
disposition of the Canadians, we must conclude they 
are averse to the present regulation of the Parlia 
ment, and had rather continue under the form of 
government instituted by the Royal proclamation. 

However this be, the French laws are again re 
vived. It is enacted: "That in all matters of con 
troversy relative to property and civil rights, resort 
shall be had to the laws of Canada, as the rule for 
the decision of the same ; and all causes that hereafter 
shall be instituted in any of the courts of justice, 
shall, with respect to such property and rights, be 
determined agreeably to the said laws and customs 
of Canada, until they shall be varied and altered by 
any ordinances that shall, from time to time, be 
passed in the said province, by the Governor, Lieu- 
tenant-Governor, or Commander-in-Chief for the 
time being, by and with the advice and consent of 
the Legislative Council of the same." Thus the 
ancient laws of Canada are restored, liable to such 
variations and additions as shall be deemed neces 
sary by the Governor and Council ; and as both the 
one and the other are to be appointed by the king 
during pleasure, they will be all his creatures, and 
entirely subject to his will, which is thereby ren 
dered the original fountain of law ; and the property 
and civil rights of the Canadians are made altogether 
dependent upon it, because the power communicated, 
of varying and altering, by new ordinances, is in 
definite and unlimited. If this does not make the 
king absolute in Canada, I am at a loss for any toler 
able idea of absolute authority, which I have ever 

1 84 Alexander Hamilton 

thought to consist, with respect to a monarch, in the 
power of governing his people according to the dic 
tates of his own will. In the present case, he has 
only to inform the Governor and Council what new 
laws he would choose to have passed, and their 
situation will insure their compliance. 

It is further provided: "That nothing contained 
in the act, shall extend, or be construed to extend, to 
prevent or hinder his Majesty, his heirs and succes 
sors, from erecting, constituting, and appointing, 
from time to time, such courts of criminal, civil, and 
ecclesiastical jurisdiction, within and for the said 
province of Quebec, and appointing, from time to 
time, the judges and officers thereof, as his Majesty, 
his heirs and successors, shall think necessary for the 
circumstances of the said province." 

Here a power of a most extraordinary and danger 
ous nature is conferred. There must be an end of 
all liberty where the prince is possessed of such an 
exorbitant prerogative as enables him, at pleasure, 
to establish the most iniquitous, cruel, and oppres 
sive courts of criminal, civil, and ecclesiastical ju 
risdiction; and to appoint temporary judges and 
officers, whom he can displace and change as often 
as he pleases. For what can more nearly concern 
the safety and happiness of subjects, than the 
wise economy, and equitable constitution of those 
courts in which trials for life, liberty, property, and 
religion are to be conducted? Should it ever com 
port with the designs of an ambitious and wicked 
minister, we may see an Inquisition erected in 
Canada, and priestly tyranny hereafter find as pro- 

The Quebec Bill 185 

pitious a soil in America as it ever has in Spain or 
Portugal. 

But in order to varnish over the arbitrary com 
plexion of the act, and to conciliate the minds of the 
Canadians, it is provided: "That whereas, the cer 
tainty and lenity of the criminal law of England, 
and the benefits and advantages resulting from the 
use of it, have been sensibly felt by the inhabitants, 
from an experience of more than nine years ; There 
fore, the same shall be administered and shall be 
observed as law, in the province of Quebec, to the 
exclusion of every rule of criminal law which did, or 
might, prevail in said province before the year one 
thousand seven hundred and sixty-four." 

As " it is in the goodness of criminal laws that the 
liberty of the subject principally depends,"1 this 
would have been an important privilege, had it not 
been rendered uncertain and alienable by the latter 
part of the same clause, which makes them " subject 
to such alterations and amendments as the Gover 
nor, Lieutenant Governor, and Commander-in-Chief 
for the time being, by and with the advice and con 
sent of the Legislative Council of the same, shall, 
from time to time, cause to be made therein." 

Under the notion of necessary alterations and 
amendments, the king, through the medium of his 
creatures, the Governor and Council, may entirely 
new mould the criminal laws of Canada, and make 
them subservient to the most tyrannical views. So 
that, in this respect, also, the principle of arbitrary 
power, which is the soul of the act, is uniformly 

1 Montesquieu. 

1 86 Alexander Hamilton 

maintained and preserved, in full vigor, without the 
least real or effectual diminution. 

It has been denied, with the most palpable ab 
surdity, that the right of trial by juries is taken from 
the Canadians. It is said that the provincial legis 
lature of Canada may introduce them as soon as 
they please, and it is expected that they will, "as 
soon as the inhabitants desire them," or "the state 
of the country will admit of them." 

A civil right is that which the laws and the con 
stitution have actually conferred, not that which 
may be derived from the future bounty and benefi 
cence of those in authority. The possibility that 
the Legislature of Canada may hereafter introduce 
trials by juries, does not imply a right in the people 
to enjoy them. For in the same sense it may be said 
that the inhabitants of France, or Spain, have a 
right to trial by juries, because it is equally in the 
power of their Legislatures to establish them. 

Since, therefore, it is apparent that a system of 
French laws has been established in the province of 
Quebec, and an indefinite power vested in the king, 
to vary and alter these laws, as also to constitute 
such courts of criminal, civil, and ecclesiastical juris 
diction and to introduce such a form of criminal law 
as he shall judge necessary; I say, since all this is 
deducible from the express letter of the act, or, in 
other words, since the whole legislative, executive, 
and judiciary powers are ultimately and effectually, 
though not immediately, lodged in the king, there 
can be no room to doubt that an arbitrary govern 
ment has been really instituted throughout the ex- 

The Quebec Bill 187 

tensive region now comprised in the province of 
Quebec. 

NO. II 

Having considered the nature of this bill with 
regard to civil government, I am next to examine it 
with relation to religion, and to endeavor to show 
that the Church of Rome has now the sanction of a 
legal establishment in the province of Quebec. 

In order to do this the more satisfactorily I beg 
leave to adopt the definition given of an established 
religion by a certain writer who has taken great 
pains to evince the contrary. "An established re 
ligion," says he, "is a religion which the civil au 
thority engages not only to protect but to support." 
This act makes effectual provision not only for the 
protection but for the permanent support of Popery, 
as is evident from the following clause : " And for the 
more perfect security and ease of the minds of the 
inhabitants of the said province, it is hereby de 
clared that his Majesty's subjects, professing the 
religion of the Church of Rome, in the said province, 
may have, hold, and enjoy the free exercise of the 
religion of the Church of Rome, subject to the king's 
supremacy, etc., and that the clergy of the said 
Church may hold, receive, and enjoy their accus 
tomed dues and rights," etc. 

This is represented as a bare permission to the 
clergy to enjoy the usual emoluments of their func 
tions, and not as a legal provision for their support. 
Much stress seems to be laid on the word "wa;y," 
which is commonly italicized. But though the 
phraseology be artful, yet it is easy to perceive that 

1 88 Alexander Hamilton 

it operates to the same effect as if it had been more 
positive and emphatical. 

The clergy "may hold, receive, and enjoy their 
accustomed dues and rights." They may if they 
please. It is at their option, and must depend upon 
their will; and, consequently, there must be a cor 
respondent obligation upon their parishioners to 
comply with that will, and to pay those dues when 
required. What the law gives us an unconditional 
permission to enjoy, no person can legally withhold 
from us. It becomes our property, and we can en 
force our right to it. If the Legislature of this colony 
were to decree that the clergy of the different denomi 
nations may hold, receive, and enjoy tithes of their 
respective congregations, we should soon find that it 
would have the same efficacy as if it were decreed 
that the several congregations should pay tithes to 
their respective clergy. For, otherwise, the Legis 
lature might confer a right which had no correla 
tive obligation, and which must, therefore, be void 
and inefficacious. But this is contradictory and 
impossible. 

"Tithes in Canada," it is said, "are the property 
of the Roman Church; and permitting a tolerated 
church to enjoy its own property, is far short of the 
idea of an establishment." But I should be glad to 
know, in the first place, how tithes can be the prop 
erty of any but of an established church? And in 
the next, how they came to be the property of the 
Romish Church in Canada, during the intermediate 
space between the surrender of that province to the 
English and the passing of this act? Nothing can 

The Quebec Bill 189 

be deemed my property, to which I have not a per 
fect and uncontrollable right by the laws. If a 
church have not a similar right to tithes, it can have 
no property in them; and if it have, it is plain the 
laws must have made provision for its support, or, in 
other words, must have established it. 

Previous to the surrender of Canada the Catholic 
religion was established there by the laws of France ; 
and tithes were, on that account, the legal property 
of the Church of Rome, and could not be withheld by 
the laity though ever so much disposed to it. But 
after the surrender this circumstance took a different 
turn. The French laws being no longer in force, the 
establishment of the Romish Church ceased of 
course, and with it the property which it before had 
in tithes. 

It is true the clergy may have continued to re 
ceive and enjoy their customary dues, tithes, and 
other perquisites ; but they were not for all that the 
property of the church, because it had lost its legal 
right to them, and it was at the discretion of the 
laity to withhold them, if they had thought proper, 
or to abridge them, and place them upon a more 
moderate footing. Their voluntary concurrence was 
necessary to give their priests a right to demand 
them as before. But by the late act this matter is 
again put into its former situation. Tithes are now 
become the property of the church as formerly, be 
cause it again has a legal claim to them, and the 
conditional consent of the people is set aside. Thus 
we see that this act does not, in fact, permit a toler 
ated church to enjoy "its own property/* but gives 

190 Alexander Hamilton 

it a real and legal property in that which it before 
held from the bounty and liberality of its professors, 
and which they might withhold or diminish at pleas 
ure ; and this, in the most proper sense, converts it 
into an establishment. 

The characteristic difference between a tolerated 
and established religion consists in this: With re 
spect to the support of the former, the law is passive 
and improvident, leaving it to those who profess it 
to make as much, or as little, provision as they shall 
judge expedient; and to vary and alter that pro 
vision, as their circumstances may require. In this 
manner the Presbyterians and other sects are toler 
ated in England. They are allowed to exercise their 
religion without molestation, and to maintain their 
clergy as they think proper. These are wholly de 
pendent upon their congregations, and can exact no 
more than they stipulate and are satisfied to con 
tribute. But with respect to the support of the 
latter, the law is active and provident. Certain 
precise dues (tithes, etc.) are legally annexed to the 
clerical office, independent on the liberal contribu 
tions of the people; which is exactly the case with 
the Canadian priests ; and, therefore, no reasonable, 
impartial man will doubt that the religion of the 
Church of Rome is established in Canada. While 
tithes were the free, though customary, gift of the 
people, as was the case before the passing of the act 
in question, the Roman Church was only in a state 
of toleration ; but when the law came to take cogni 
zance of them, and, by determining their permanent 
existence, destroyed the free agency of the people, 

The Quebec Bill 191 

it then resumed the nature of an establishment, 
which it had been divested of at the time of the 
capitulation. 

As to the Protestant religion, it is often asserted 
that ample provision has been made by the act for 
its future establishment; to prove which the writer 
before mentioned has quoted a clause in the follow 
ing mutilated manner: " It is provided," says he, 
" that his Majesty, his heirs or successors, may make 
such provision out of the accustomed dues, or rights, 
for the encouragement of the Protestant religion, 
and for the maintenance of a Protestant clergy 
within the said province, as he or they shall, from 
time to time, think necessary and expedient." 

It must excite a mixture of anger and disdain to 
observe the wretched arts to which a designing ad 
ministration and its abettors are driven in order to 
conceal the enormity of their measures. This whole 
clause, in its true and original construction, is desti 
tute of meaning; and was evidently inserted for no 
other end than to deceive by the appearance of a 
provident regard for the Protestant religion. The 
act first declares: ''That his Majesty's subjects pro 
fessing the religion of the Church of Rome may have 
and enjoy the free exercise of their religion; and 
that the clergy of the said church may hold, receive, 
and enjoy their accustomed dues and rights. " Then 
follows this clause: " Provided, nevertheless, that it 
shall be lawful for his Majesty, his heirs and succes 
sors, to make such provision, out of the rest of the 
said accustomed dues and rights, for the encourage 
ment of the Protestant religion, for the maintenance 

192 Alexander Hamilton 

and support of a Protestant clergy within the said 
province, as he or they shall, from time to time, 
think necessary and expedient." 

Thus we see the Romish clergy are to have, hold, 
and enjoy their accustomed dues and rights, and the 
rest and remainder of them is to be applied toward 
the encouragement of the Protestant religion; but 
when they have had their wonted dues, I fancy it 
will puzzle the administration, by any effort of po 
litical chemistry, to produce the rest, or remainder. 
Suppose, for instance, A made an actual settlement 
of a hundred pounds on B; and, by a subsequent 
act, should declare that B should continue to hold 
and enjoy his accustomed and annual bounty ; and 
that the rest of the said bounty should be given to C : 
it is evident that C would have nothing, because 
there would be no rest whatever. Exactly parallel 
and analogous is the case in hand. The Romish 
priests are to have their accustomed dues and rights; 
and the rest of the said dues and rights is to be dedi 
cated to the encouragement of the Protestant re 
ligion. In the above-recited quotation there is a 
chasm, the words "the rest of" being artfully 
omitted, to give the passage some meaning which it 
has not in itself. With this amendment, the sense 
must be that his Majesty might appropriate what 
portion of the customary revenues of the Romish 
clergy he should think proper to the support and 
maintenance of Protestant churches. But, accord 
ing to the real words of the act, he can only devote 
"the rest," or remainder, of such revenues to that 
purpose, which, as I have already shown, is nothing. 

The Quebec Bill 193 

So that the seeming provision in favor of the Pro 
testant religion is entirely verbal and delusory. Ex 
cellent must be the encouragement it will derive 
from this source. But this is not all. Had there 
been really provision made, to be applied at the dis 
cretion of his Majesty, I should still consider this act 
as an atrocious infraction on the rights of English 
men, in a point of the most delicate and momentous 
concern. No Protestant Englishman would consent 
to let the free exercise of his religion depend upon 
the mere pleasure of any man, however great or 
exalted. The privilege of worshipping the Deity in 
the manner his conscience dictates, which is one of 
the dearest he enjoys, must in that case be rendered 
insecure and precarious. Yet this is the unhappy 
situation to which the Protestant inhabitants of 
Canada are now reduced. 

The will of the king must give law to their con 
sciences. It is in his power to keep them for ever 
dispossessed of all religious immunities, and there 
is too much reason to apprehend that the same 
motives which instigated the act would induce 
him to give them as little future encouragement as 
possible. 

I imagine it will clearly appear, from what has 
been offered, that the Roman Catholic religion, in 
stead of being tolerated, as stipulated by the treaty 
of peace, is established by the late act, and that the 
Protestant religion has been left entirely destitute 
and unbefriended in Canada. But if there should 
be any who think that the indulgence granted does 
not extend to a perfect establishment, and that it 

194 Alexander Hamilton 

may be justified by the terms of the treaty and the 
subsequent conduct of the Canadians, and if they 
should also be at a loss to perceive the dangerous 
nature of the act, with respect to the other colonies, 
I would beg their further attention to the following 
considerations . 

However justifiable this act may be in relation to 
the province of Quebec, with its ancient limits, it 
cannot be defended by the least plausible pretext, 
when it is considered as annexing such a boundless 
extent of new territory to the old. 

If a free form of government had " been found by 
experience to be inapplicable to the state and cir 
cumstances of the province," and if "a toleration 
less generous — although it might have fulfilled the 
letter of the articles of the treaty — would not have 
answered the expectations of the Canadians, nor 
have left upon their minds favorable impressions of 
British justice and honor," — if these reasons be ad 
mitted as true, and allowed their greatest weight, 
they only prove that it might be just and politic to 
place the province of Quebec, alone, with its former 
boundaries, in the circumstances of civil and re 
ligious government which are established by this act. 
But when it is demanded, why it has also added the 
immense tract of country that surrounds all these 
colonies to that province, and has placed the whole 
under the same exceptionable institutions, both civil 
and religious, the advocates for administration must 
be confounded and silenced. 

This act develops the dark designs of the ministry 
more fully than any thing they have done, and shows 

The Quebec Bill 195 

that they have formed a systematic project of abso 
lute power. 

The present policy of it is evidently this : By giving 
a legal sanction to the accustomed dues of the priests, 
it was intended to interest them in behalf of the ad 
ministration ; and by means of the dominion they 
possessed over the minds of the laity, together with 
the appearance of good-will toward their religion, to 
prevent any dissatisfaction which might arise from 
the loss of their civil rights, and to propitiate them 
to the great purposes in contemplation — first, the 
subjugation of the colonies, and afterward that of 
Great Britain itself. It was necessary to throw out 
some such lure to reconcile them to the exactions of 
that power which has been communicated to the 
king, and which the emergency of the times may re 
quire in a very extensive degree. 

The future policy of it demands particular atten 
tion. The nature of its civil government will here 
after put a stop to emigrations from other parts of 
the British dominions thither, and from all other free 
countries. The preeminent advantages secured to 
^the Roman Catholic religion will discourage all Pro- 
'testant settlers, of whatever nation; and on these 
accounts, the province will be settled and inhabited 
by none but Papists. If lenity and moderation are 
observed in administering the laws, the natural ad 
vantages of this fertile infant country, united to the 
indulgence given to their religion, will attract droves 
of emigrants from all the Roman Catholic States 
in Europe, and these colonies, in time, will find 
themselves encompassed with innumerable hosts of 

196 Alexander Hamilton 

neighbors, disaffected to them, both because of differ 
ence in religion and government. How dangerous 
their situation would be, let every man of common- 
sense judge. 

What can speak in plainer language the corrup 
tion of the British Parliament than this act, which 
invests the king with absolute power over a little 
world (if I may be allowed the expression), and 
makes such ample provision for the Popish religion, 
and leaves the Protestant in such a dependent, dis 
advantageous situation, that he is like to have no 
other subjects in this part of his domain, than Roman 
Catholics, who, by reason of their implicit devotion 
to their priests, and the superlative reverence they 
bear those who countenance and favor their religion, 
will be the voluntary instruments of ambition, and 
will be ready, at all times, to second the oppressive 
designs of the administration against the other parts 
of the empire. 

Hence, while our ears are stunned with the dismal 
sounds of New England's republicanism, bigotry, 
and intolerance, it behooves us to be upon our guard 
against the deceitful wiles of those who would per 
suade us that we have nothing to fear from the 
operation of the Quebec Act. We should consider it 
as being replete with danger to ourselves, and as 
threatening ruin to our posterity. Let us not, there 
fore, suffer ourselves to be terrified at the prospect 
of an imaginary and fictitious Scylla; and, by that 
means, be led blindfold into a real and destructive 
Charybdis. 

PUBLIUS 

POUGHKEEPSIE, October 19, 1778. 

MR. HOLT: 

There are abuses in the state which demand an 
immediate remedy. Important political characters 
must be brought upon the stage, and animadverted 
upon with freedom. The opinion I have of the in 
dependence of your spirit convinces me you will ever 
be a faithful guardian of the liberty of the press, and 
determines me to commit to you the publication of 
a series of letters, which will give you an opportunity 
of exemplifying it. 

The following is by way of prelude. You may 
depend I shall always preserve the decency and re 
spect due either to the Government of the United 
States, or to the government of any particular State; 
but I shall not conceive myself bound to use any 
extraordinary ceremony with the characters of cor 
rupt individuals, however exalted their stations. 

To the Printer of the New York "Journal." 

SIR: — While every method is taken to bring to jus 
tice those men whose principles and practices have 

1 These letters explain themselves. The feebleness and laxity of 
Congress had for a long time excited the reprobation of Washington 
and his friends. The immediate cause of these letters came from the 
revelation by a member of Congress of a secret plan to relieve the dis 
tress of the army in order to make money by forestalling the market. 
2OO Alexander Hamilton 

been hostile to the present revolution, it is to be 
lamented that the conduct of another class, equally 
criminal, and, if possible, more mischievous, has 
hitherto passed with impunity, and almost without 
notice. I mean that tribe who, taking advantage 
of the times, have carried the spirit of monopoly and 
extortion to an excess which scarcely admits of a 
parallel. Emboldened by the success of progressive 
impositions, it has extended to all the necessaries of 
life. The exorbitant price of every article, and the 
depreciation upon our currency, are evils derived es 
sentially from this source. When avarice takes the 
lead in a state, it is commonly the forerunner of its 
fall. How shocking is it to discover among our 
selves, even at this early period, the strongest symp 
toms of this fatal disease. 

There are men in all countries, the business of 
whose lives it is to raise themselves above indigence 
by every little art in their power. When these men 
are observed to be influenced by the spirit I have 
mentioned, it is nothing more than might be ex 
pected, and can only excite contempt. When 
others, who have characters to support, and credit 
enough in the world to satisfy a moderate appetite 
for wealth, in an honorable way, are found to be 
actuated by the same spirit, our contempt is mixed 
with indignation. But when a man, appointed to be 
the guardian of the state and the depositary of the 
happiness and morals of the people, forgetful of the 
solemn relation in which he stands, descends to 
the dishonest artifices of a mercantile projector, and 
sacrifices his conscience and his trust to pecuniary 

Publius 201 

motives, there is no strain of abhorrence of which 
the human mind is capable, no punishment the venge 
ance of the people can inflict, which may not be 
applied to him with justice. 

If it should have happened that a member of Con 
gress has been this degenerate character, and has 
been known to turn the knowledge of secrets to 
which his office gave him access to the purposes of 
private profit, by employing emissaries to engross 
an article of immediate necessity to the public service, 
he ought to feel the utmost rigor of public resentment, 
and be detested as a traitor of the worst and most 
dangerous kind. 

PUBLIUS. 

October 26, 1778. 

The Honorable , Esq.1 

SIR: — The honor of being a hero of a public pan 
egyric is what you could hardly have aspired to, 
either from your talents, or from your good qualities. 
The partiality of your friends has never given you 
credit for more than mediocrity in the former; and 
experience has proved that you are indebted for all 
your consequence to the reverse of the latter. Had 
you not struck out a new line of prostitution for 
yourself, you might still have remained unnoticed 
and contemptible — your name scarcely known be 
yond the little circle of your electors and clients, and 

1 Mr. Samuel Chase, of Maryland, was the member of Congress 
attacked in this letter, and the affair aroused at the time much indigna 
tion and interest. I am indebted for this information to Mr. Worth- 
ington C. Ford, of Washington, who has kindly pointed out these facts 
in a letter to the New York Evening Post, dated November i, 1886. 

202 Alexander Hamilton 

recorded only in the journals of C ss. But you 

have now forced yourself into view, in a light too 
singular and conspicuous to be overlooked, and have 
acquired an undisputed title to be immortalized in 
infamy. I admire the boldness of your genius, and 
confess you have exceeded expectation. Though 
from your first appearance in the world you gave the 
happiest presages of your future life, and the plainest 
marks of your being unfettered by any of those nice 
scruples from which men of principle find so much 
inconvenience, yet your disposition was not under 
stood in its full extent. You were thought to pos 
sess a degree of discretion and natural timidity 
which would restrain you from any hazardous ex 
tremes. You have the merit both of contradicting 
this opinion, and discovering that, notwithstanding 
our youth and inexperience as a nation, we begin to 
emulate the most veteran and accomplished states 
in the art of corruption. You have shown that 
America can already boast at least one public char 
acter as abandoned as any the history of past or 
present times can produce. 

Were your associates in power of a congenial tem 
per with yourself, you might hope that your address 
and dexterity upon a late occasion would give a new 
and advantageous impression of your abilities, and 
recommend you to employment in some important 
negotiation, which might afford you other opportu 
nities of gratifying your favorite inclination at the 
expense of the public. 

It is unfortunate for the reputation of Governor 
Johnston, and for the benevolent purposes of his 

Publius 203 

royal master, that he was not acquainted with the 
frailties of your character before he made his experi 
ment on men whose integrity was above temptation. 
If he had known you, and had thought your ser 
vices worth purchasing, he might have played a sure 
game, and avoided the risk of exposing himself to 
contempt and ridicule. And you, sir, might have 
made your fortune at one decisive stroke. 

It is matter of curious inquiry, what could have 
raised you in the first instance, and supported you 
since in your present elevation. I never knew a 
single man but was ready to do ample justice to your 
demerit. The most indulgent opinion of the quali 
fications of your head and heart could not offend the 
modest delicacy of your ear, or give the smallest 
cause of exultation to your vanity. It is your lot to 
have the peculiar privilege of being universally de 
spised. Excluded from all resource to your abilities 
or virtues, there is only one way in which I can ac 
count for the rank you hold in the political scale. 
There are seasons in every country when noise and 
impudence pass current for worth; and in popular 
commotions especially, the clamors of interested and 
factious men are often mistaken for patriotism. You 
prudently took advantage of the commencement of 
the contest, to ingratiate yourself in the favor of the 
people, and gain an ascendant in their confidence by 
appearing a zealous assertor of their rights. No man 
will suspect you of the folly of public spirit — a heart 
notoriously selfish exempts you from any charge of 
this nature, and obliges us to resolve the part you 
took into opposite principles. A desire of popularity 

2O4 Alexander Hamilton 

and a rivalship with the ministry will best explain 
them. Their attempt to confine the sale of a lucra 
tive article of commerce to the East India Company, 
must have been more unpardonable in the sight of a 
monopolist than the most daring attack upon the 
public liberty. There is a vulgar maxim which has 
pointed emphasis in your case, and has made many 
notable patriots in this dispute. 

It sometimes happens that a temporary caprice of 
the people leads them to make choice of men whom 
they neither love nor respect; and that they after 
ward, from an indolent and mechanical habit natural 
to the human mind, continue their confidence and 
support merely because they had once conferred 
them. I cannot persuade myself that your influence 
rests upon a better foundation, and I think the fin 
ishing touch you have given to the profligacy of your 
character must rouse the recollection of the people, 
and force them to strip you of a dignity which sets 
so awkwardly upon you, and consign you to that 
disgrace which is due to a scandalous perversion of 
your trust. When you resolved to avail yourself of 
the extraordinary demand for the article of flour 
which the wants of the French fleet must produce, 
and which your official situation early impressed on 
your attention, to form connections for monopolizing 
that article, and raising the price upon the public 
more than one hundred per cent.; when by your 
intrigues and studied delays you protracted the de 
termination of the C tt — e of C ss on the pro 
posals made by Mr. W — sw — th,1 C ss — y 

1 General Wadsworth, of Connecticut. 

Publius 205 

G n 1, for procuring the necessary supplies 

for the public use, to give your agents time to com 
plete their purchases; — I say when you were doing 
all this, and engaging in a traffic infamous in itself, 
repugnant to your station, and ruinous to your 
country, did you pause and allow yourself a mo 
ment's reflection on the consequences? Were you 
infatuated enough to imagine you would be able to 
conceal the part you were acting ? Or had you con 
ceived a thorough contempt of reputation, and a 
total indifference to the opinion of the world? En 
veloped in the promised gratifications of your 
avarice, you probably forgot to consult your under 
standing, and lost sight of every consideration that 
ought to have regulated the man, the citizen, the 
statesman. 

I am aware that you could never have done what 
you have without first obtaining a noble victory over 
every sentiment of honor and generosity. You have 
therefore nothing to fear from the reproaches of your 
own mind. Your insensibility secures you from 
remorse. But there are arguments powerful enough 
to extort repentance, even from a temper as callous 
as yours. You are a man of the world, sir; your 
self-love forces you to respect its decisions, and 
your utmost credit with it will not bear the test 
of your recent enormities, or screen you from the 
fate you deserve. 

November 16, 1778. 

The Honorable , Esq. 

SIR: — It may appear strange that you should be 
made a second time the principal figure of a piece 

206 Alexander Hamilton 

intended for the public eye. But a character, insig 
nificant in every other respect, may become interest 
ing from the number and magnitude of its vices. In 
this view you have a right to the first marks of dis 
tinction, and I regret that I feel any reluctance to 
render you the liberal tribute you deserve. But I 
reverence humanity, and would not wish to pour a 
blush upon the cheeks of its advocates. Were I in 
clined to make a satire upon the species I would at 
tempt a faithful description of your heart. It is 
hard to conceive, in theory, one of more finished de 
pravity. There are some men whose vices are 
blended with qualities that cast a lustre upon them, 
and force us to admire while we detest! Yours are 
pure and unmixed, without a single solitary excel 
lence even to serve for contrast and variety. 

The defects, however, of your private character 
shall pass untouched. This is a field in which your 
personal enemies may expatiate with pleasure. I 
find it enough to consider you in a public capacity. 

The station of a member of C ss is the most 

illustrious and important of any I am able to con 
ceive. He is to be regarded not only as a legislator, 
but as a founder of an empire. A man of virtue and 
ability, dignified with so precious a trust, would re 
joice that fortune had given him birth at a time, and 
placed him in circumstances, so favorable for pro 
moting human happiness. He would esteem it not 
more the duty than the privilege and ornament of 
his office to do good to all mankind. From this 
commanding eminence he would look down with 
contempt upon every mean or interested pursuit. 

Publius 207 

To form useful alliances abroad — to establish a 
wise government at home — to improve the internal 
resources and finances of the nation— would be the 
generous objects of his care. He would not allow 
his attention to be diverted from these to intrigue 
for personal connections to confirm his own influ 
ence ; nor would he be able to reconcile it, either to 
the delicacy of his honor or to the dignity of his 
pride, to confound in the same person the representa 
tive of the commonwealth and the little member of 
a trading company. Anxious for the permanent 
power and prosperity of the state, he would labor to 
perpetuate the union and harmony of the several 
parts. He would not meanly court a temporary im 
portance by patronizing the narrow views of local 
interest, or by encouraging dissensions either among 

the people or in C ss. In council or debate he 

would discover the candor of a statesman zealous for 
truth, and the integrity of a patriot studious of the 
public welfare ; not the cavilling petulance of an at 
torney contending for the triumph of an opinion, 
nor the perverse duplicity of a partisan devoted to 
the service of a cabal. Despising the affectation of 
superior wisdom, he would prove the extent of his 
capacity by foreseeing evils, and contriving ex 
pedients to prevent or remedy them. He would 
not expose the weak sides of the States to find an 
opportunity of displaying his own discernment by 
magnifying the follies and mistakes of others. In 
his transactions with individuals, whether foreigners 
or countrymen, his conduct would be guided by the 
sincerity of a man, and the politeness of a gentleman ; 

208 Alexander Hamilton 

not by the temporizing flexibility of a courtier, nor 
the fawning complaisance of a sycophant. 

You will not be at a loss, sir, in what part of this 
picture to look for your own resemblance ; nor have 
I the least apprehension that you will mistake it on 
the affirmative side. The happy indifference with 
which you view those qualities most esteemed for 
their usefulness to society will preserve you from the 
possibility of an illusion of this kind. Content with 
the humble merit of possessing qualities useful only 
to yourself, you will contemplate your own image 
on the opposite side with all the satisfaction of con 
scious deformity. 

It frequently happens that the excess of one selfish 
passion either defeats its own end, or counteracts an 
other. This, if I am not mistaken, is your case. 
The love of money and the love of power are the 
predominating ingredients of your mind; cunning, 
the characteristic of your understanding. This has 
hitherto carried you successfully through life, and 
has alone raised you to the exterior consideration 
you enjoy. The natural consequence of success is 
temerity. It has now proceeded one step too far, 
and precipitated you into measures from the conse 
quence of which you will not easily extricate your 
self. Your avarice will be fatal to your ambition. 
I have too good an opinion of the sense and spirit, 
to say nothing of the virtue, of your countrymen, 
to believe they will permit you any longer to abuse 
their confidence or trample upon their honor. Ad 
mirably fitted in many respects for the meridian of 
St. James, you might there make the worthy repre- 

Publius 209 

sentative of a venal borough, but you ought not to 
be suffered to continue to sully the majesty of the 

people in an American C ss. 

It is a mark of comparison, to which you are not 
entitled, to advise you by a timely and voluntary 
retreat to avoid the ignominy of a formal dismission. 
Your career has held out as long as you could have 
hoped. It is time you should cease to personate the 
fictitious character you have assumed, and appear 
what you really are. Lay aside the mask of patriot 
ism, and assert your station among the honorable 
tribe of speculators and projectors. Cultivate a 

close alliance with your and your , the 

accomplices and instruments of your guilt, and con 
sole yourself for the advantage you have lost, by in 
dulging your genius without restraint in all the 
forms and varieties of fashionable peculation. 

PUBLIUS. 

VOL. I— 14 

THE GOVERNMENT AND THE CONSTL 
TUTION 
THE GOVERNMENT AND THE CON 
STITUTION 

HAMILTON TO JAMES DUANE.1 

LIBERTY POLE, September 3, 1780. 

DEAR SIR: 

Agreeably to your request, and my promise, I sit 
down to give you my ideas of the defects of our 
present system, and the changes necessary to save 
us from ruin. They may, perhaps, be the reveries 
of a projector, rather than the sober views of a poli 
tician. You will judge of them, and make what use 
you please of them. 

The fundamental defect is a want of power in 
Congress. It is hardly worth while to show in what 
this consists, as it seems to be universally acknow 
ledged; or to point out how it has happened, as the 
only question is how to remedy it. It may, however, 
be said, that it has originated from three causes: an 
excess of the spirit of liberty, which has made the 

1 This is the first of Hamilton's papers on the subject of government. 
His earliest essays on this subject and finance are in the form of letters, 
but they find a more appropriate place here than in his private corre 
spondence. This letter is of marked ability, and shows strikingly the 
author's precocious genius. Like most of Hamilton's writings it tells 
its own story and needs no annotation. Such modifications of opinion 
as he afterwards experienced are shown in his subsequent writings. 
214 Alexander Hamilton 

particular States show a jealousy of all power not in 
their own hands, — and this jealousy has led them to 
exercise a right of judging in the last resort of the 
measures recommended by Congress, and of acting 
according to their own opinions of their propriety, 
or necessity; a diffidence, in Congress, of their own 
powers, by which they have been timid and in 
decisive in their resolutions, constantly making con 
cessions to the States, till they have scarcely left 
themselves the shadow of power ; a want of sufficient 
means at their disposal to answer the public exigen 
cies, and of vigor to draw forth those means, which 
have occasioned them to depend on the States in 
dividually to fulfil their engagements with the army, 
— the consequence of which has been to ruin their in 
fluence and credit with the army, to establish its 
dependence on each State separately, rather than on 
them — that is, rather than on the whole collectively. 
It may be pleaded that Congress had never any 
definite powers granted them, and of course could 
exercise none, could do nothing more than recom 
mend. The manner in which Congress was ap 
pointed would warrant, and the public good required 
that they should have considered themselves as 
vested with full power to preserve the republic from 
harm. They have done many of the highest acts of 
sovereignty, which were always cheerfully sub 
mitted to: The declaration of independence, the 
declaration of war, the levying of an army, creating 
a navy, emitting money, making alliances with 
foreign powers, appointing a dictator, etc. All 
these implications of a complete sovereignty were 

The Government and the Constitution 215 

never disputed, and ought to have been a standard 
for the whole conduct of administration. Un 
defined powers are discretionary powers, limited 
only by the object for which they were given; in 
the present case the independence and freedom of 
America. The Confederation made no difference, 
for as it has not been generally adopted, it had no 
operation. But from what I recollect of it, Con 
gress have even descended from the authority which 
the spirit of that act gives them, while the particular 
States have no further attended to it than as it 
suited their pretensions and convenience. It would 
take too much time to enter into particular instances, 
each of which separately might appear inconsider 
able, but united are of serious import. I only mean 
to remark, not to censure. 

But the Confederation itself is defective, and re 
quires to be altered. It is neither fit for war nor 
peace. The idea of an uncontrollable sovereignty in 
each State over its internal police will defeat the 
other powers given to Congress, and make our union 
feeble and precarious. There are instances without 
number where acts, necessary for the general good, 
and which rise out of the powers given to Congress, 
must interfere with the internal police of the States ; 
and there are as many instances in which the par 
ticular States, by arrangements of internal police, 
can effectually, though indirectly, counteract the 
arrangements of Congress. You have already had 
examples of this, for which I refer you to your own 
memory. 

The Confederation gives the States, individually, 

216 Alexander Hamilton 

too much influence in the affairs of the army. They 
should have nothing to do with it. The entire for 
mation and disposal of our military forces ought to 
belong to Congress. It is an essential cement of the 
union; and it ought to be the policy of Congress to 
destroy all ideas of State attachments in the army, 
and make it look up wholly to them. For this pur 
pose all appointments, promotions, and provisions, 
whatsoever, ought to be made by them. It may be 
apprehended that this may be dangerous to liberty. 
But nothing appears more evident to me than that 
we run much greater risk of having a weak and dis 
united federal government, than one which will be 
able to usurp upon the rights of the people. 

Already some of the lines of the army would obey 
their States in opposition to Congress, notwithstand 
ing the pains we have taken to preserve the unity of 
the army. If any thing would hinder this it would 
be the personal influence of the General — a melan 
choly and mortifying consideration. 

The forms of our State constitutions must always 
give them great weight in our affairs, and will make 
it too difficult to bend them to the pursuit of a 
common interest, too easy to oppose whatever they 
do not like, and to form partial combinations sub 
versive of the general one. There is a wide differ 
ence between our situation and that of an empire 
under one simple form of government, distributed 
into counties, provinces, or districts, which have no 
Legislatures, but merely magistratical bodies to exe 
cute the laws of a common sovereign. Here the 
danger is that the sovereign will have too much 

The Government and the Constitution 217 

power, and oppress the parts of which it is com 
posed. In our case, that of an empire composed of 
confederated States, each with a government com 
pletely organized within itself, having all the means 
to draw its subjects to a close dependence on itself, 
the danger is directly the reverse. It is that the 
common sovereign will not have power sufficient to 
unite the different members together, and direct the 
common forces to the interest and happiness of the 
whole. 

The leagues among the old Grecian republics are a 
proof of this. They were continually at war with 
each other, and for want of union fell a prey to their 
neighbors. They frequently held general councils; 
but their resolutions were no further observed than 
as they suited the interests and inclinations of all 
the parties, and at length they sank entirely into 
contempt. 

The Swiss Cantons are another proof of the doc 
trine. They have had wars with each other, which 
would have been fatal to them, had not the different 
powers in their neighborhood been too jealous of 
one another, and too equally matched, to suffer 
either to take advantage of their quarrels. That 
they have remained so long united at all, is to be 
attributed to their weakness, to their poverty, and 
to the causes just mentioned. These ties will not 
exist in America; a little time hence some of the 
States will be powerful empires; and we are so re 
mote from other nations, that we shall have all the 
leisure and opportunity we can wish to cut each 
other's throats. 

2i8 Alexander Hamilton 

The Germanic corps might also be cited as an 
example in favor of the position. 

The United Provinces may be thought to be one 
against it. But the family of the Stadtholders, 
whose authority is interwoven with the whole gov 
ernment, has been a strong link of union between 
them. Their physical necessities, and the habits 
founded upon them, have contributed to it. Each 
province is too inconsiderable, by itself, to under 
take any thing. An analysis of their present con 
stitutions would show that they have many ties 
which would not exist in ours, and that they are by 
no means a proper model for us. 

Our own experience should satisfy us. We have 
felt the difficulty of drawing out the resources of 
the country, and inducing the States to combine in 
equal exertions for the common cause. 

The ill success of our last attempt is striking. 
Some have done a great deal; others little, or 
scarcely any thing. The disputes about boundaries, 
etc., testify how flattering a prospect we have of 
future tranquillity, if we do not frame, in time, a 
confederacy capable of deciding the differences and 
compelling the obedience of the respective members. 

The Confederation, too, gives the power of the 
purse too entirely to the State Legislatures. It 
should provide perpetual funds, in the disposal of 
Congress, by a land tax, poll tax, or the like. All 
imposts upon commerce ought to be laid by Con 
gress, and appropriated to their use. For, without 
certain revenues, a government can have no power. 
That power which holds the purse - strings abso- 

The Government and the Constitution 219 

lutely, must rule. This seems to be a medium 
which, without making Congress altogether indepen 
dent, will tend to give reality to its authority. 

Another defect in our system is want of method 
and energy in the administration. This has partly 
resulted from the other defect; but in a great degree 
from prejudice, and the want of a proper executive. 
Congress have kept the power too much in their own 
hands, and have meddled too much with details of 
every sort. Congress is, properly, a deliberative 
corps, and it forgets itself when it attempts to play 
the executive. It is impossible such a body, nu 
merous as it is, and constantly fluctuating, can ever 
act with sufficient decision or with system. Two 
thirds of the members, one half the time, cannot 
know what has gone before them, or what connec 
tion the subject in hand has to what has been trans 
acted on former occasions. The members who have 
been more permanent, will only give information 
that promotes the side they espouse in the present 
case, and will as often mislead as enlighten. The 
variety of business must distract, and the proneness 
of every assembly to debate must at all times delay. 

Lately, Congress, convinced of these inconven 
iences, have gone into the measure of appointing 
Boards. But this is, in my opinion, a bad plan. 

A single man in each department of the adminis 
tration would be greatly preferable. It would give 
us a chance of more knowledge, more activity, more 
responsibility, and, of course, more zeal and atten 
tion. Boards partake of a part of the inconven 
iences of larger assemblies. Their decisions are 

22O Alexander Hamilton 

slower, their energy less, their responsibility more 
diffused. They will not have the same abilities and 
knowledge as an administration by single men. 
Men of the first pretensions will not so readily en 
gage in them, because they will be less conspicuous, 
of less importance, have less opportunity of dis 
tinguishing themselves. The members of Boards 
will take less pains to inform themselves and arrive 
to eminence, because they have fewer motives to 
do it. All these reasons conspire to give a preference 
to the plan of vesting the great executive depart 
ments of the State in the hands of individuals. As 
these men will be, of course, at all times under the 
direction of Congress, we shall blend the advantages 
of a monarchy and republic in our constitution. 

A question has been made, whether single men 
could be found to undertake these offices. I think 
they could, because there would be then every thing 
to excite the ambition of candidates. But, in order 
to effect this, Congress, by their manner of appoint 
ing them, and the line of duty marked out, must 
show that they are in earnest in making these officers 
officers of real trust and importance. 

I fear a little vanity has stood in the way of these 
arrangements, as though they would lessen the im 
portance of Congress and leave them nothing to do. 
But they would have precisely the same rights and 
powers as heretofore, happily disencumbered of the 
detail. They would have to inspect the conduct of 
their ministers, deliberate upon their plans, originate 
others for the public good; only observing this rule 
— that they ought to consult their ministers, and get 

The Government and the Constitution 221 

all the information and advice they could from them, 
before they entered into any new measures or made 
changes in the old. 

A third defect is the fluctuating constitution of 
our army. This has been a pregnant source of evil; 
all our military misfortunes, three fourths of our 
civil embarrassments, are to be ascribed to it. The 
General has so fully enumerated the mischiefs of it, 
in a letter of 20 August, 17 So,1 to Congress, that I 
could only repeat what he has said, and will therefore 
refer you to that letter. 

The imperfect and unequal provision made for 
the army is a fourth defect, which you will find de 
lineated in the same letter. Without a speedy 
change the army must dissolve. It is now a mob, 
rather than an army ; without clothing, without pay, 
without provision, without morals, without disci 
pline. We begin to hate the country for its neglect 
of us. The country begin to hate us for our op 
pressions of them. Congress have long been jealous 
of us. We have now lost all confidence in them, 
and give the worst construction to all they do. 
Held together by the slenderest ties, we are ripen 
ing for a dissolution. 

The present mode of supplying the army, by State 
purchases, is not one of the least considerable de 
fects of our system. It is too precarious a depend 
ence, because the States will never be sufficiently 
impressed with our necessities. Each will make its 

1 This date is left blank in the J. C. Hamilton edition, but there can 
be no doubt that it refers to Washington's letter to the President of 
Congress, dated: Orangetown, 20 August, 1780. See Writings of 
Washington, vol. vii., p. 156. 

222 Alexander Hamilton 

own ease a primary object, the supply of the army a 
secondary one. The variety of channels through 
which the business is transacted will multiply the 
number of persons employed and the opportunities 
of embezzling public money. From the popular 
spirit on which most of the governments turn, the 
State agents will be men of less character and ability, 
nor will there be so rigid a responsibility among 
them as there might easily be among those in the 
employ of the Continent; of course, not so much 
diligence, care, or economy. Very little of the 
money raised in the several States will go into the 
Continental treasury, on pretence that it is all ex 
hausted in providing the quotas of supplies; and the 
public will be without funds for the other demands 
of government. The expense will be ultimately 
much greater and the advantages much smaller. 
We actually feel the insufficiency of this plan, and 
have reason to dread under it a ruinous extremity 
of want. 

These are the principal defects in the present 
system that now occur to me. There are many in 
ferior ones in the organization of particular depart 
ments, and many errors of administration, which 
might be pointed out, but the task would be trouble 
some and tedious; and if we had once remedied 
those I have mentioned, the others would not be at 
tended with much difficulty. 

I shall now propose the remedies which appear to 
me applicable to our circumstances, and necessary to 
extricate our affairs from their present deplorable 
situation. 

The Government and the Constitution 223 

The first step must be to give Congress powers 
competent to the public exigencies. This may hap 
pen in two ways: one by resuming and exercising 
the discretionary powers I suppose to have been 
originally vested in them for the safety of the States, 
and resting their conduct on the candor of their 
countrymen and the necessity of the conjuncture; 
the other, by calling immediately a Convention of 
all the States, with full authority to conclude finally 
upon a General Confederation, stating to them be 
forehand, explicitly, the evils arising from a want of 
power in Congress, and the impossibility of support 
ing the contest on its present footing, that the dele 
gates may come possessed of proper sentiments as 
well as proper authority to give efficacy to the meet 
ing. Their commission should include a right of 
vesting Congress with the whole, or a proportion, of 
the unoccupied lands, to be employed for the pur 
pose of raising a revenue; reserving the jurisdiction 
to the States by whom they are granted. 

The first plan, I expect, will be thought too bold 
an expedient by the generality of Congress; and, 
indeed, their practice hitherto has so riveted the 
opinion of their want of power, that the success of 
this experiment may very well be doubted. 

I see no objection to the other mode that has any 
weight in competition with the reasons for it. The 
Convention should assemble the first of November 
next. The sooner the better. Our disorders are too 
violent to admit of a common or lingering remedy. 
The reasons for which I require them to be vested 
with plenipotentiary authority are that the business 

224 Alexander Hamilton 

may suffer no delay in the execution, and may, in 
reality, come to effect. A Convention may agree 
upon a Confederation ; the States individually hardly 
ever will. We must have one at all events, and a 
vigorous one, if we mean to succeed in the contest 
and be happy hereafter. As I said before, to en 
gage the States to comply with this mode Congress 
ought to confess to them, plainly and unanimously, 
the impracticability of supporting our affairs on the 
present footing and without a solid coercive union. 
I ask that the Convention should have a power of 
vesting the whole, or a part, of the unoccupied lands 
in Congress ; because it is necessary that body should 
have some property as a fund for the arrangements 
of finance; and I know of no other kind that can be 
given them. 

The Confederation, in my opinion, should give 
Congress complete sovereignty, except as to that 
part of internal police which relates to the rights of 
property and life among individuals, and to raising 
money by internal taxes. It is necessary that every 
thing belonging to this should be regulated by the 
State Legislatures. Congress should have com 
plete sovereignty in all that relates to war, peace, 
trade, finance; and to the management of foreign 
affairs; the right of declaring war; of raising ar 
mies, officering, paying them, directing their motions 
in every respect; of equipping fleets, and doing the 
same with them; of building fortifications, arsenals, 
magazines, etc., etc.; of making peace on such con 
ditions as they think proper; of regulating trade, 
determining with what countries it shall be carried 

The Government and the Constitution 225 

on; granting indulgences; laying prohibitions on 
all the articles of export or import ; imposing duties ; 
granting bounties and premiums for raising, export 
ing or importing, and applying to their own use, the 
product of these duties — only giving credit to the 
States on whom they are raised in the general 
account of revenues and expenses; instituting Ad 
miralty Courts, etc.; of coining money; establish 
ing banks on such terms, and with such privileges 
as they think proper ; appropriating funds, and doing 
whatever else relates to the operations of finance; 
transacting every thing with foreign nations; mak 
ing alliances, offensive and defensive, treaties of 
commerce, etc., etc.1 

The Confederation should provide certain per 
petual revenues, productive and easy of collection; 
a land tax, poll tax, or the like ; which, together with 
the duties on trade, and the unlocated lands, would 
give Congress a substantial existence, and a stable 
foundation for their schemes of finance. What 
more supplies were necessary should be occasionally 
demanded of the States, in the present mode of 
quotas. 

The second step I would recommend is, that Con 
gress should instantly appoint the following great 
officers of State: A Secretary of Foreign Affairs, a 
President of War, a President of Marine, a Financier, 
a President of Trade. Instead of this last, a Board 
of Trade may be preferable, as the regulations of 
trade are slow and gradual, and require prudence 

1 This is an interesting sketch of a constitution very like the one 
adopted nearly ten years later. 

226 Alexander Hamilton 

and experience more than other qualities, for which 
Boards are very well adapted. 

Congress should choose for these offices men of the 
first abilities, property, and character in the Conti 
nent, and such as have had the best opportunities 
of being acquainted with the several branches. 
General Schuyler, whom you mentioned, would make 
an excellent President of War; General M'Dougall a 
very good President of Marine. Mr. Robert Morris 
would have many things in his favor for the depart 
ment of finance. He could, by his own personal in 
fluence, give great weight to the measures he should 
adopt. I dare say men, equally capable, may be 
found for the other departments. 

I know not if it would not be a good plan to let the 
Financier be President of the Board of Trade; but 
he should only have a casting voice in determining 
questions there. There is a connection between 
trade and finance which ought to make the director 
of one acquainted with the other ; but the Financier 
should not direct the affairs of trade, because, for 
the sake of acquiring reputation by increasing the 
revenues, he might adopt measures that would de 
press trade. In what relates to finance he should be 
alone. 

These officers should have nearly the same powers 
and functions as those in France analogous to them; 
and each should be chief in his department, with 
subordinate Boards, composed of assistants, clerks, 
etc., to execute his orders. 

In my opinion, a plan of this kind would be of in 
conceivable utility to our affairs; its benefits would 

The Government and the Constitution 227 

be very speedily felt. It would give new life and 
energy to the operations of government. Business 
would be conducted with dispatch, method, and 
system. A million of abuses now existing would be 
corrected, and judicious plans would be formed and 
executed for the public good. 

Another step of immediate necessity is to recruit 
the army for the war, or at least for three years. 
This must be done by a mode similar to that which is 
practised in Sweden. There the inhabitants are 
thrown into classes of sixteen, and when the sovereign 
wants men each of these classes must furnish one. 
They raise a fixed sum of money, and if one of the 
class is willing to become a soldier he receives the 
money and offers himself a volunteer. If none is 
found to do this a draught is made, and he on whom 
the lot falls receives the money and is obliged to 
serve. 

The minds of the people are prepared for a thing 
of this kind. The heavy bounties they have been 
obliged to pay for men to serve a few months must 
have disgusted them with this mode, and made 
them desirous of another that will, once for all, 
'answer the public purpose and obviate a repetition 
of the demand. It ought, by all means, to be at 
tempted; and Congress should frame a general plan, 
and press the execution upon the States. 

When the Confederation comes to be framed, it 
ought to provide for this by a fundamental law, and 
hereafter there would be no doubt of the success. 

But we cannot now wait for this. We want to 
replace the men whose terms of service will expire 

228 Alexander Hamilton 

the first of January; for then, without this, we shall 
have no army remaining, and the enemy may do 
what they please. The General, in his letter already 
quoted, has assigned the most substantial reasons 
for paying immediate attention to this point. 

Congress should endeavor, both upon their credit 
in Europe and by every possible exertion in this 
country, to provide clothing for their officers, and 
should abolish the whole system of State supplies. 
The making good the depreciation of the currency, 
and all other compensations to the army, should be 
immediately taken up by Congress, and not left to 
the States. If they would have the accounts of 
depreciation liquidated, and governmental certifi 
cates given for what is due, in specie, or an equiva 
lent to specie, it would give satisfaction; appointing 
periodical settlements for future depreciation. 

The placing the officers upon half -pay during life 
would be a great stroke of policy, and would give 
Congress a stronger tie upon them than any thing 
else they can do. No man that reflects a moment 
but will prefer a permanent provision of this kind to 
any temporary compensation. Nor is it opposed to 
economy; the difference between this and between 
what has already been done will be insignificant. 
The benefit of it to the widows should be confined 
to those whose husbands die during the war. As 
to the survivors, not more than one half, on the usual 
calculation of men's lives, will exceed the seven 
years for which the half -pay is already established. 
Besides this, whatever may be the visionary specu 
lations of some men at this time, we shall find it 

The Government and the Constitution 229 

indispensable, after the war, to keep on foot a con 
siderable body of troops, and all the officers, retained 
for this purpose must be deducted out of the half- 
pay list. If any one will take the pains to calculate 
the expense of these principles, I am persuaded he 
will find the addition of expense, from the establish 
ment proposed, by no means a national object. 

The advantages of securing the attachment of the 
army to Congress, and binding them to the service 
by substantial ties, are immense. We should then 
have discipline, — an army in reality as well as in 
name. Congress would then have a solid basis of 
authority and consequence; for, to me, it is an 
axiom, that in our constitution an army is essential 
to the American Union. 

The providing of supplies is the pivot of every 
thing else (though a well-constituted army would, 
not in a small degree, conduce to this by giving con 
sistency and weight to government). There are 
four ways, all of which must be united: a foreign 
loan ; heavy pecuniary taxes ; a tax in kind ; a bank 
founded on public and private credit. 

As to a foreign loan, I dare say Congress are doing 
every thing in their power to obtain it. The most 
effectual way will be to tell France that without it 
we must make terms with Great Britain. This must 
be done with plainness and firmness, but with re 
spect, and without petulance ; not as a menace, but 
as a candid declaration of our circumstances. 

We need not fear to be deserted by France. Her 
interest and honor are too deeply involved in our 
fate, and she can make no possible compromise. 

230 Alexander Hamilton 

She can assist us if she is convinced it is absolutely 
necessary, either by lending us herself, or by becom 
ing our surety, or by influencing Spain. It has been 
to me astonishing how any man could have doubted, 
at any period of our affairs, of the necessity of a 
foreign loan. It was self-evident that we had not a 
fund of wealth in this country capable of affording 
revenues equal to the expenses. We must then 
create artificial revenues, or borrow. The first was 
done; but it ought to have been foreseen that the 
expedient could not last, and we should have pro 
vided in time for its failure. 

Here was an error of Congress. I have good 
reason to believe that measures were not taken in 
earnest early enough to procure a loan abroad. I 
give you my honor that from our first outset I 
thought as I do now, and wished for a foreign loan, 
not only because I foresaw it would be essential, 
but because I considered it as a tie upon the nation 
from which it was derived, and as a means to prop 
our cause in Europe. 

Concerning the necessity of heavy pecuniary 
taxes, I need say nothing, as it is a point in which 
everybody is agreed. Nor is there any danger that 
the product of any taxes raised in this way will over- 
burthen the people or exceed the wants of the public. 
Indeed, if all the paper in circulation were drawn 
annually into the treasury, it would neither do one 
nor the other. 

As to a tax in kind, the necessity of it results from 
this principle : that the money in circulation is not a 
sufficient representative of the productions of the 

The Government and the Constitution 231 

country, and consequently no revenues raised from 
it as a medium can be a competent representative of 
that part of the products of the country which it is 
bound to contribute to the support of the public. 
The public, therefore, to obtain its due, or satisfy its 
just demands and its wants, must call for a part of 
those products themselves. This is done in all those 
countries which are not commercial, — in Russia, 
Prussia, Denmark, Sweden, etc., and is peculiarly 
necessary in our case. 

Congress, in calling for specific supplies, seem to 
have had this in view, but their intention has not 
been answered. The States in general have under 
taken to furnish supplies by purchase, a mode, as 1 
have observed, attended with every inconvenience, 
and subverting the principle on which the supplies 
were demanded — the insufficiency of our circulating 
medium as a representative for the labor and com 
modities of the country. It is therefore necessary 
that Congress should be more explicit, should form 
the outlines of a plan for a tax in kind, and re 
commend it to the States as a measure of absolute 
necessity. 

The general idea I have of a plan is, that a re 
spectable man should be appointed by the State, in 
each county, to collect the taxes and form maga 
zines; that Congress should have, in each State, an 
officer to superintend the whole ; and that the State 
collectors should be subordinate and responsible to 
them. This Continental superintendent might be 
subject to the general direction of the Quarter 
master-General, or not, as might be deemed best; 

232 Alexander Hamilton 

but if not subject to him, he should be obliged to 
make monthly returns to the President of War, who 
should instruct him what proportion to deliver to 
the Quartermaster-General. It may be necessary 
that the superintendents should sometimes have 
power to dispose of the articles in their possession, 
on public account; for it would happen that the 
contributions in places remote from the army could 
not be transported to the theatre of operations with 
out too great expense, in which case it would be 
eligible to dispose of them, and purchase, with the 
money so raised, in the countries near the immediate 
scene of war. 

I know the objections which may be raised to this 
plan, — its tendency to discourage industry, and the 
like. But necessity calls for it. We cannot proceed 
without it ; and less evils must give place to greater. 
It is, besides, practised with success in other countries, 
and why not in this? It may be said, the examples 
cited are from nations under despotic governments, 
and that the same would not be practicable with us. 
But I contend, where the public good is evidently 
the object more may be effected in governments like 
ours, than in any other. It has been a constant re 
mark that free countries have ever paid the heaviest 
taxes. The obedience of a free people to general 
laws, however hard they bear, is ever more perfect 
than that of slaves to the arbitrary will of a prince. 
To this may be added, that Sweden was always a 
free government, and is so now, in a great degree, 
notwithstanding the late revolution. 

How far it may be practicable to erect a bank on 

The Government and the Constitution 233 

the joint credit of the public and of individuals can 
only be certainly determined by the experiment. 
But it is of so much importance, that the experiment 
ought to be fully tried. When I saw the subscrip 
tions going on to the bank established for supplying 
the army, I was in hopes it was only the embryo of a 
more permanent and extensive establishment. But 
I have reason to believe I shall be disappointed. It 
does not seem to be at all conducted on the true 
principles of a bank. 

The directors of it are purchasing with their stock 
instead of bank-notes, as I expected, in consequence 
of which it must turn out to be a mere subscription 
of a particular sum of money for a particular purpose. 

Paper credit never was long supported in any 
country, on a national scale, where it was not 
founded on a joint basis of public and private credit. 
An attempt to establish it on public credit alone in 
France, under the auspices of Mr. Law, had nearly 
ruined the kingdom. We have seen the effects of it 
in America, and every successive experiment proves 
the futility of the attempt. Our new money is de 
preciating almost as fast as the old, though it has, in 
some States, as real funds as paper-money ever had. 
The reason is that the moneyed men have not an 
immediate interest to uphold its credit. They may 
even, in many ways, find it their interest to under 
mine it. The only certain manner to obtain a 
permanent paper credit is to engage the moneyed 
interest immediately in it, by making them con 
tribute the whole or part of the stock, and giving 
them the whole or part of the profits. 

234 Alexander Hamilton 

The invention of banks on the modern principle, 
originated in Venice. There the public and a com 
pany of moneyed men are mutually concerned. 
The Bank of England unites public authority and 
faith with private credit, and hence we see what a 
vast fabric of paper credit is raised on a visionary 
basis. Had it not been for this, England would 
never have found sufficient funds to carry on her 
wars; but with the help of this, she has done, and is 
doing, wonders. The Bank of Amsterdam is on a 
similar foundation. 

And why can we not have an American Bank? 
Are our moneyed men less enlightened to their own 
interest, or less enterprising in the pursuit? I be 
lieve the fault is in government, which does not 
exert itself to engage them in such a scheme. It is 
true the individuals in America are not very rich, 
but this would not prevent their instituting a bank ; 
it would only prevent its being done with such ample 
funds as in other countries. Have they not suffi 
cient confidence in the government, and in the issue 
of the cause? Let the government endeavor to in 
spire that confidence, by adopting the measures I 
have recommended, or others equivalent to them. 
Let it exert itself to procure a solid confederation; 
to establish a good plan of executive administration ; 
to form a permanent military force ; to obtain, at all 
events, a foreign loan. If these things were in a 
train of vigorous execution, it would give a new 
spring to our affairs ; government would recover its 
respectability, and individuals would renounce their 
diffidence. 

The Government and the Constitution 235 

The object I should propose to myself, in the first 
instance, from a bank, would be an auxiliary mode 
of supplies, for which purpose contracts should be 
made between government and the bank, on terms 
liberal and advantageous to the latter. Every thing 
should be done, in the first instance, to encourage 
the bank. After it gets well established it will take 
care of itself, and government may make the best 
terms it can for itself. 

The first step to establishing the bank will be to 
engage a number of moneyed men of influence to 
relish the project and make it a business. The 
subscribers to that lately established are the fittest 
persons that can be found, and their plan may be 
interwoven. 

The outlines of my plan would be to open sub 
scriptions in all the States, for the stock, which we 
will suppose to be one million of pounds. Real 
property of every kind, as well as specie, should be 
deemed good stock, but at least a fourth part of the 
subscription should be in specie or plate. There 
should be one great company, in three divisions: in 
Virginia, Philadelphia, and at Boston; or two, at 
Philadelphia and Boston. The Bank should have a 
right to issue bank-notes, bearing two per cent, in 
terest, for the whole of their stock, but not to exceed 
it. These notes may be payable every three months 
or oftener, and the faith of government must be 
pledged for the support of the bank. It must there 
fore have a right, from time to time, to inspect its 
operations, and must appoint inspectors for the 
purpose 

236 Alexander Hamilton 

The advantages of the bank may consist in this: 
in the profits of the contracts made with govern 
ment, which should bear interest to be annually paid 
in specie; in the loan of money at interest, say six 
per cent. ; in purchasing lives by annuities, as prac 
tised in England, etc. The benefit resulting to the 
company is evident from the consideration, that they 
may employ in circulation a great deal more money 
than they have specie in stock, on the credit of the 
real property which they will have in other use. 
This money will be employed either in fulfilling their 
contracts with the public, by which also they will 
gain a profit, or in loans at an advantageous interest, 
or in annuities. 

The bank may be allowed to purchase plate and 
bullion, and coin money, allowing government a 
part of the profit. I should make the bank-notes 
bear interest, in order to obtain a readier currency, 
and to induce the holders to prefer them to specie, 
so as to prevent too great a run upon the bank, at 
any time, beyond its ability to pay. 

If government can obtain a foreign loan, it should 
lend to the bank, on easy terms, to extend its in 
fluence and facilitate a compliance with its engage 
ments. If government could engage the States to 
raise a sum of money in specie, to be deposited in 
bank in the same manner, it would be of the greatest 
consequence. If government could prevail on the 
enthusiasm of the people to make a contribution in 
plate for the same purpose, it would be a master 
stroke. Things of this kind sometimes succeed in 
popular contests, and if undertaken with address I 

The Government and the Constitution 237 

should not despair of its success, but I should not be 
sanguine. 

The bank may be instituted for a term of years by 
way of trial, and the particular privilege of coining 
money be for a term still shorter. A temporary trans 
fer of it to a particular company can have no inconven 
ience, as the government are in no condition to improve 
this resource, nor could it in our circumstances be an 
object to them, though with the industry of a knot 
of individuals it might be a valuable one to them. 

A bank of this kind, even in its commencement, 
would answer the most valuable purposes to govern 
ment and to the proprietors; in its progress, the 
advantages will exceed calculation. It will promote 
commerce by furnishing a more extensive medium, 
which we greatly want in our circumstances. I mean 
a more extensive valuable medium. We have an enor 
mous nominal one at this time, but it is only a name. 

In the present unsettled state of things in this 
country we can hardly draw inferences from what 
has happened in others, otherwise I should be cer 
tain of the success of this scheme, but I think it has 
enough in its favor to be worthy of trial. 

I have only skimmed the surface of the different 
subjects I have introduced. Should the plans recom 
mended come into contemplation in earnest, and you 
desire my further thoughts, I will endeavor to give 
them more form and particularity. I am persuaded 
a solid confederation, a permanent army, and a 
reasonable prospect of subsisting it, would give us 
treble consideration in Europe, and produce a peace 
this winter. 

238 Alexander Hamilton 

If a Convention is called, the minds of all the 
States and the people ought to be prepared to re 
ceive its determinations by sensible and popular 
writings, which should conform to the views of Con 
gress. There are epochs in human affairs when 
novelty even is useful. If a general opinion prevails 
that the old way is bad, whether true or false, and 
this obstructs or relaxes the operations of the public 
service, a change is necessary, if it be but for the 
sake of change. This is exactly the case now. It is 
a universal sentiment that our present system is a 
bad one, and that things do not go right on this ac 
count. The measure of a Convention would revive 
the hopes of the people and give a new direction to 
their passions, which may be improved in carrying 
points of substantial utility. The Eastern States 
have already pointed out this mode to Congress; 
they ought to take the hint and anticipate the others. 

And, in future, my dear sir, two things let me 
recommend as fundamental rules for the conduct of 
Congress: to attach the army to them by every 
motive; to maintain an air of authority (not domi 
neering) in all their measures with the States. The 
manner in which a thing is done has more influence 
than is commonly imagined. Men are governed by 
opinion; this opinion is as much influenced by ap 
pearances as by realities. If a government appears 
to be confident of its own powers, it is the surest way 
to inspire the same confidence in others. If it is 
diffident, it may be certain there will be a still greater 
diffidence in others ; and that its authority will not 
only be distrusted, controverted, but contemned. 

The Government and the Constitution 239 

I wish, too, Congress would always consider that 
a kindness consists as much in the manner as in the 
thing. The best things done hesitatingly and with an 
ill grace lose their effect, and produce disgust rather 
than satisfaction or gratitude. In what Congress 
have at any time done for the army, they have com 
monly been too late. They have seemed to yield to 
importunity rather than to sentiments of justice or 
to a regard to the accommodation of their troops. 
An attention to this idea is of more importance than 
it may be thought. I, who have seen all the work 
ings and progress of the present discontents, am con 
vinced that a want of this has not been among the 
most inconsiderable causes. 

You will perceive, my dear sir, this letter is hastily 
written and with a confidential freedom; not as to 
a member of Congress whose feelings may be sore at 
the prevailing clamors, but as to a friend who is in 
a situation to remedy public disorders, who wishes 
for nothing so much as truth, and who is desirous of 
information even from those less capable of judging 
than himself. I have not even time to correct and 
copy, and only enough to add that I am, very truly 
and affectionately, dear sir, 

Your most obedient servant, 

A. HAMILTON.' 

1 This letter was not without an immediate influence. The pro 
position in regard to single executive officers resulted in a plan brought 
in by a committee, of which Duane was a member, establishing a 
Department of Foreign Affairs, with a Secretary for its chief officer. 
Soon after followed the establishment of three other executive depart 
ments, the Superintendent of Finance being Robert Morris. 

THE CONTINENTALIST 

THE CONTINENT ALIST' 

PUBLISHED BY LOUDON'S NEW YORK PACKET COMPANY 

FISHKILL, July 12, 1781. 

MR. LOUDON: 

I send you the first number of a series of papers 
which I intend to publish on matters of the greatest 
importance to these States. I hope they will be 
read with as much candor and attention as the object 
of them deserves, and that no conclusions will be 
drawn till these are fully developed. 
I am, sir, 

Your most ob't humble servant, 

A. B. 

NO. I * 
i 

It would be the extreme of vanity in us not to be 
sensible that we began this revolution with very 
vague and confined notions of the practical business 
of government. To the greater part of us it was a 
novelty ; of those who under the former constitution 
had had opportunities of acquiring experience, a 

1 This series of essays may be said to mark the public beginning of 
the movement for a new system of government, which resulted in the 
Conventions of Annapolis and Philadelphia, the adoption of the Con 
stitution, and the formation of the Federalist party. 

2 In the edition of 1851, Nos. 2,3, and 5 of the Continentalist are lack 
ing. They have since been recovered, and the entire series is now 
given here in the order of publication. 
244 Alexander Hamilton 

large proportion adhered to the opposite side, and the 
remainder can only be supposed to have possessed 
ideas adapted to the narrow colonial sphere in 
which they had been accustomed to move, not of 
that enlarged kind suited to the government of an 
independent nation. 

There were, no doubt, exceptions to these observa 
tions, — men in all respects qualified for conducting 
the public affairs with skill and advantage. But 
their number was small; they were not always 
brought forward in our councils ; and when they 
were, their influence was too commonly borne down 
by the prevailing torrent of ignorance and prejudice. 

On a retrospect, however, of our transactions, 
under the disadvantages with which we commenced, 
it is perhaps more to be wondered at that we have 
done so well than that we have not done better. 
There are, indeed, some traits in our conduct as con 
spicuous for sound policy as others for magnanimity. 
But, on the other hand, it must also be confessed, 
there have been many false steps, many chimerical 
projects and Utopian speculations, in the manage 
ment of our civil as well as of our military affairs. A 
part of these were the natural effects of the spirit of 
the times, dictated by our situation. An extreme 
jealousy of power is the attendant on all popular re 
volutions, and has seldom been without its evils. 
It is to this source we are to trace many of the 
fatal mistakes which have so deeply endangered the 
common cause; particularly that defect which will 
be the object of these remarks — a want of power in 
Congress. 

The Continentalist 245 

The present Congress, respectable for abilities and 
integrity, by experience convinced of the necessity of 
change, are preparing several important articles, to 
be submitted to the respective States, for augment 
ing the powers of the Confederation. But though 
there is hardly at this time a man of information 
in America who will not acknowledge, as a general 
proposition, that in its present form it is unequal 
either to a vigorous prosecution of the war or to the 
preservation of the Union in peace; yet when the 
principle comes to be applied to practice, there 
seems not to be the same agreement in the modes of 
remedying the defect; and it is to be feared, from 
a disposition which appeared in some of the States 
on a late occasion, that the salutary intentions of 
Congress may meet with more delay and opposition 
than the critical posture of the States will justify. 

It will be attempted to show, in a course of papers, 
what ought to be done, and the mischiefs of a con 
trary policy. 

In the first stages of the controversy, it was ex 
cusable to err. Good intentions, rather than great 
skill, were to have been expected from us. But we 
have now had sufficient time for reflection, and ex 
perience as ample as unfortunate, to rectify our 
errors. To persist in them becomes disgraceful, 
and even criminal, and belies that character of good 
sense, and a quick discernment of our interests, 
which, in spite of our mistakes, we have been 
hitherto allowed. It will prove that our sagacity is 
limited to interests of inferior moment, and that 
we are incapable of those enlightened and liberal 

246 Alexander Hamilton 

views necessary to make us a great and a flourishing 
people. 

History is full of examples where, in contests for 
liberty, a jealousy of power has either defeated the 
attempts to recover or preserve it, in the first in 
stance, or has afterward subverted it by clogging 
government with too great precautions for its fe 
licity, or by leaving too wide a door for sedition and 
popular licentiousness. In a government framed 
for durable liberty, not less regard must be paid 
to giving the magistrate a proper degree of au 
thority to make and execute the laws with rigor, 
than to guard against encroachments upon the 
rights of the community. As too much power leads 
to despotism, too little leads to anarchy, and both, 
eventually, to the ruin of the people. These are 
maxims well known, but never sufficiently attended 
to, in adjusting the frames of governments. Some 
momentary interest or passion is sure to give a wrong 
bias, and pervert the most favorable opportunities. 

No friend to order or to rational liberty can read 
without pain and disgust the history of the Common 
wealths of Greece. Generally speaking, they were a 
constant scene of the alternate tyranny of one part 
of the people over the other, or of a few usurping 
demagogues over the whole. Most of them had been 
originally governed by kings, whose despotism (the 
natural disease of monarchy) had obliged their sub 
jects to murder, expel, depose, or reduce them to a 
nominal existence, and institute popular govern 
ments. In these governments, that of Sparta ex- 
cepted, the jealousy of power hindered the people 

The Continentalist 247 

from trusting out of their own hands a competent 
authority to maintain the repose and stability of 
the Commonwealth ; whence originated the frequent 
revolutions and civil broils with which they were 
distracted. This, and the want of a solid federal 
union to restrain the ambition and rivalship of the 
different cities, after a rapid succession of bloody 
wars, ended in their total loss of liberty, and sub 
jugation to foreign powers. 

In comparison of our governments with those of 
the ancient republics, we must, without hesitation, 
give the preference to our own ; because every power 
with us is exercised by representation, not in tu 
multuary assemblies of the collective body of the 
people, where the art or impudence of the Orator or 
Tribune, rather than the utility or justice of the 
measure, could seldom fail to govern. Yet, what 
ever may be the advantage on our side in such a com 
parison, men who estimate the value of institutions, 
not from prejudices of the moment, but from ex 
perience and reason, must be persuaded that the 
same jealousy of power has prevented our reaping all 
the advantages from the examples of other nations 
which we ought to have done, and has rendered 
our constitutions in many respects feeble and 
imperfect. 

Perhaps the evil is not very great in respect to our 
State constitutions; for, notwithstanding their im 
perfections, they may for some time be made to 
operate in such a manner as to answer the pur 
poses of the common defence and the maintenance of 
order; and they seem to have, in themselves, and 

248 Alexander Hamilton 

in the progress of society among us, the seeds of 
improvement. 

But this is not the case with respect to the Federal 
Government; if it is too weak at first, it will continu 
ally grow weaker. The ambition and local interests 
of the respective members will be constantly under 
mining and usurping upon its prerogatives till it 
comes to a dissolution, if a partial combination of 
some of the more powerful ones does not bring it to 
a more speedy and violent end. 

NO. II 

July 19, 1781. 

In a single state where the sovereign power is 
exercised by delegation, whether it be a limited 
monarchy or a republic, the danger most commonly 
is, that the sovereign will become too powerful for 
his constituents. In federal governments, where 
different states are represented in a general council, 
the danger is on the other side — that the members 
will be an overmatch for the common head; or, in 
other words, that it will not have sufficient influence 
and authority to secure the obedience of the several 
parts of the confederacy. 

In a single state the sovereign has the whole legis 
lative power as well as the command of the national 
forces — of course an immediate control over the 
persons and property of the subjects; every other 
power is subordinate and dependent. If he under 
takes to subvert the constitution, it can only be 

The Continentalist 249 

preserved by a general insurrection of the people. 
The magistrates of the provinces, counties, or towns 
into which the State is divided, having only an 
executive and police jurisdiction, can take no deci 
sive measures for counteracting the first indications 
of tyranny; but must content themselves with the 
ineffectual weapon of petition and remonstrance. 
They cannot raise money, levy troops, nor form 
alliances. The leaders of the people must wait till 
their discontents have ripened into a general revolt, 
to put them in a situation to confer the powers 
necessary for their defence. It will always be 
difficult for this to take place ; because the sovereign, 
possessing the appearance and forms of legal author 
ity, having the forces and revenues of the state at 
his command, and a large party among the people 
besides, — which with those advantages he can hardly 
fail to acquire — he will too often be able to bafBe 
the first motions of the discontented, and prevent 
that union and concert essential to the success of 
their opposition. 

The security, therefore, of the public liberty must 
consist in such a distribution of the sovereign power, 
as will make it morally impossible for one part to 
gain an ascendency over the others, or for the whole 
to unite in a scheme of usurpation. 

In federal governments, each member has a dis 
tinct sovereignty, makes and executes laws, im 
poses taxes, distributes justice, and exercises every 
other function of government. It has always within 
itself the means of revenue; and on an emergency, 
can levy forces. If the common sovereign should 

250 Alexander Hamilton 

meditate or attempt any thing unfavorable to the 
general liberty, each member, having all the proper 
organs of power, can prepare for defence with 
celerity and vigor. Each can immediately sound 
the alarm to the others, and enter into leagues for 
mutual protection. If the combination is general, as 
is to be expected, the usurpers will soon find them 
selves without the means of recruiting their treasury 
or their armies ; and for want of continued supplies 
of men and money, must, in the end, fall a sacrifice 
to the attempt. If the combination is not general, 
it will imply that some of the members are interested 
in that which is the cause of dissatisfaction to others, 
and this cannot be an attack upon the common 
liberty, but upon the interests of one part in favor of 
another part ; and it will be a war between the mem 
bers of the federal union with each other, not be 
tween them and the federal government. From the 
plainest principles of human nature, two inferences 
are to be drawn: one, that each member of a po 
litical confederacy will be more disposed to advance 
its own authority upon the ruins of that of the con 
federacy, than to make any improper concession in 
its favor, or support it in unreasonable pretensions; 
the other, that the subjects of each member will be 
more devoted in their attachments and obedience to 
their own particular governments, than to that of the 
union. 

It is the temper of societies as well as of individuals 
to be impatient of constraint, and to prefer partial to 
general interest. Many cases may occur where mem 
bers of a confederacy have, or seem to have, an ad- 

The Continentalist 251 

vantage in things contrary to the good of the whole, 
or a disadvantage in others conducive to that end. 
The selfishness of every part will dispose each to be 
lieve that the public burdens are unequally appor 
tioned, and that itself is the victim. These and 
other circumstances will promote a disposition for 
abridging the authority of the federal government; 
and the ambition of men in office in each state will 
make them glad to encourage it. They think their 
own consequence connected with the power of the 
government of which they are a part; and will en 
deavor to increase the one as the means of increasing 
the other. 

The particular governments will have more empire 
over the minds of their subjects than the general one, 
because their agency will be more direct, more uni 
form, and more apparent. The people will be ha 
bituated to look up to them as the arbiters and 
guardians of their personal concerns, by which the 
passions of the vulgar, if not of all men, are most 
strongly affected; and in every difference with the 
confederated body, will side with them against 
the common sovereign. 

Experience confirms the truth of these principles. 
The chief cities of Greece had once their council of 
Amphyctions, or States-general, with authority to 
decide and compose the differences of the several 
cities, and to transact many other important mat 
ters relative to the common interest and safety. At 
their first institution, they had great weight and 
credit; but never enough to preserve effectually the 
balance and harmony of the confederacy; and in 

252 Alexander Hamilton 

time their decrees only served as an additional pre 
text to that side whose pretensions they favored. 
When the cities were not engaged in foreign wars, 
they were at perpetual variance among themselves. 
Sparta and Athens contended twenty-seven years 
for the precedence, or rather dominion, of Greece, 
till the former made herself mistress of the whole; 
and till, in subsequent struggles, having had re 
course to the pernicious expedient of calling in the 
aid of foreign enemies, the Macedonians first and 
afterward the Romans became their masters. 

The German Diet had formerly more authority 
than it now has, though like that of Greece never 
enough to hinder the great potentates from disturb 
ing the repose of the empire, and mutually wasting 
their own territories and people. 

The Helvetic League is another example. It is 
true it has subsisted nearly five hundred years; but 
in that period the cantons have had repeated and 
furious wars with each other, which would have made 
them an easy prey to their more powerful neighbors, 
had not the reciprocal jealousy of these prevented 
either from taking advantage of their dissensions. 
This and their poverty have hitherto saved them 
from total destruction, and kept them from feeling 
the miseries of foreign conquest, added to those of 
civil war. The federal government is too weak to 
hinder their renewal, whenever the ambition or 
fanaticism of the principal cantons shall be disposed 
to rekindle the flame. For some time past, indeed, 
it has been in a great measure nominal ; the Protest 
ants and Catholics have had separate diets, to man- 

The Continentalist 253 

age almost all matters of importance; so that in 
fact, the general diet is only kept up to regulate the 
affairs of the common bailliages and preserve a sem 
blance of union ; and even this, it is probable would 
cease, did not the extreme weakness of the cantons 
oblige them to a kind of coalition. 

If the divisions of the United Provinces have not 
proceeded to equal extremities, there are peculiar 
causes to be assigned. The authority of the Stadt- 
holder pervades the whole frame of the republic, 
and is a kind of common link by which the provinces 
are bound together. The jealousy of his progressive 
influence, in which more or less they all agree, oper 
ates as a check upon their ill-humors against one 
another. The inconsiderableness of each province 
separately, and the imminent danger to which the 
whole would be exposed of being overrun by their 
neighbors in case of disunion, is a further preserva 
tive against the phrensy of hostility; and their im 
portance and even existence depending entirely upon 
frugality, industry, and commerce, peace both at 
home and abroad is of necessity the predominant 
object of their policy. 

NO. Ill 

August 9, 1781. 

The situation of these States is very unlike that 
of the United Provinces. Remote as we are from 
Europe, in a little time we should fancy ourselves 
out of the reach of attempts from abroad, and in full 
liberty, at our leisure and convenience, to try our 

254 Alexander Hamilton 

strength at home. This might not happen at once, 
but if the Federal Government should lose its au 
thority it would certainly follow. Political societies 
in close neighborhood must either be strongly united 
under one government, or there will infallibly exist 
emulations and quarrels; this is in human nature, 
and we have no reason to think ourselves wiser or 
better than other men. Some of the larger States, 
a small number of years hence, will be in themselves 
populous, rich, and powerful in all those circum 
stances calculated to inspire ambition and nourish 
ideas of separation and independence. Though it 
will ever be their true interest to preserve the Union, 
their vanity and self-importance will be very likely 
to overpower that motive, and make them seek to 
place themselves at the head of particular con 
federacies independent of the general one. A schism 
once introduced, competitions of boundary and 
rivalships of commerce will easily afford pretexts 
for war. 

European powers may have many inducements for 
fomenting these divisions and playing us off against 
each other; but without such a disposition in them, 
if separations once take place we shall, of course, 
embrace different interests and connections. The 
particular confederacies, leaguing themselves with 
rival nations, will naturally be involved in their dis 
putes, into which they will be the more readily 
tempted by the hope of making acquisitions upon 
each other and upon the colonies of the powers with 
whom they are respectively at enmity. 

We already see symptoms of the evils to be appre- 

The Continentalist 255 

hended. In the midst of a war for our existence as 
a nation — in the midst of dangers too serious to be 
trifled with, some of the States have evaded or re 
fused compliance with the demands of Congress in 
points of the greatest moment to the common safety. 
If they act such a part at this perilous juncture, 
what are we to expect in a time of peace and security ? 
Is it not to be feared that the resolutions of Congress 
would soon become like the decisions of the Greek 
Amphyctions, or like the edicts of a German Diet ? 

But as these evils are at a little distance, we may 
perhaps be insensible and short-sighted enough to 
disregard them. There are others that threaten our 
immediate safety. Our whole system is in disorder; 
our currency depreciated, till in many places it will 
hardly obtain a circulation at all; public credit at its 
lowest ebb ; our army deficient in numbers, and un 
provided with every thing; the Government, in its 
present condition, unable to command the means to 
pay, clothe, or feed their troops ; the enemy making 
an alarming progress in the Southern States, lately 
in complete possession of two of them, though now 
in part rescued by the genius and exertions of a gen 
eral without an army; a force under Cornwallis still 
formidable to Virginia. 

We ought to blush to acknowledge that this is a 
true picture of our situation, when we reflect that 
the enemy's whole force in the United States, in 
cluding their American levies and the late reinforce 
ments, is little more than fourteen thousand effective 
men ; that our population, by recent examination, has 
been found to be greater than at the commencement 

256 Alexander Hamilton 

of the war; that the quantity of our specie has also 
increased; that the country abounds with all the 
necessaries of life, and has a sufficiency of foreign 
commodities, with a considerable and progressive 
commerce; that we have, beyond comparison, a bet 
ter stock of warlike materials than when we began 
the contest, and an ally as willing as able to supply 
our further wants; and that we have on the spot 
five thousand auxiliary troops, paid and subsisted 
by that ally, to assist in our defence. 

Nothing but a general disaffection of the people or 
mismanagement in their rulers can account for the 
figure we make, and for the distresses and perplexi 
ties we experience contending against so small a 
force. 

Our enemies themselves must now be persuaded 
that the first is not the cause, and we know it is not. 
The most decided attachment of the people could 
alone have made them endure, without a convulsion, 
the successive shocks in our currency, added to the 
unavoidable inconveniences of war. There is per 
haps not another nation in the world that would 
have shown equal patience and perseverance in simi 
lar circumstances. The enemy have now tried the 
temper of almost every part of America, and they 
can hardly produce in their ranks a thousand men 
who, without their arts and seductions, have volun 
tarily joined their standard. The miseries of a 
rigorous captivity may perhaps have added half as 
many more to the number of the American levies 
at this time in their armies. This small accession of 
force is the more extraordinary, as they have at 

The Continentalist 257 

some periods been apparently in the full tide of 
success, while every thing wore an aspect tending 
to infuse despondency into the people of this country. 
This has been remarkably the case in the Southern 
States. 

They for a time had almost undisturbed posses 
sion of two of them, and Cornwallis, after over 
running a great part of a third, after two victorious 
battles, only brought with him into Virginia about 
two hundred Tories; — in the State where he thought 
himself so well established, that he presumptuously 
ventured to assure the minister there was not a 
rebel left, a small body of continental troops have 
been so effectually seconded by the militia of 
that vanquished country as to have been able to 
capture a number of his troops more than equal 
to their own, and to repossess the principal part 
of the State. 

As in the explanation of our embarrassments 
nothing can be alleged to the disaffection of the 
people, we must have recourse to the other cause — 
of impolicy and mismanagement in their rulers. 

Where the blame of this may lie is not so much 
the question as what are the proper remedies, yet it 
may not be amiss to remark that too large a share 
has fallen upon Congress. That body is no doubt 
chargeable with mistakes, but perhaps its greatest 
has been too much readiness to make concessions of 
the powers implied in its original trust. This is 
partly to be attributed to an excessive complaisance 
to the spirit which has evidently actuated a majority 
of the States, a desire of monopolizing all power in 

VOL. I.— 17. 

258 Alexander Hamilton 

themselves. Congress has been responsible for the 
administration of affairs, without the means of ful 
filling that responsibility. 

It would be too severe a reflection upon us to sup 
pose that a disposition to make the most of the 
friendship of others, and to exempt ourselves from a 
full share of the burthens of the war, has had any 
part in the backwardness which has appeared in 
many of the States to confer powers and adopt 
measures adequate to the exigency. Such a senti 
ment would neither be wise, just, generous, nor honor 
able; nor do I believe the accusation would be 
well founded, yet our conduct makes us liable to a 
suspicion of this sort. It is certain, however, that 
too sanguine expectations from Europe have unin 
tentionally relaxed our efforts by diverting a sense 
of danger, and begetting an opinion that the in 
equality of the contest would make every campaign 
the last. 

We did not consider how difficult it must be to 
exhaust the resources of a nation circumstanced like 
that of Great Britain ; whose government has always 
been distinguished for energy, and its people for en 
thusiasm. Nor did we in estimating the superiority 
of our friends make sufficient allowance for that 
want of concert which will ever characterize the 
operations of allies, or for the immense advantage 
to the enemy of having their forces, though inferior, 
under a single direction. 

Finding the rest of Europe either friendly or pa 
cific, we never calculated the contingencies which 
might alter that disposition; nor reflected that the 

The Continentalist 259 

death x of a single prince, the change or caprice of 
a single minister, was capable of giving a new face 
to the whole system. 

We are at this time more sanguine than ever. The 
war with the Dutch, we believe, will give such an ad 
dition of force to our side as will make the superiority 
irresistible. No person can dispute this, if things 
remain in their present state; but the extreme dis 
parity of the contest is the very reason why this can 
not be the case. The neutral powers will either 
effect a particular or a general accommodation, or 
they will take their sides. There are three supposi 
tions to be made: one, that there will be a com 
promise between the United Provinces and England, 
for which we are certain the mediation of Austria 
and Russia has been offered ; another, a pacification 
between all the belligerent powers, for which we have 
reason to believe the same mediation has been 
offered; the third, a rejection of the terms of media 
tion and a more general war. 

Either of these suppositions is a motive for exer 
tion. The first will place things in the same, prob 
ably in a worse, situation than before the declaration 
'of the war against Holland. The composing of 

1 The death of the Empress Queen has actually produced a change. 
Her politics, if not friendly to our connections, were at least pacific, 
and while she lived no hostile interference of the House of Austria was 
to be expected. The Emperor, her son, by her death left more at 
liberty to pursue his inclinations averse to the aggrandizement of 
France, of course afraid of the abasement of England, has given several 
indications of an unfriendly disposition. It should be a weighty con 
sideration with us, that among the potentates which we look upon as 
amicable, three of the principal ones are at a very advanced stage of 
life — the King of Spain, the King of Prussia, and the Empress of Russia. 
We know not what may be the politics of successors. 

260 Alexander Hamilton 

present differences may be accompanied with a re 
vival of ancient connections ; and at least would be 
productive of greater caution and restraint in a 
future intercourse with us. 

The second, it is much to be dreaded, would 
hazard a dismemberment x of a part of these States ; 
and we are bound in honor, in duty, and in interest, 
to employ every effort to dispossess the enemy of 
what they hold. A natural basis of the negotiation 
with respect to this continent will be, that each party 
shall retain what it possesses at the conclusion of the 
treaty, qualified perhaps by a cession of particular 
points for an equivalent elsewhere. It is too deli 
cate to dwell on the motives to this apprehension; 
but if such a compromise sometimes terminates the 
disputes of nations originally independent, it will be 

1 Perhaps not expressly and directly, but virtually, under the 
plausible form of a new arrangement of limits. 

If we are determined, as we ought to be with the concurrence of our 
allies, not to accept such a condition, then we ought to prepare for the 
third event — a more general and more obstinate war. 

Should this take place a variety of new interests will be involved, 
and the affairs of America may cease to be of primary importance. In 
proportion as the objects and operations of the war become complicated 
and extensive, the final success must become uncertain ; and in propor 
tion as the interests of others in our concerns may be weakened or sup 
planted by more immediate interests of their own, ought our attention 
to ourselves and exertions in our own behalf to be awakened and 
augmented. 

We ought, therefore, not only to strain every nerve for complying 
with the requisitions to render the present campaign as decisive as 
possible, but we ought without delay to enlarge the powers of Congress. 
Every plan of which this is not the foundation will be illusory. The 
separate exertions of the States will never suffice. Nothing but a well 
proportioned exertion of the resources of the whole, under the direction 
of a common council, with power sufficient to give efficacy to their 
resolutions, can preserve us from being a conquered people now or can 
make us a happy people hereafter. 

The Continentalist 261 

less extraordinary where one party was originally 
under the dominion of the other. 

NO. IV 

August 30, 1781 

The preceding numbers are chiefly intended to 
confirm an opinion, already pretty generally re 
ceived, that it is necessary to augment the powers 
of the Confederation. The principal difficulty yet 
remains to fix the public judgment definitely on the 
points which ought to compose that augmentation. 

It may be pronounced with confidence that nothing 
short of the following articles can suffice. 

ist. — THE POWER OF REGULATING TRADE, com 
prehending a right of granting bounties and pre 
miums by way of encouragement, of imposing duties 
of every kind as well for revenue as regulation, of 
appointing all officers of the customs, and of laying 
embargoes in extraordinary emergencies. 

2d. — A moderate-levied tax, throughout the 
United States, of a specific rate per pound or per 
acre,1 granted to the Federal Government in per 
petuity, and, if Congress think proper, to be levied 
by their own collectors. 

3d. — A moderate capitation-tax on every male 2 
inhabitant above fifteen years of age, exclusive 
of common soldiers, common seamen, day laborers, 

1 Two pence an acre on cultivated, and a half-penny on uncultivated, 
land would answer the purpose, and would be so moderate as not to be 
felt; a small tax on uncultivated land would have the good effect of 
obliging the proprietor either to cultivate it himself or to dispose of it» 
to some persons that would do it. 

2 Suppose a dollar, or even half a dollar, per head. 

262 Alexander Hamilton 

cottagers, and paupers, to be also vested in per 
petuity, and with the same condition of collection. 

4th. — The disposal of all unlocated land for the 
benefit of the United States (so far as respects the 
profits of the first sale and the quit-rents), the juris 
diction remaining to the respective States in whose 
limits they are contained. 

5th. — A certain proportion of the product of all 
mines discovered, or to be discovered, for the same 
duration, and with the same right of collection as in 
the second and third articles. 

6th. — The appointment of all land (as well as 
naval) officers of every rank. 

The three first articles are of IMMEDIATE NECES 
SITY; the three last would be of great present, but 
of much greater future, utility; the whole combined 
would give solidity and permanency to the Union. 

The great defect of the Confederation is, that it 
gives the United States no property; or, in other 
words, no revenue, nor the means of acquiring it, 
inherent in themselves and independent on the tern- 
porary pleasure of the different members. And 
power without revenue, in political society, is a name. 
While Congress continue altogether dependent on 
the occasional grants of the several States, for the 
means of defraying the expenses of the Federal 
Government, it can neither have dignity, vigor, nor 
credit. Credit supposes specific and permanent funds 
for the punctual payment of interest, with a moral 
certainty of the final redemption of the principal. 

In our situation it will probably require more, on 
account of the general diffidence which has been ex- 

The Continentalist 263 

cited by the past disorders in our finances. It will 
perhaps be necessary, in the first instance, to appro 
priate funds for the redemption of the principal in 
a determinate period, as well as for the payment of 
interest. 

It is essential that the property in such funds 
should be in the contractor himself, and the appro 
priation dependent on his own will. If, instead of 
this, the possession or disposal of them is dependent 
on the voluntary or occasional concurrence of a num 
ber of different wills not under his absolute control, 
both the one and the other will be too precarious to 
be trusted. The most wealthy and best established 
nations are obliged to pledge their funds to obtain 
credit, and it would be the height of absurdity in us, 
in the midst of a revolution, to expect to have it on 
better terms. This credit being to be procured 
through Congress, the funds ought to be provided, 
declared, and vested in them.1 It is a fact that 
verifies the want of specific funds that the cir 
cumstance which operates powerfully against our 
obtaining credit abroad is, not a distrust of our be 
coming independent, but of our continuing united, 
and with our present Confederation the distrust is 
natural. Both foreigners and the thinking men 
among ourselves would have much more confidence 
in the duration of the Union, if they were to see it 
supported on the foundation here proposed. 

1 It might, indeed, be a good restraint upon the spirit of running in 
debt, with which governments are too apt to be infected, to make it a 
condition of the grants to Congress, that they shall be obliged, in all 
their loans, to appropriate funds for the payment of principal as well 
as interest, and such a restriction might be serviceable to public credit. 

264 Alexander Hamilton 

There are some among us ignorant enough to im 
agine that the war may be carried on without credit, 
defraying the expenses of the year with what may 
be raised within the year. But this is for want of a 
knowledge of our real resources and expenses. 

It may be demonstrated that the whole amount of 
the revenue which these States are capable of afford 
ing will be deficient annually five or six millions of 
dollars for the support of civil government and of 
the war. 

This is not a conjecture hazarded at random, but 
the result of experiment and calculation; nor can it 
appear surprising, when it is considered that the 
revenues of the United Provinces, equal to these 
States in population, beyond comparison superior in 
industry, commerce, and riches, do not exceed 
twenty-five millions of guilders, or about nine mil 
lions and a half of dollars. In times of war they 
have raised a more considerable sum, but it has been 
chiefly by gratuitous combinations of rich individ 
uals, a resource we cannot employ, because there 
are few men of large fortunes in this country, and 
these for the most part are in land. Taxes in the 
United Provinces are carried to an extreme which 
would be impracticable here. Not only the living 
are made to pay for every necessary of life, but even 
the dead are tributary to the public for the liberty 
of interment at particular hours. These considera 
tions make it evident that we could not raise an 
equal amount of revenue in these States. Yet, in 
'76, when the currency was not depreciated, Con 
gress emitted, for the expenses of the year, fourteen 

The Continentalist 265 

millions of dollars. It cannot be denied that there 
was a want of order and economy in the expenditure 
of public money, nor that we had a greater military 
force to maintain at that time than we now have; 
but, on the other hand, allowing for the necessary 
increase in our different civil lists, and for the ad 
vanced prices of many articles, it can hardly be 
supposed possible to reduce our annual expense very 
much below that sum. This simple idea of the sub 
ject, without entering into details, may satisfy us 
that the deficiency which has been stated is not to 
be suspected of exaggeration. 

Indeed, nations the most powerful and opulent 
are obliged to have recourse to loans in time of war, 
and hence it is that most of the states of Europe are 
deeply immersed in debt. France is among the 
number, notwithstanding her immense population, 
wealth, and resources. England owes the enormous 
sum of two hundred millions sterling. The United 
Provinces, with all their prudence and parsimony, 
owe a debt of the generality of fifty millions, be 
sides the particular debts of each province. Almost 
all the other powers are more or less in the same 
circumstances. 

While this teaches us how contracted and unin 
formed are the views of those who expect to carry 
on the war without running in debt, — it ought to 
console us with respect to the amount of that which 
we now owe, or may have occasion to incur in the 
remainder of the war. The whole, without burthen- 
ing the people, may be paid off in twenty years after 
the conclusion of peace. 

266 Alexander Hamilton 

The principal part of the deficient five or six mil 
lions must be procured by loans from private persons 
at home and abroad. Every thing may be hoped 
from the generosity of France which her means will 
permit, but she has full employment for her revenues 
and credit in the prosecution of the war on her own 
part. If we judge of the future by the past, the 
pecuniary succors from her must continue to be far 
short of our wants, and the contingency of a war on 
the continent of Europe makes it possible they may 
diminish rather than increase. 

We have in a less degree experienced the friend 
ship of Spain in this article. 

The Government of the United Provinces, if dis 
posed to do it, can give us no assistance. The re 
sources of the republic are chiefly mortgaged for 
former debts. Happily, it has extensive credit, but 
it will have occasion for the whole to supply its own 
exigencies. 

Private men, either foreigners or natives, will not 
lend to a large amount, but on the usual security of 
funds properly established. This security Congress 
cannot give till the several States vest them with 
revenue, or the means of revenue, for that purpose. 

Congress have1 wisely appointed a superintendent 
of their finances, — a man of acknowledged abilities 
and integrity, as well as of great personal credit and 
pecuniary influence. 

It was impossible that the business of finance 
could be ably conducted by a body of men however 
well composed or well intentioned. Order in the 

1 Robert Morris. 

The Continentalist 267 

future management of our moneyed concerns, a 
strict regard to the performance of public engage 
ments, and of course the restoration of public credit 
may be reasonably and confidently expected from 
Mr. Morris' administration if he is furnished with 
materials upon which to operate — that is, if the Fed 
eral Government can acquire funds as the basis of his 
arrangements. He has very judiciously proposed 
a National Bank, which, by uniting the influence 
and interest of the moneyed men with the re 
sources of government, can alone give it that durable 
and extensive credit of which it stands in need. 
This is the best expedient he could have devised for 
relieving the public embarrassments, but to give 
success to the plan it is essential that Congress 
should have it in their power to support him with 
unexceptionable funds. Had we begun the practice 
of funding four years ago, we should have avoided 
that depreciation of the currency which has been 
pernicious to the morals and to the credit of the 
nation, and there is no other method than this to 
prevent a continuance and multiplication of the 
evils flowing from that prolific source. 

NO. v 

April 18, 1782. 

The vesting Congress with the power of regulating 
trade ought to have been a principal object of the 
Confederation for a variety of reasons. It is as 
necessary for the purposes of commerce as of revenue. 
There are some who maintain that trade will regulate 

268 Alexander Hamilton 

itself, and is not to be benefited by the encourage 
ments or restraints of government. Such persons 
will imagine that there is no need of a common direct 
ing power. This is one of those wild speculative 
paradoxes, which have grown into credit among us, 
contrary to the uniform practice and sense of the 
most enlightened nations. 

Contradicted by the numerous institutions and 
laws that exist everywhere for the benefit of trade, 
by the pains taken to cultivate particular branches 
and to discourage others, by the known advantages 
derived from those measures, and by the palpable 
evils that would attend their discontinuance, it must 
be rejected by every man acquainted with commer 
cial history. Commerce, like other things, has its 
fixed principles, according to which it must be regu 
lated. If these are understood and observed, it will 
be promoted by the attention of government ; if un 
known, or violated, it will be injured — but it is the 
same with every other part of administration. 

To preserve the balance of trade in favor of a na 
tion ought to be a leading aim of its policy. The 
avarice of individuals may frequently find its ac 
count in pursuing channels of traffic prejudicial to 
that balance, to which the government may be able 
to oppose effectual impediments. There may, on 
the other hand, be a possibility of opening new 
sources, which, though accompanied with great diffi 
culties in the commencement, would in the event 
amply reward the trouble and expense of bringing 
them to perfection. The undertaking may often 
exceed the influence and capitals of individuals, and 

The Continentalist 269 

may require no small assistance, as well from the 
revenue as from the authority of the state. 

The contrary opinion, which has grown into a 
degree of vogue among us, has originated in the in 
judicious attempts made at different times to effect 
a regulation of prices. It became a cant phrase 
among the opposers of these attempts, that trade 
must regulate itself; by which at first was only 
meant that it had its fundamental laws, agreeable 
to which its general operations must be directed, 
and that any violent attempts in opposition to these 
would commonly miscarry. In this sense the maxim 
was reasonable, but it has since been extended to 
militate against all interference by the sovereign; 
an extreme as little reconcilable with experience or 
common sense as the practice it was first framed to 
discredit. 

The reasonings of a very ingenious and sensible 
writer,1 by being misapprehended, have contributed 
to this mistake. The scope of his argument is not, 
as by some supposed, that trade will hold a certain 
invariable course independent on the aid, protec 
tion, care, or concern of government; but that it 
will, in the main, depend upon the comparative in 
dustry, moral and physical advantages of nations; 
and that though, for a while, from extraordinary 
causes, there may be a wrong balance against one of 
them, this will work its own cure, and things will 
ultimately return to their proper level. His object 
was to combat that excessive jealousy on this head, 
which has been productive of so many unnecessary 

1 Hume's essay: Jealousy of Trade. 

270 Alexander Hamilton 

wars, and with which the British nation is particu 
larly infected; but it was no part of his design to 
insinuate that the regulating hand of government 
was either useless or hurtful. The nature of a gov 
ernment, its spirit, maxims, and laws, with respect 
to trade, are among those constant moral causes 
which influence its general results, and when it has 
by accident taken a wrong direction, assist in bring 
ing it back to its natural course. This is every 
where admitted by all writers upon the subject; nor 
is there one who has asserted a contrary doctrine. 

Trade may be said to have taken its rise in Eng 
land under the auspices of Elizabeth, and its rapid 
progress there is in a great measure to be ascribed 
to the fostering care of government in that and 
succeeding reigns. 

From a different spirit in the government, with 
superior advantages, France was much later in com 
mercial improvements; nor would her trade have 
been at this time in so prosperous a condition, had 
it not been for the abilities and indefatigable en 
deavors of the great Colbert. He laid the founda 
tion of the French commerce, and taught the way to 
his successors to enlarge and improve it. The es 
tablishment of the woollen manufacture in a king 
dom where nature seemed to have denied the means, 
is one, among many proofs, how much may be 
effected in favor of commerce by the attention and 
patronage of a wise administration. 

The number of useful edicts passed by Louis XIV.,. 
and since his time, in spite of frequent interruptions 
from the jealous enmity of Great Britain, has ad- 

The Continentalist 271 

vanced that of France to a degree which has excited 
the envy and astonishment of its neighbors. 

The Dutch, who may justly be allowed a pre 
eminence in the knowledge of trade, have ever made 
it an essential object of state. Their commercial 
regulations are more rigid and numerous than those 
of any other country; and it is by a judicious and 
unremitted vigilance of government that they have 
been able to extend their traffic to a degree so much 
beyond their natural and comparative advantages. 

Perhaps it may be thought that the power of regu 
lation will be best placed in the governments of the 
several States, and that a general superintendence is 
unnecessary. If the States had distinct interests, 
were unconnected with each other, their own govern 
ments would then be the proper, and could be the 
only, depositories of such a power; but as they are 
parts of a whole, with a common interest in trade, 
as in other things, there ought to be a common direc 
tion in that as in all other matters. It is easy to 
conceive that many cases may occur in which it 
would be beneficial to all the States to encourage or 
suppress a particular branch of trade, while it would 
be detrimental to either to attempt it without the 
concurrence of the rest, and where the experiment 
would probably be left untried for fear of a want of 
that concurrence. 

No mode can be so convenient as a source of rev 
enue to the United States. It is agreed that imposts 
on trade, when not immoderate, or improperly laid, 
are one of the most eligible species of taxation. 
They fall in a great measure upon articles not of 

272 Alexander Hamilton 

absolute necessity, and being partly transferred to 
the price of the commodity, are so far imperceptibly 
paid by the consumer. It is therefore that mode 
which may be exercised by the Federal Government 
with least exception or disgust. Congress can easily 
possess all the information necessary to impose the 
duties with judgment, and the collection can with 
out difficulty be made by their own officers. 

They can have no temptation to abuse this power, 
because the motive of revenue will check its own 
extremes. Experience has shown that moderate 
duties are more productive than high ones. When 
they are low, a nation can trade abroad on better 
terms, its imports and exports will be larger, the 
duties will be regularly paid, and arising on a greater 
quantity of commodities, will yield more in the ag 
gregate than when they are so high as to operate 
either as a prohibition, or as an inducement to 
evade them by illicit practices. 

It is difficult to assign any good reason why Con 
gress should be more liable to abuse the powers 
with which they are entrusted than the State As 
semblies. The frequency of the election of the mem 
bers is a full security against a dangerous ambition, 
and the rotation established by the Confederation 
makes it impossible for any state, by continuing the 
same men, who may put themselves at the head of 
a prevailing faction, to maintain for any length of 
time an undue influence in the national councils. It 
is to be presumed that Congress will be in general 
better composed for abilities, as well as for integrity, 
than any assembly on the continent. 

The Continentalist 273 

But to take away any temptation from a cabal to 
load particular articles, which are the principal ob 
jects of commerce to particular States, with a too 
great proportion of duties, to ease the others in the 
general distribution of expense, let all the duties, 
whether for regulation or revenue, raised in each 
State, be credited to that State, and let it, in like 
manner, be charged for all the bounties paid within 
itself for the encouragement of agriculture, manu 
factures, or trade. This expedient will remove the 
temptation; for as the quotas of the respective 
States are to be determined by a standard of land, 
agreeable to the eighth article of the Confederation, 
each will have so much the less to contribute other 
wise, as it pays more on its commerce. An ob 
jection has been made in a late instance to this 
principle. It has been urged that as the consumer 
pays the duty, those States which are not equally 
well situated for foreign commerce, and which con 
sume a great part of the imports of their neighbors, 
will become contributors to a part of their taxes. 
This objection is rather specious than solid. 

The maxim, that the consumer pays the duty, has 
been admitted in theory with too little reserve ; fre 
quently contradicted in practice. It is true, the 
merchant will be unwilling to let the duty be a de 
duction from his profits, if the state of the market 
will permit him to incorporate it with the price of 
his commodity. But this is often not practicable. 
It turns upon the quantity of goods at market in 
proportion to the demand. When the latter ex 
ceeds the former, and the competition is among the 

VOL. I. — 18. 

274 Alexander Hamilton 

buyers, the merchant can easily increase his price, 
and make his customers pay the duty. When the 
reverse is the case, and the competition is among the 
sellers, he must then content himself with smaller 
profits and lose the value of the duty, or at least a 
part of it. When a nation has a flourishing and 
well-settled trade, this more commonly happens 
than may be imagined, and it will, many times, be 
found that the duty is divided between the mer 
chant and the consumer. 

Besides this consideration which greatly dimin 
ishes the force of the objection, there is another 
which entirely destroys it. There is a strong re 
ciprocal influence between the prices of all com 
modities in a State, by which they, sooner or later, 
attain a pretty exact balance and proportion to each 
other. If the immediate productions of the soil 
rise, the manufacturer will have more for his manu 
facture, the merchant for his goods; and the same 
will happen with whatever class the increase of price 
begins. If duties are laid upon the imports in one 
State, by which the prices of foreign articles are 
raised, the products of land and labor within that 
State will take a proportionate rise ; and if a part of 
those articles are consumed in a neighboring State, 
it will have the same influence there as at home. 
The importing State must allow an advanced price 
upon the commodities which it receives in exchange 
from its neighbor, in a ratio to the increased price 
of the article it sells. To know, then, which is the 
gainer or loser, we must examine how the general 
balance of trade stands between them. If the im- 

The Continentalist 275 

porting State takes more of the commodities of its 
neighbor than it gives in exchange, that will be the 
loser by the reciprocal augmentation of prices; it 
will be the gainer if it takes less, and neither will gain 
or lose if the barter is carried on upon equal terms. 
The balance of trade, and consequently the gain, or 
loss, in this respect, will be governed more by the 
relative industry and frugality of the parties than 
by their relative advantages for foreign commerce. 

Between separate nations this reasoning will not 
apply with full force, because a multitude of local 
and extraneous circumstances may counteract the 
principle; but from the intimate connections of 
these States, the similitude of governments, situa 
tions, customs, manners, political and commercial 
causes will have nearly the same operation in the in 
tercourse between the States, as in that between the 
different parts of the same State. If this should be 
controverted, the objection drawn from the hypoth 
esis of the consumer paying the duty must fall at the 
same time; for as far as this is true it is as much 
confined in its application to a State within itself as 
the doctrine of a reciprocal proportion of prices. 

General principles in subjects of this nature ought 
always to be advanced with caution; in an experi 
mental analysis there are found such a number of 
exceptions as tend to render them very doubtful; 
and in questions which affect the existence and 
collective happiness of these States, all nice and 
abstract distinctions should give way to plainer 
interests, and to more obvious and simple rules 
of conduct. 

276 Alexander Hamilton 

But the objection which has been urged ought to 
have no weight on another account. Which are the 
States that have not sufficient advantages for foreign 
commerce, and that will not in time be their own 
carriers? Connecticut and Jersey are the least 
maritime of the whole; yet the Sound which washes 
the coast of Connecticut has an easy outlet to the 
ocean, affords a number of harbors and bays very 
commodious for trading vessels. New London may 
be a receptacle for merchantmen of almost any bur 
then; and the fine rivers with which the State is 
intersected, by facilitating the transportation of 
commodities to and from every part, are extremely 
favorable both to its domestic and foreign trade. 

Jersey, by way of Amboy, has a shorter com 
munication with the ocean than the city of New, 
York. Prince's Bay, which may serve as an outport 
to it, will admit and shelter in winter and summer 
vessels of any size. Egg Harbor, on its southern 
coast, is not to be despised. The Delaware may be 
made as subservient to its commerce as to that of 
Pennsylvania, Gloucester, Burlington, and Trenton, 
being all conveniently situated on that river. The 
United Provinces, with inferior advantages of posi 
tion to either of these States, have for centuries held 
the first rank among commercial nations. 

The want of large trading cities has been some 
times objected as an obstacle to the commerce of 
these States ; but this is a temporary deficiency that 
will repair itself with the increase of population and 
riches. The reason that the States in question have 
hitherto carried on little foreign trade, is that they 

The Continentalist 277 

have found it equally beneficial to purchase the 
commodities imported by their neighbors. If the 
imposts on trade should work an inconvenience to 
them, it will soon cease by making it their interest 
to trade abroad. 

It is too much characteristic of our national tem 
per to be ingenious in finding out and magnifying 
the minutest disadvantages, and to reject measures 
of evident utility, even of necessity, to avoid trivial 
and sometimes imaginary evils. We seem not to 
reflect that in human society there is scarcely any 
plan, however salutary to the whole and to every 
part, by the share each has in the common prosper 
ity, but in one way, or another, and under particular 
circumstances, will operate more to the benefit of 
some parts than of others. Unless we can overcome 
this narrow disposition and learn to estimate meas 
ures by their general tendencies, we shall never be a 
great or a happy people, if we remain a people at all. 

NO. VI 

July 4, 1782. 

Let us see what will be the consequences of not 
authorizing the Federal Government to regulate the 
trade of these States. Besides the want of revenue 
and of power, besides the immediate risk to our in 
dependence and the dangers of all the future evils 
of a precarious Union, besides the deficiency of a 
wholesome concert and provident superintendence 
to advance the general prosperity of trade, the 
direct consequence will be that the landed interest 

278 Alexander Hamilton 

and the laboring poor will in the first place fall a 
sacrifice to the trading interest, and the whole even 
tually to a bad system of policy made necessary by 
the want of such regulating power. 

Each State will be afraid to impose duties on its 
commerce, lest the other States, not doing the same, 
should enjoy greater advantages than itself, by being 
able to afford native commodities cheaper abroad 
and foreign commodities cheaper at home. 

A part of the evils resulting from this would be a 
loss to the revenue of those moderate duties which, 
without being injurious to commerce, are allowed to 
be the most agreeable species of taxes to the people. 
Articles of foreign luxury, while they would con 
tribute nothing to the income of the State, being less 
dear by an exemption from duties, would have a 
more extensive consumption. 

Many branches of trade, hurtful to the common 
interest, would be continued for want of proper 
checks and discouragements. As revenues must be 
found to satisfy the public exigencies in peace and in 
war, too great a proportion of taxes will fall directly 
upon land, and upon the necessaries of life — the pro 
duce of that land. The influence of these evils will 
be to render landed property fluctuating and less 
valuable; to oppress the poor by raising the prices 
of necessaries; to injure commerce by encouraging 
the consumption of foreign luxuries, by increasing 
the value of labor, by lessening the quantity of home 
productions, enhancing their prices at foreign mar 
kets, of course obstructing their sale, and enabling 
other nations to supplant us. 

The Continentalist 279 

Particular caution ought at present to be observed 
in this country not to burthen the soil itself and its 
productions with heavy impositions, because the 
quantity of unimproved land will invite the husband 
man to abandon old settlements for new, and the dis 
proportion of our population for some time to come 
will necessarily make labor dear, to reduce which, 
and not to increase it, ought to be a capital object of 
our policy. 

Easy duties, therefore, on commerce, especially on 
imports, ought to lighten the burthens which will un 
avoidably fall upon land. Though it may be said 
that, on the principle of a reciprocal influence of 
prices, whereon the taxes are laid in the first in 
stance, they will in the end be borne by all classes, 
yet it is of the greatest importance that no one should 
sink under the immediate pressure. The great art 
is to distribute the public burthens well, and not 
suffer them, either first or last, to fall too heavily on 
parts of the community, else distress and disorder 
must ensue ; a shock given to any part of the polit 
ical machine vibrates through the whole. 

As a sufficient revenue could not be raised from 
trade to answer the public purposes, other articles 
have been proposed. A moderate land and poll tax, 
being of easy and unexpensive collection, and leaving 
nothing to discretion, are the simplest and best that 
could be devised. 

It is to be feared that the avarice of many of the 
landholders will be opposed to a perpetual tax upon 
land, however moderate. They will ignorantly hope 
to shift the burthens of the national expense from 

280 Alexander Hamilton 

themselves to others — a disposition as iniquitous as 
it is fruitless. The public necessities must be satis 
fied; this can only be done by the contributions of 
the whole society. Particular classes are neither 
able nor will they be willing to pay for the protection 
and security of the others, and where so selfish a 
spirit discovers itself in any member, the rest of the 
community will unite to compel it to do its duty. 

Indeed, many theorists in political economy have 
held that all taxes, wherever they originate, fall upon 
land, and have therefore been of opinion that it 
would be best to draw the whole revenue of the state 
immediately from that source, to avoid the expense 
of a more diversified collection, and the accumula 
tions which will be heaped, in their several stages, 
upon the primitive sums, advanced in those stages, 
which are imposed on our trade. But though it has 
been demonstrated that this theory has been carried 
to an extreme impracticable in fact, yet it is evident, 
in tracing the matter, that a large part of all taxes, 
however remotely laid, will, by an insensible circula 
tion, come at last to settle upon land — the source of 
most of the materials employed in commerce. 

It appears, from calculation made by the ablest 
master of political arithmetic, about sixty years ago, 
that the yearly product of all the lands in England 
amounted to £42,000,000 sterling, and the whole an 
nual consumption at that period, of foreign as well as 
domestic commodities, did not exceed £49,000,000, 
and the surplus of the exportation above the im 
portation £2,000,000, on which sums arise all the 
revenues, in whatever shape, which go into the 

The Continentalist 281 

Treasury. It is easy to infer from this how large a 
part of them must, directly or indirectly, be derived 
from land. 

Nothing can be more mistaken than the collision 
and rivalship which almost always subsist between 
the landed and trading interests, for the truth is they 
are so inseparably interwoven that one cannot be 
injured without injury nor benefited without benefit 
to the other. Oppress trade, lands sink in value; 
make it flourish, their value rises. Incumber hus 
bandry, trade declines; encourage agriculture, com 
merce revives. The progress of this mutual reaction 
might be easily delineated, but it is too obvious to 
every man who turns his thoughts, however super 
ficially, upon the subject to require it. It is only to 
be regretted that it is too often lost sight of when 
the seductions of some immediate advantage or 
exemption tempt us to sacrifice the future to the 
present. 

But perhaps the class is more numerous of those 
who, not unwilling to bear their share of public bur 
thens, are yet averse to the idea of perpetuity, as if 
there ever would arrive a period when the state 
would cease to want revenues and taxes become un 
necessary. It is of importance to unmask this delu 
sion, and open the eyes of the people to the truth. 
It is paying too great a tribute to the idol of popular 
ity, to flatter so injurious and so visionary an ex 
pectation. The error is too gross to be tolerated 
anywhere but in the cottage of the peasant. Should 
we meet with it in the Senate-house, we must lament 
the ignorance or despise the hypocrisy on which it is 

282 Alexander Hamilton 

ingrafted. Expense is in the present state of things 
entailed upon all governments; though, if we con 
tinue united, we shall be hereafter less exposed to 
wars by land than most other countries; yet while 
we have powerful neighbors on either extremity, and 
our frontier is embraced by savages whose alliance 
they may without difficulty command, we cannot, 
in prudence, dispense with the usual precautions for 
our interior security. As a commercial people, mari 
time power must be a primary object of our atten 
tion, and a navy cannot be created or maintained 
without ample revenues. The nature of our popular 
institutions requires a numerous magistracy, for 
whom competent provision must be made, or we 
may be certain our affairs will always be committed 
to improper hands, and experience will teach us that 
no government costs so much as a bad one. 

We may preach, till we are tired of the theme, the 
necessity of disinterestedness in republics, without 
making a single proselyte. The virtuous declaimer 
will neither persuade himself nor any other person to 
be content with a double mess of pottage, instead of 
a reasonable stipend for his services. We might as 
soon reconcile ourselves to the Spartan community 
of goods and wives, to their iron coin, their long 
beards, or their black broth. There is a total dis 
similarity in the circumstances as well as the man 
ners of society among us, and it is as ridiculous 
to seek for models in the small ages of Greece and 
Rome, as it would be to go in quest of them among 
the Hottentots and Laplanders. 

The public, for the different purposes that have 

The Continentalist 283 

been mentioned, must always have large demands 
upon its constituents, and the only question is, 
whether these shall be satisfied by annual grants 
perpetually renewed, by a perpetual grant once for 
all, or by a compound of permanent and occasional 
supplies. The last is the wisest course. The Fed 
eral Government should neither be independent nor 
too much dependent. It should neither be raised 
above responsibility or control, nor should it want 
the means of maintaining its own weight, authority, 
dignity, and credit. To this end, permanent funds 
are indispensable, but they ought to be of such a 
nature and so moderate in their amount as never to 
be inconvenient. Extraordinary supplies can be the 
objects of extraordinary emergencies, and in that 
salutary medium will consist our true wisdom. 

It would seem as if no mode of taxation could be 
relished but the worst of all modes, which now pre 
vails, — by assessment. Every proposal for a specific 
tax is sure to meet with opposition. It has been ob 
jected to a poll tax at a fixed rate, that it will be un 
equal, and the rich will pay no more than the poor. 
In the form in which it has been offered in these 
papers, the poor, properly speaking, are not com 
prehended, though it is true that beyond the exclu 
sion of the indigent the tax has no reference to the 
proportion of property, but it should be remembered 
that it is impossible to devise any specific tax that 
will operate equally on the whole community. It 
must be the province of the Legislature to hold the 
scales with a judicious hand and balance one by 
another. The rich must be made to pay for their 

284 Alexander Hamilton 

luxuries, which is the only proper way of taxing 
their superior wealth. 

Do we imagine that our assessments operate 
equally ? Nothing can be more contrary to the fact. 
Wherever a discretionary power is lodged in any set 
of men over the property of their neighbors, they 
will abuse it; their passions, prejudices, partialities, 
dislikes, will have the principal lead in measuring 
the abilities of those over whom their power extends ; 
and assessors will ever be a set of petty tyrants, too 
unskilful, if honest, to be possessed of so delicate a 
trust, and too seldom honest to give them the excuse 
of want of skill. 

The genius of liberty reprobates every thing arbi 
trary or discretionary in taxation. It exacts that 
every man, by a definite and general rule, should 
know what proportion of his property the state de 
mands ; whatever liberty we may boast in theory, it 
cannot exist in fact while assessments continue. 

The admission of them among us is a new proof 
how often human conduct reconciles the most glaring 
opposites ; in the present case, the most vicious prac 
tice of despotic governments with the freest con 
stitutions and the greatest love of liberty. 

The establishment of permanent funds would not 
only answer the public purposes infinitely better 
than temporary supplies, but it would be the most 
effectual way of easing the people. 

With this basis for procuring credit, the amount 
of present taxes might be greatly diminished. Large 
sums of money might be borrowed abroad at a low 
interest, and introduced into the country, to defray 

The Continentalist 285 

the current expenses and pay the public debts; 
which would not only lessen the demand for imme 
diate supplies, but would throw more money into 
circulation, and furnish the people with greater 
means of paying the taxes. 

Though it be a just rule that we ought not to run 
in debt to avoid present expense, so far as our facul 
ties extend, yet the propriety of doing it cannot be 
disputed when it is apparent that these are incom 
petent to the public necessities. Efforts beyond our 
abilities can only tend to individual distress and 
national disappointment. The product of the three 
foregoing articles will be as little as can be required 
to enable Congress to pay their debts and restore 
order into their finances. In addition to them: 

The disposal of the unlocated lands will hereafter 
be a valuable source of revenue and an immediate 
one of credit. As it may be liable to the same condi 
tion with the duties on trade — that is, the product 
of the sales within each State to be credited to that 
State, — and as the rights of jurisdiction are not in 
fringed, it seems to be susceptible of no reasonable 
objection. 

Mines in every country constitute a branch of 
revenue. In this, where nature has so richly im 
pregnated the bowels of the earth, they may in time 
become a valuable one ; and as they require the care 
and attention of government to bring them to per 
fection, this care and a share in the profits of it will 
very properly devolve upon Congress. All the pre 
cious metals should absolutely be the property of the 
Federal Government, and with respect to the others 

286 Alexander Hamilton 

it should have a discretionary power of reserving, in 
the nature of a tax, such part as it may judge not 
inconsistent with the encouragement due to so im 
portant an object. This is rather a future than a 
present resource. 

The reason of allowing Congress to appoint its 
own officers of the customs, collectors of the taxes, 
and military officers of every rank, is to create in the 
interior of each State a mass of influence in favor of 
the Federal Government. The great danger has 
been shown to be that it will not have power enough 
to defend itself and preserve the Union, not that it 
will ever become formidable to the general liberty; 
a mere regard to the interests of the Confederacy 
will never be a principle sufficiently active to crush 
the ambition and intrigues of different members. 
Force cannot effect it. A contest of arms will seldom 
be between the common sovereign and a single re 
fractory member, but between distinct combinations 
of the several parts against each other. A sympathy 
of situations will be apt to produce associates to the 
disobedient. The application of force is always dis 
agreeable — the issue uncertain. It will be wise to 
obviate the necessity of it, by interesting such a num 
ber of individuals in each State in support of the 
Federal Government as will be counterpoised to the 
ambition of others, and will make it difficult for 
them to unite the people in opposition to the first 
and necessary measures of the Union. 

There is something noble and magnificent in the 
perspective of a great Federal Republic, closely 
linked in the pursuit of a common interest, tranquil 

The Continentalist 287 

and prosperous at home, respectable abroad; but 
there is something proportionably diminutive and 
contemptible in the prospect of a number of petty 
States, with the appearance only of union, jarring, 
jealous, and perverse, without any determined direc 
tion, fluctuating and unhappy at home, weak and 
insignificant by their dissensions in the eyes of other 
nations. 

Happy America, if those to whom thou hast in 
trusted the guardianship of thy infancy know how 
to provide for thy future repose, but miserable and 
undone, if their negligence or ignorance permits the 
spirit of discord to erect her banner on the ruins of 
thy tranquillity! 

RESOLUTIONS FOR A GENERAL CONVEN- 
TION OF THE STATES 
RESOLUTIONS FOR A GENERAL CON 
VENTION OF THE STATES 

Passed by the Legislature of New York, Sunday, July 21, 1782. 

Resolved, That it appears to this Legislature — 
after full and solemn consideration of the several 
matters communicated by the Honorable the Com 
mittee of Congress relative to the present posture of 
our affairs, foreign and domestic, and contained in 
a letter from the Secretary for Foreign Affairs re 
specting the former, as well as of the representations 
from time to time made by the Superintendent of the 
Finances of the United States relative to his par 
ticular department — that the situation of these 
States is in a peculiar manner critical, and affords 
the strongest reason to apprehend, from a continu 
ance of the present constitution of the Continental 
Government, a subdivision of the public credit, 
and consequences highly dangerous to the safety 
and independence of these States. 

Resolved, That, while this Legislature are con 
vinced by the before-mentioned communications 
that, notwithstanding the generous intentions of an 
ally from whom we have experienced and doubtless 
shall still experience all possible support, exigencies 
may arise to prevent our receiving pecuniary succors 
292 Alexander Hamilton 

hereafter in any degree proportioned to our neces 
sities; they are also convinced, from facts within 
their own knowledge, that the provisions made by 
the respective States for carrying on the war are 
not only inadequate to the end, but must con 
tinue to be so while there is an adherence to the 
principles which now direct the operation of public 
measures. 

Resolved, That it is also the opinion of this Legis 
lature, that the present plan instituted by Congress 
for the administration of their finances is founded in 
wisdom and sound policy; that the salutary effects 
of it have already been felt in an extensive degree; 
and that after so many violent shocks sustained by 
the public credit, a failure in this system, for want 
of the support which the States are able to give, 
would be productive of evils too pernicious to be 
hazarded. 

Resolved, That it appears to this Legislature, that 
the present British ministry, with a disposition not 
less hostile than that of their predecessors, taught 
by experience to avoid their errors, and assuming 
the appearance of moderation are pursuing a scheme 
calculated to conciliate in Europe and seduce in 
America; that the economical arrangements they 
appear to be adopting are adapted to enlarging the 
credit of their government, and multiplying its re 
sources, at the same time that they serve to confirm 
the prepossessions and confidence of the people ; and 
that their plan of a defensive war on this continent, 
while they direct all their attention and resources to 
the augmentation of their navy, is that which may 

Resolutions for a General Convention 293 

be productive of consequences ultimately dangerous 
to the United States. 

Resolved, That it is the opinion of this Legislature, 
that the present system of these States exposes the 
common cause to a precarious issue, and leaves us at 
the mercy of events over which we have no influence, 
— a conduct extremely unwise in any nation and at 
all times, and to a change of which we are impelled 
at this juncture by reasons of peculiar and irresistible 
weight; and that it is the natural tendency of the 
weakness and disorders in our national measures to 
spread diffidence and distrust among the people, and 
prepare their minds to receive the impressions the 
enemy wish to make. 

Resolved, That the general state of European affairs, 
as far as they have come to the knowledge of this 
Legislature, affords, in their opinion, reasonable 
ground of confidence, and assures us that with ju 
dicious, vigorous exertion on our part we may rely 
on the final attainment of our object; but far from 
justifying indifference and security, calls upon us by 
every motive of honor, good faith, and patriotism, 
without delay, to unite in some system more effectual 
for producing energy, harmony, and consistency of 
measures than that which now exists, and more 
capable of putting the common cause out of the reach 
of contingencies. 

Resolved, That in the opinion of this Legislature 
the radical source of most of our embarrassments is 
the want of sufficient power in Congress to effectuate 
that ready and perfect co-operation of the different 
States on which their immediate safety and future 

294 Alexander Hamilton 

happiness depend; that experience has demon 
strated the Confederation to be defective in several 
essential points, particularly in not vesting the Fed 
eral Government either with a power of providing 
revenue for itself, or with ascertained and productive 
funds, secured by a sanction so solemn and general 
as would inspire the fullest confidence in them and 
make them a substantial basis of credit — that these 
defects ought to be without loss of time repaired, 
the powers of Congress extended, a solid security 
established for the payment of debts already in 
curred, and competent means provided for future 
credit and for supplying the current demands of 
the war. 

Resolved, That it appears evident to this Legisla 
ture, that the annual income of these States, admit 
ting the best means were adopted for drawing out 
their resources, would fall far short of the annual 
expenditure, and that there would be a large de 
ficiency to be supplied on the credit of the States, 
which, if it should be inconvenient for those powers 
to afford on whose friendship we justly rely, must be 
sought for from individuals, to engage whom to lend, 
satisfactory securities must be pledged for the punc 
tual payment of interest and the final redemption of 
the principal. 

Resolved, That it appears to this Legislature, that 
the foregoing important ends can never be attained 
by partial deliberations of the States separately, but 
that it is essential to the common welfare that there 
should be as soon as possible a conference of the 
whole on the subject, and that it would be advisable 

Resolutions for a General Convention 295 

for this purpose to propose to Congress to recom 
mend, and to each State to adopt, the measure of 
assembling a GENERAL CONVENTION OF THE STATES, 
specially authorized to revise and amend the CON 
FEDERATION, reserving a right to the respective 
LEGISLATURES to ratify their determinations. 

SPEECHES AND RESOLUTIONS IN 
CONGRESS 

CONGRESS1 

MONDAY, January 27, 1783. 

MR. HAMILTON went extensively into the sub 
ject; the sum of it was as follows: He ob 
served that funds considered as permanent sources 
of revenue were of two kinds: first, such as would 
extend generally and uniformly throughout the 
United States, and would be collected under the au 
thority of Congress; secondly, such as might be 
established separately within each State, and might 
consist of any objects which were chosen by the 
States, and might be collected either under the au 
thority of the States or of Congress. Funds of the 
first kind, he contended, were preferable; as being, 
first, more simple, the difficulties attending the mode 
of fixing the quotas laid down in the Confederation 
rendering it extremely complicated, and in a manner 

1 Almost all the resolutions offered in Congress by Hamilton are 
omitted here, because they are given in the journals of that body. 
Many of them are unimportant, and nearly all are the work of com 
mittees. Those which follow are retained solely because they show 
the drift of Hamilton's mind at this time on the subject of government, 
and the nature of his efforts as a public man to bring about the desired 
changes in our political system. The speeches are taken from Madi 
son's Debates, and although mere fragments, illustrate better than 
anything else the character of Hamilton's work as a delegate to the 
Congress of the Confederation. 
300 Alexander Hamilton 

insuperable; secondly, as being more certain, since 
the States, according to the said plan, would prob 
ably retain the collection of the revenue, and a 
vicious system of collection prevailed generally 
throughout the United States, — a system by which 
the collectors were chosen by the people, and made 
their offices more subservient to their popularity 
than to the public revenue; thirdly, as being more 
economical, since the collection would be effected 
with fewer officers under the management of Con 
gress than under that of the States. 

TUESDAY, January 28th. 

Mr. Hamilton, in reply to Mr. Ellsworth, dwelt 
long on the inefficacy of State funds. He supposed, 
too, that greater obstacles would arise to the execu 
tion of the plan than to that of a general revenue. 
As an additional reason for the latter to be collected 
by officers under the appointment of Congress, he 
signified that as the energy of the Federal Govern 
ment was evidently short of the degree necessary for 
pervading and uniting the States, it was expedient 
to introduce the influence of officers deriving their 
emoluments from, and consequently interested in 
supporting the power of, Congress.1 

1 This remark was imprudent and injurious to the cause which it was 
meant to serve. This influence was the very source of the jealousy 
which rendered the States averse to a revenue under collection, as well 
as appropriation, of Congress. All the members of Congress who 
concurred in any degree with the States in this jealousy smiled at the 
disclosure. Mr. Bland, and still more Mr. Lee, who were of this num 
ber, took notice in private conversation that Mr. Hamilton had let 
out the secret. (Note by Madison.) 

Speeches and Resolutions in Congress 301 

WEDNESDAY, January apth. 

Mr. Hamilton disliked every plan that made but 
partial provision for the public debts, as an incon 
sistent and dishonorable departure from the declara 
tion made by Congress on that subject. He said 
the domestic creditors would take the alarm at any 
distinctions unfavorable to their claims; that they 
would withhold their influence from any such meas 
ures recommended by Congress; and that it must 
be principally from their influence on their respective 
Legislatures that success could be expected to any 
application from Congress for a general revenue. 

February 12, 1783. 

Resolved, That it is the opinion of Congress that 
complete JUSTICE cannot be done to the creditors of 
the United States, nor the restoration of PUBLIC 
CREDIT be effected, nor the future exigencies of the 
war provided for, but by the establishment of per 
manent and adequate funds to operate generally 
throughout the United States, to be collected by 
Congress.1 

1 There has been much useless controversy as to whether the honor 
of first advocating the establishment of permanent funds belongs to 
Hamilton, Madison, or Wilson of Pennsylvania. (See Hamilton's 
History of the Republic, ii., 398, and Rives' Life of Madison, i., 437.) 
The first suggestion of permanent funds was in the report of a Com 
mittee on the Army Memorial, drafted by Hamilton. (See Journals 
of Congress, Jan. 25, 1783.) Then followed the debates on this ques 
tion of public credit, and the speeches given above show that Hamilton 
took strong grounds in favor of permanent funds. On Jan. 2gth, a 
resolution for permanent funds was passed substantially as above, 
and was amended Feb. rath. Madison and Wilson both sustained the 
principle. It is of no importance whether the ultimate resolution was 
identical with this of Hamilton's or not. This resolution, as given 
here, shows Hamilton's views exactly, and that is sufficient. 

3O2 Alexander Hamilton 

OPEN DEBATE 

WEDNESDAY, February 

Mr. Hamilton said, in support of his motion, x that 
it was in vain to attempt to gain the concurrence of 
the States by removing the objections publicly as 
signed by them against the impost; that these were 
the ostensible and not the true objections; that the 
true objection on the part of Rhode Island was the 
interference of the impost with the opportunity 
afforded by their situation of levying contributions 
on Connecticut, etc., which received foreign supplies 
through the ports of Rhode Island; that the true 
objection on the part of Virginia was her having 
little share in the debts due from the United States, 
to which the impost would be applied; that a re 
moval of the avowed objections would not therefore 
remove the obstructions, whilst it would admit, on 
the part of Congress, that their first recommenda 
tion went beyond the absolute exigencies of the pub 
lic; that Congress, having taken a proper ground at 
first, ought to maintain it till time should convince 
the States of the propriety of the measure. 

Mr. Hamilton opposed the motion 2 strenuously ; 
declared that, as a friend to the army as well as to 
the other creditors and to the public at large, he 
would never assent to such a partial distribution of 
justice; that the different States, being differently 
attached to different branches of the public debt, 

1 To postpone clause limiting time of duration of impost, and to 
make it unlimited in duration. 

9 By Mr. Rutledge, to appropriate impost to army exclusively. 

Speeches and Resolutions in Congress 303 

would never concur in establishing a fund which was 
not extended to every branch; that it was impolitic 
to divide the interests of the civil and military credi 
tors, whose joint efforts in the States would be neces 
sary to prevail on them to adopt a general revenue. 

1783- 

Whereas it is the desire of Congress that the mo 
tives of their deliberations and measures (so far as 
they can be disclosed consistently with the public 
safety) should be fully known to their constituents, 
therefore 

Resolved, That when the establishment of funds 
for paying the principal and interest of the public 
debt shall be under the consideration of this House, 
the doors shall be opened. 

MUTINY OF TROOPS 

June 21, 1783. 

Resolved* That the President and Supreme Execu 
tive Council of Pennsylvania be informed that the 

1 This resolution, and those which follow, with the exception of the 
very next series, relate to the mutiny of certain troops at Philadelphia 
and Lancaster. Congress was threatened and insulted, and the Gov 
ernment of Pennsylvania displayed great feebleness. Hamilton fav 
ored most vigorous measures, and subsequently defended his action 
and that of Congress in The Vindication. His resolutions and other 
writings in connection with this incident do not strictly belong to his 
writings on government, but they show the difficulties with which 
he was contending, the way in which he met a danger that shook 
severely the crazy fabric of the Confederation, and the use which he 
made of this wretched affair to advance his broad and far-reaching 
schemes. 

304 Alexander Hamilton 

authority of the United States having been this day 
grossly insulted by the disorderly and menacing ap 
pearance of a body of armed soldiers about the place 
within which Congress were assembled, and the 
peace of this city being endangered by the mutinous 
disposition of said troops, now in the barracks, it is, 
in the opinion of Congress, necessary that effectual 
measures be immediately taken for supporting the 
public authority. 

Resolved, That the Committee, on a letter from 
Colonel Butler, be directed to confer, without loss of 
time, with the Supreme Executive Council of Penn 
sylvania, on the practicability of carrying the pre 
ceding resolution into effect; and that in case it 
shall appear to the Committee that there is not a 
satisfactory ground for expecting adequate and 
prompt exertions of this State, for supporting the 
dignity of the Federal Government, the President, 
on the advice of the Committee, be authorized to 
summon the members of Congress to meet on Thurs 
day next, at Trenton or Princeton, in New Jersey, in 
order that further and more effectual measures may 
be taken for suppressing the present revolt and 
maintaining the dignity and authority of the United 
States. 

Resolved, That the Secretary of War be directed 
to communicate to the Commander-in-Chief the 
state and disposition of the said troops, in order 
that he may take immediate measures to dispatch 
to this city such force as he may judge expedi 
ent for suppressing any disturbances that may 
ensue. 

Speeches and Resolutions in Congress 305 

RESOLUTIONS FOR A GENERAL CONVENTION 

June 30, 1783. 

Whereas, in the opinion of this Congress, the Con 
federation of the United States is defective in the 
following essential points, to wit: 

Firstly, and generally: In confining the power of 
the Federal Government within too narrow limits; 
withholding from it that efficacious authority and 
influence, in all matters of general concern, which 
are indispensable to the harmony and welfare of the 
whole; embarrassing general provisions by unneces 
sary details and inconvenient exceptions incom 
patible with their nature, tending only to create 
jealousies and disputes respecting the proper bounds 
of the authority of the United States, and of that of 
the particular States, and a mutual interference of 
the one with the other. 

Secondly: In confounding legislative and execu 
tive powers in a single body : as, that of determining 
on the number and quantity of force, land and naval, 
to be employed for the common defence, and of di 
recting their operations when raised and equipped, 
with that of ascertaining and making requisitions 
for the necessary sums or quantities of money to 
be paid by the respective States into the common 
treasury; contrary to the most approved and well- 
founded maxims of free government, which require 
that the legislative, executive, and judicial authori 
ties should be deposited in distinct and separate 
hands. 

Thirdly: In want of a Federal Judicature, having 

VOL. I.— 20. 

3°6 Alexander Hamilton 

cognizance of all matters of general concern in the 
last resort, especially those in which foreign nations 
and their subjects are interested ; from which defect, 
by the interference of the local regulations of par 
ticular States militating directly or indirectly against 
the powers vested in the Union, the national treaties 
will be liable to be infringed, the national faith to be 
violated, and the public tranquillity to be disturbed. 

Fourthly: In vesting the United States in Congress 
assembled with the power of general taxation, com 
prehended in that of " ascertaining the necessary 
sums of money to be raised for the common defence, 
and of appropriating and applying the same, for de 
fraying the public expenses"; and yet rendering 
that power, so essential to the existence of the Union, 
nugatory, by withholding from them all control over 
either the imposition or the collection of the taxes 
for raising the sums required: whence it happens 
that the inclinations, not the abilities, of the respec 
tive States are, in fact, the criterion of their contri 
butions to the common expense; and the public 
burthen has fallen, and will continue to fall, with 
very unequal weight. 

Fifthly: In fixing a rule for determining the pro 
portion of each State towards the common expense, 
which, if practicable at all, must, in the execution, 
be attended with great expense, inequality, uncer 
tainty, and difficulty. 

Sixthly: In authorizing Congress "to borrow 
money, or emit bills on the credit of the United 
States," without the power of establishing funds to 
secure the repayment of the money borrowed, or 

Speeches and Resolutions in Congress 307 

the redemption of the bills emitted; from which 
must result one of these evils : Either a want of suf 
ficient credit, in the first instance, to borrow, or to 
circulate the bills emitted, whereby, in great national 
exigencies, the public safety may be endangered; 
or, in the second instance, frequent infractions of 
the public engagements, disappointments to lenders, 
repetitions of the calamities of depreciating paper, 
a continuance of the injustice and mischiefs of an 
unfunded debt, and, first or last, the annihilation of 
public credit. 

Indeed, in authorizing Congress at all to emit an 
unfunded paper as the sign of value, a resource which, 
though useful in the infancy of this country, and in 
dispensable in the commencement of the revolution, 
ought not to continue a formal part of the Constitu 
tion, nor ever, hereafter, to be employed, being, in 
its nature, pregnant with abuses, and liable to be 
made the engine of imposition and fraud, holding 
out temptations equally pernicious to the integrity of 
government and to the morals of the people. 

Seventhly: In not making proper or competent 
provisions for interior or exterior defence. For in 
terior defence, by leaving it to the individual States 
to appoint all regimental officers of the land-forces; 
to raise the men in their own way; to clothe, arm, 
and equip them at the expense of the United States : 
from which circumstances have resulted, and will 
hereafter result, great confusion in the military de 
partment; continual disputes of rank; languid and 
disproportionate levies of men ; an enormous increase 
of expense, for want of system and uniformity in the 

308 Alexander Hamilton 

manner of conducting them, and from the com 
petitions of State bounties ; by an ambiguity in the 
fourth clause of the sixth article, susceptible of a 
construction which would devolve upon the par 
ticular States in time of peace the care of their own 
defence, both by sea and land, and would preclude 
the United States from raising a single regiment, or 
building a single ship, before a declaration of war or 
an actual commencement of hostilities, — a principle 
dangerous to the Confederacy in different respects, 
by leaving the United States at all times unprepared 
for the defence of their common rights, obliging 
them to begin to raise an army and to build and 
equip a navy at the moment they would have occa 
sion to employ them, and by putting into the hands 
of a few States, who, from their local situations, are 
more immediately exposed, all the standing forces of 
the country; thereby, not only leaving the care of 
the safety of the whole to a part which will naturally 
be both unwilling and unable to make effectual pro 
vision at its particular expense, but also furnishing 
grounds of jealousy and distrust between the States ; 
unjust, in its operation, to those States in whose 
hands they are, by throwing the exclusive burthen 
of maintaining those forces upon them, while their 
neighbors, immediately, and all the States, ulti 
mately, would share the benefits of their services. 

For exterior defence, in authorizing Congress to 
"build and equip a navy" without providing any 
means of manning it, either by requisitions of the 
States, by the power of registering and draughting 
the seamen in rotation, or by embargoes in cases of 

Speeches and Resolutions in Congress 309 

emergency to induce them to accept employment on 
board the ships of war; the omission of all of which, 
leaves no other resource than voluntary enlistment, 
— a resource which has been found ineffectual in every 
country, and, for reasons of peculiar force, in this. 

Eighthly: In not vesting in the United States, a 
general superintendence of trade, equally necessary 
in the view of revenue and regulation. Of revenue, 
because duties on commerce, when moderate, are 
one of the most agreeable and productive species of 
it; which cannot, without great disadvantages, be 
imposed by particular States while others refrain 
from doing it, but must be imposed in concert, and 
by laws operating upon the same principles, at the 
same moment, in all the States, otherwise those 
States which should not impose them would engross 
the commerce of such of their neighbors as did. Of 
regulation, because by general prohibitions of par 
ticular articles, by a judicious arrangement of duties, 
sometimes by bounties on the manufacture or expor 
tation of certain commodities, injurious branches of 
commerce might be discouraged, favorable branches 
encouraged, useful products and manufactures pro 
moted, none of which advantages can be as effect 
ually attained by separate regulations, without a 
general superintending power; because, also, it is 
essential to the due observance of the commercial 
stipulations of the United States with foreign powers, 
an interference with which will be unavoidable if the 
different States have the exclusive regulation of 
their own trade, and, of course, the construction of 
the treaties entered into. 

Alexander Hamilton 

Ninthly: In defeating essential powers by provi 
sions and limitations inconsistent with their nature, 
as the power of making treaties with foreign nations, 
" provided that no treaty of commerce shall be made 
whereby the legislative power of the respective 
States shall be restrained from imposing such im 
posts and duties on foreigners as their own people 
are subjected to, or from prohibiting the importation 
or exportation of any species of goods or commodi 
ties whatsoever " ; a proviso, susceptible of an inter 
pretation which includes a constitutional possibility 
of defeating the treaties of commerce entered into 
by the United States. As also the power " of regu 
lating the trade and managing all affairs with the 
Indians, not members of any of the States, provided 
that the legislative right of any State, within its own 
limits, be not infringed or violated "; and others of 
a similar nature. 

Tenthly: In granting the United States the sole 
power "of regulating the alloy and value of coin 
struck by their own authority or by that of the re 
spective States/* without the power of regulating the 
foreign coin in circulation ; though the one is essential 
to the due exercise of the other, as there ought to be 
such proportions maintained, between the national 
and foreign coin as will give the former preference 
in all internal negotiations; and without the latter 
power the operations of government, in a matter of 
primary importance to the commerce and finances 
of the United States, will be exposed to numberless 
obstructions. 

Eleventhly: In requiring the assent of nine States 

Speeches and Resolutions in Congress 311 

to matters of principal importance, and of seven to 
all others, except adjournments from day to day ; a 
rule destructive of vigor, consistency, or expedition 
in the administration of affairs; tending to subject 
the sense of the majority to that of the minority, by 
putting it in the power of a small combination to 
retard, and even to frustrate, the most necessary 
measures; and to oblige the greater number, in 
cases which require speedy determinations, as hap 
pens in the most interesting concerns of the com 
munity, to come into the views of the smaller; the 
evils of which have been felt in critical conjunc 
tures, and must always make the spirit of govern 
ment a spirit of compromise and expedient rather 
than of system and energy. 

Twelfthly: In vesting in the Federal Government 
the sole direction of the interests of the United 
States, in their intercourse with foreign nations, 
without empowering it to pass all general laws in aid 
and support of the laws of nations ; for the want of 
which authority the faith of the United States may 
be broken, their reputation sullied, and their peace 
interrupted by the negligence or misconception of 
any particular State. 

And whereas, experience hath clearly manifested 
that the powers reserved to the Union in the Con 
federation are unequal to the purpose of effectually 
drawing forth the resources of the respective mem 
bers, for the common welfare and defence : whereby 
the United States have, upon several occasions, been 
exposed to the most critical and alarming situations ; 
have wanted an army adequate to their defence, and 

312 Alexander Hamilton 

proportioned to the abilities of the country; have, 
on account of that deficiency, seen essential posts 
reduced, others eminently endangered, whole States, 
and large parts of others overrun and ravaged by 
small bodies of the enemy's forces; have been desti 
tute of sufficient means of feeding, clothing, paying, 
and appointing that army; by which the troops, 
rendered less efficient for military operations, have 
been exposed to sufferings which nothing but un 
paralleled patience, perseverance, and patriotism 
could have endured; whereby, also, the United 
States have been too often compelled to make the 
administration of their affairs a succession of tem 
porary expedients, inconsistent with order, economy, 
energy, or a scrupulous adherence to the public en 
gagements; and now find themselves, at the close of 
a glorious struggle for independence, without any 
certain means of doing justice to those who have been 
its principal supporters, — to an army which has 
bravely fotight and patiently suffered, to citizens 
who have cheerfully lent their money, and to others 
who have in different ways contributed their prop 
erty and their personal service to the common cause; 
obliged to rely, for the only effectual mode of doing 
that justice, by funding the debt on solid securities, 
on the precarious concurrence of thirteen distinct 
deliberatives, the dissent of either of which may 
defeat the plan, and leave these States, at this 
early period of their existence, involved in all the dis 
grace and mischiefs of violated faith and national 
bankruptcy. 

And whereas, notwithstanding we have, by the 

Speeches and Resolutions in Congress 313 

blessing of Providence, so far happily escaped the 
complicated dangers of such a situation, and now 
see the object of our wishes secured by an honorable 
peace, it would be unwise to hazard a repetition 
of the same dangers and embarrassments in any 
future war in which these States may be engaged, or 
to continue this extensive empire under a govern 
ment unequal to its protection and prosperity. 

And whereas, it is essential to the happiness and 
security of these States, that their union should be 
established on the most solid foundations; and it is 
manifest that this desirable object cannot be effected 
but by a government capable, both in peace and war, 
of making every member of the Union contribute, 
in just proportion, to the common necessities, and 
of combining and directing the forces and wills of 
the several parts to a general end; to which pur 
poses, in the opinion of Congress, the present Con 
federation is altogether inadequate. 

And whereas, on the spirit which may direct the 
councils and measures of these States at the present 
juncture may depend their future safety and wel 
fare, Congress conceives it to be their duty freely to 
state to their constituents the defects which, by ex 
perience, have been discovered in the present plan 
of the Federal Union, and solemnly to call their at 
tention to a revisal and amendment of the same. 

Therefore, Resolved, That it be earnestly recom 
mended to the several States to appoint a Conven 
tion to meet at -*•$•••$ on the day 
of , with full powers to revise the Confed 
eration, and to adopt and propose such alterations 

3*4 Alexander Hamilton 

as to them shall appear necessary ; to be finally ap 
proved or rejected by the States respectively; and 
that a Committee of be appointed to pre 

pare an address upon the subject. 

MUTINY OF THE TROOPS 

July i, 1783. 

Resolved, That Major-General Howe be directed to 
march such part of the force under his command as 
he shall judge necessary to the State of Pennsyl 
vania, in order that immediate measures may be 
taken to confine and bring to trial all such persons 
belonging to the army as have been principally ac 
tive in the late meeting, to disarm the remainder, 
and to examine fully into all the circumstances re 
lating thereto. 

That in the exercise of the foregoing resolution, if 
any matters shall arise which may concern the civil 
jurisdiction, or in which its aid may be necessary, 
application be made for the same to the executive 
authorities of the State. 



The Committee, consisting of Mr. Hamilton, Mr- 
Ellsworth, and Mr. Peters, to whom were referred a 
letter of the i;th of June from Col. R. Butler, at 
Lancaster, and sundry papers communicated to 
Congress by the Executive Council of Pennsylvania, 
through their delegates, having, on the i9th of June, 

Speeches and Resolutions in Congress 315 

made a verbal report, and on the 2oth of the same 
month, a report in writing, and the written report 
being on the 3oth recommitted that they might amend 
it by adding thereto their verbal report, and the re 
port being this day brought in with the said amend 
ment, ordered that it be entered on the journal. 

Report 

The Committee, to whom were referred the letters 
and papers communicated to Congress by the Ex 
ecutive Council of Pennsylvania, through their dele 
gates, report: That they had a conference yesterday, 
as directed, with the Supreme Executive Council, 
in which, in the first instance, the propriety of call 
ing out a detachment of militia to intercept the 
mutineers on their march from Lancaster was pro 
posed to the Council, suggesting the danger of their 
being suffered with impunity to join the troops in 
the barracks, who a few days before had manifested 
a dangerous spirit by an insolent and threatening 
message sent to Congress in the name of a board of 
sergeants, and who, it was apprehended, would be 
ready to make common cause with those on their 
march for mutinous purposes ; that the Council hav 
ing shown a reluctance to call out any part of the 
militia, expressing an opinion that they would not 
be willing to act till some outrage should have been 
committed by the troops, there appeared to the Com 
mittee no alternative but to endeavor to dissuade 
the mutineers from coming to town, and if they 
failed in that attempt, to make use of expedients 

316 Alexander Hamilton 

to prevent the troops in the barracks from join 
ing in any excesses, and to induce the detachment 
from Lancaster to return to that place ; that, in this 
view, and at their desire, the Assistant Secretary of 
War met the detachment then on its march to the 
city, and endeavored to engage them to return to 
the former place, urging the considerations con 
tained in the annexed instructions within, but the 
said detachment persisted in their intention of com 
ing to this city and arrived here this morning; that 
upon conferring with the Superintendent of Finance 
they find there is a probability that the Paymaster 
General, to whom the settlement of the accounts of 
the army has been committed, and who, having all 
the documents in his possession, can alone execute the 
business with propriety, will shortly arrive from the 
army, and will immediately enter upon a settle 
ment with the troops in this State; that, in the 
meantime, measures will be taken to prepare the 
business for a future adjustment; that there will 
immediately be sent to Lancaster a sum of money 
to be paid to the troops on account of the month's 
pay heretofore described to be advanced to them, 
the payment of which has hitherto been delayed by 
particular circumstances, together with notes for 
three months' pay, intended to be advanced to the 
men when furloughed; that they have desired this 
information to be transmitted to the commanding 
officer here and at Lancaster, with this declaration, 
that the corps stationed at Lancaster, including the 
detachment, can only be settled with or paid at that 
place. 

Speeches and Resolutions in Congress 317 

Instructions to Major Jackson 
SIR: 

Information having been received that a detach 
ment of about eighty mutineers are on their way 
from Lancaster to this place, you will please to pro 
ceed to meet them, and to endeavor by every pru 
dent method to engage them to return to the post 
they have left. You will inform them of the orders 
that have been given, permitting them to remain in 
service till their accounts shall have been settled, 
if they prefer it to being furloughed, and of the allow 
ance of pay which has been made to the army at 
large, and in which they are to be included. You 
will represent to them that their accounts cannot be 
settled without their officers, whom they have left 
behind them at Lancaster. You will represent to 
them with coolness but energy the impropriety of 
such irregular proceedings, and the danger they will 
run by persisting in an improper conduct. You will 
assure them of the best intentions in Congress to do 
them justice, and of the absurdity of their expecting 
to procure it more effectually by intemperate pro 
ceedings. You will point out to them the tendency 
which such proceedings may have to raise the resent 
ments of their country, and to indispose it to take 
effectual measures for their relief. In short, you will 
urge every consideration in your power to induce 
them to return, at the same time avoiding whatever 
may tend to irritate. If they persist in coming to 
town, you will give the earliest notice to us of their 
progress and disposition. Should they want pro 
visions, you will assure them of a supply, if they will 

318 Alexander Hamilton 

remain where they are, which you are to endeavor 
to persuade them to do, in preference to coming to 
town. 

I am, sir, 

Your most obedient servant, 

A. HAMILTON, 
In behalf of the Committee. 

PHILADELPHIA, June 19, 1783. 

The Committee, consisting of Mr. Hamilton and 
Mr. Ellsworth, appointed on the 2ist of June, to 
confer with the Supreme Executive Council of Penn 
sylvania on the practicability of taking effectual 
measures to support the public authority, having 
delivered in a report, ordered that it be entered in 
the journal. 

Report 

The Committee appointed to confer with the Su 
preme Executive Council of Pennsylvania on the 
practicability of taking effectual measures to sup 
port the public authority, in consequence of the dis 
orderly and menacing appearance of a body of armed 
soldiers surrounding the place where Congress were 
assembled on Saturday the 2ist, beg leave to report. 

That they had a conference the morning following 
with the Supreme Executive Council, agreeable to 
the intention of Congress, and having communicated 
their resolution on that subject, informed the Council 
that Congress considered the proceeding on which 
that resolution was founded of so serious a nature 
as to render palliatives improper, and to require that 
vigorous measures should be taken to put a stop to 

Speeches and Resolutions in Congress 319 

the further progress of the evil, and to compel sub 
mission on the part of the offenders; that, in this 
view, they had thought it expedient to declare to 
the Executive of the State in which they reside the 
necessity of taking effectual measures for supporting 
the public authority ; that though they had declined 
a specification of the measures which they would 
deem effectual, it was their sense that a number of 
the militia should be immediately called out, suf 
ficient to suppress the revolt; that Congress, un 
willing to expose the United States to a repetition 
of the insult, had suspended their ordinary delibera 
tions in this city, till proper steps could be taken to 
provide against the possibility of it. 

The Council, after some conversation, informed 
the Committee that they would wish, previous to a 
determination, to ascertain the state and disposition 
of the militia, and to consult the officers for that 
purpose. 

The day following the Committee waited upon the 
Council for their final resolution, having previously 
presented a letter addressed to his Excellency the 
President, of which a copy is annexed,1 requesting 
the determination of the Council in writing. The 
Council declined a written answer, alleging that it 
had been unusual on similar occasions; that they 

1 " SIR: — We have the honor to enclose for your Excellency and the 
Council, a copy of the resolutions communicated in our conference 
yesterday. Having then fully entered into all the explanations which 
were necessary on the subject, we shall not trouble your Excellency 
with a recapitulation, but as the object is of a delicate and important 
nature, we think it our duty to request the determination of the 
Council in writing." 

PHILADELPHIA, June 23, 1783. 

320 Alexander Hamilton 

were unwilling to do any thing which might appear 
an innovation in the manner of conducting confer 
ences between their body and committees of Con 
gress; adding, however, that they were ready to 
give their answer in writing if Congress should re 
quest it. They then proceeded to a verbal answer, 
in substance as follows : that the Council had a high 
respect for the representative sovereignty of the 
United States, and were disposed to do every thing 
in their power to support its dignity. That they 
regretted the insult which had happened, with this 
additional motive of sensibility, that they had them 
selves had a principal share in it. That they had 
consulted a number of well-informed officers of the 
militia, and found that nothing in the present state 
of things was to be expected from that quarter. 
That the militia of the city in general were not only 
ill-provided for service, but disinclined to act upon 
the present occasion. That the Council did not be 
lieve any exertions were to be looked for from them, 
except in case of further outrage and actual violence 
to person or property. That in such case a re 
spectable body of citizens would arm for the security 
of their property and of the public peace; but it was 
to be doubted what measure of outrage would pro 
duce this effect ; and in particular, it was not to be 
expected merely from a repetition of the insult which 
had happened. 

The Council observed that they thought it their 
duty to communicate their expectations with candor, 
and passed from the subject of the practicability of 
vigorous measures to the policy of them. They 

Speeches and Resolutions in Congress 321 

stated that General St. Clair, with the approbation 
of several members of Congress and of Council, had, 
by a declaration in writing, permitted the mutineers 
to choose a committee of commissioned officers to 
represent their grievances to Council, and had au 
thorized them to expect that a conference would be 
allowed for that purpose. That it was said the mu 
tineers began to be convinced of their error, and were 
preparing submissions. That from the steps which 
had been taken, the business seemed to be in a train 
of negotiation, and that it merited consideration, 
how far it would be prudent to terminate the 
matter in that way rather than employ coercive 
means. 

The Committee remarked, with respect to the 
scruple about giving an answer in writing, that they 
could not forbear differing in opinion as to its pro 
priety. That nothing was more common than 
written communications between the Executives of 
the different States and the Civil and military officers 
acting under the authority of the United States; 
that for a much stronger reason there was a pro 
priety in this mode of transacting business between 
the Council and a Committee of the body of Con 
gress. That indeed it would be conformable to the 
most obvious and customary rules of proceeding, 
and that the importance of the present occasion 
made it desirable to give every transaction the 
greatest precision. With respect to the practicability 
of employing the militia, the Committee observed 
that this was a point of which the Council was 
alone competent to judge. That the duty of the 

VOL. I.— 21. 

322 Alexander Hamilton 

Committee was performed in explicitly signifying 
the expectations of Congress. 

And with respect to the policy of coercion, the 
Committee remarked that the measures taken by 
Congress clearly indicated their opinion that the ex 
cesses of the mutineers had passed the bounds within 
which a spirit of compromise might consist with the 
dignity and even safety of government. That im 
punity for what had happened might encourage to 
more flagrant proceedings, invite others to follow 
the example, and extend the mischief. That the 
passiveness of conduct observed toward the detach 
ment which had mutinied at Lancaster, and came to 
the city in defiance of their officers, had, no doubt, 
led to the subsequent violences. That these con 
siderations had determined Congress to adopt deci 
sive measures. That besides the application to the 
State in which they reside for its immediate support, 
they had not neglected other means of ultimately 
executing their purposes, but had directed the 
Commander-in-Chief to march a detachment of 
troops toward the city. That whatever moderation 
it might be prudent to exercise toward the mutineers, 
when they were once in the power of the government, 
it was necessary, in the first instance, to place them 
in that situation. That Congress would probably 
continue to pursue this object unless it should be 
superseded by unequivocal demonstrations of sub 
mission on the part of the mutineers. That they 
had hitherto given no satisfactory evidence of this 
disposition, having lately presented the officers they 
had chosen to represent their grievances, with a 

Speeches and Resolutions in Congress 323 

formal commission in writing, enjoining them, if 
necessary, to use compulsory means for redress, and 
menacing them with death in case of their failing to 
execute their views. Under this state of things the 
Committee could not forbear suggesting to the Coun 
cil that it would be expedient for them so to qualify 
the reception which they should think proper to give 
to any propositions made by the mutineers, as not to 
create embarrassment, should Congress continue to 
act on the principle of coercion. 

The Committee, finding that there was no satis 
factory ground to expect prompt and adequate ex 
ertions on the part of the Executive of this State 
for supporting the public authority, were bound, by 
the resolution under which they acted, to advise 
the President to summon Congress to assemble at 
Princeton or Trenton on Thursday the 26th inst. 

Willing, however, to protract the departure of 
Congress as long as they could be justified in doing 
it, still hoping that further information would pro 
duce more decisive measures on the part of the 
Council, and desirous of seeing what complexion the 
intimated submissions would assume, they ventured 
to defer advising the removal till the afternoon of the 
day following that on which the answer of Council 
was given. But having then received no further 
communication from the Council, and having learned 
from General St. Clair that the submissions proposed 
to be offered by the mutineers, through the officers 
they had chosen to represent them, were not of a 
nature sufficiently explicit to be accepted or relied 
on; that they would be accompanied by new 

324 Alexander Hamilton 

demands, to which it would be improper to listen; 
that the officers themselves composing the commit 
tee had shown a mysterious reluctance to inform 
General St. Clair of their proceedings ; had refused in 
the first instance to do it, and had afterwards only 
yielded to a peremptory demand on his part; the 
Committee could no longer think themselves at 
liberty to delay their advice for an adjournment, 
which they this day accordingly gave; persuaded, 
at the same time, that it was necessary to impress 
the mutineers with a conviction that extremities 
would be used against them before they would 
be induced to resolve on a final and unreserved 
submission. 

PHILADELPHIA, June 24, 1783. 

VINDICATION OF CONGRESS 

IIOWEVER men actuated by private pique or 
* * party views may take pleasure in stigmatiz 
ing the conduct of Congress, with or without reason, 
considerate and good men, who are solicitous for the 
honor of their country, will act upon very different 
principles. They will view with regret those in 
stances in which the measures of that body may be 
really entitled to blame, will be cautious how they 
bestow it where it is not merited, and will always 
examine with candor before they condemn. Though 
it is certainly true that the infallibility of that or 
any other body is a doctrine to be reprobated in a 
free country, and a servile complaisance to its errors 
would be as dangerous as despicable, yet it must be 
allowed that an opposite extreme may be little less 
pernicious. 

A captious disposition to arraign without examina 
tion — to accumulate undistinguishing censure — to 
excite jealousies against the phantom, without the 
substance of power — to blame for defects in the Con 
stitution itself, not in the administration of it — is a 
vice of nearly as mischievous a tendency in the 
public mind, as a blind and superstitious reverence. 

In the present circumstances of this country, most 
evil is to be apprehended from the prevalency of the 
328 Alexander Hamilton 

former spirit; for new governments emerging out of 
a revolution are naturally deficient in authority, and 
require that every effort should be made to strengthen, 
not to undermine, the public confidence. This ob 
servation applies with peculiar force to the govern 
ment of the Union — the constitutional imbecility of 
which must be apparent to every man of reflection. 

It is therefore painful to hear, as is too fashionable 
a practice, indiscriminate censure heaped upon Con 
gress for every public failure and misfortune, with 
out considering the entire disproportion between 
the means which that body have it in their power to 
employ, and their responsibility. 

It is equally exceptionable to see all the errors of 
their predecessors concentred in a mass of accusation 
against the subsisting body. If there have been 
meritorious acts performed by Congress at any period 
of the Revolution, all the praise of it is confined to 
the immediate actors ; if there have been faults com 
mitted, they descend with increasing odium upon 
all who come after. The good deeds of Congress die, 
or go off the stage with the individuals who are the 
authors of them, but their mistakes are the inherit 
ance of all those who succeed. 

It is true, Congress in a political capacity are per 
petual; but the individuals who compose it in fact 
undergo frequent changes. It is not more reason 
able to charge any present set of members for the 
mismanagement of a former set — allowing it to be 
real — than it would be to impute to George the Third 
the crimes of Henry the Eighth. It is a principle of 
the English law that the king never dies, and yet no 

Vindication of Congress 329 

man in his senses, on account of this fiction of the 
law, will transfer to the reigning monarch the in 
famy of his predecessor's misconduct. It is not 
less unjust or absurd to blame a subsisting Con 
gress, the greater part of whose members have had 
no agency in the measures which are the objects 
of crimination, for the ill consequences of those 
measures. 

It is not much to be wondered at that this error 
should exist among the uninformed parts of the 
community, who can only be expected to have gen 
eral notions of Congress, without any precise ideas of 
their constitution, and who, therefore, will be dis 
posed to view them always under the same form, 
without attending to the changes which the body 
is continually undergoing. But when men more 
enlightened fall into the same fallacy, it is an argu 
ment of disingenuous intentions, and proves them to 
be under the influence of passion, of prejudice, or 
of something worse. 

The chief topics of clamor against Congress are, 
either positive breaches of faith, by avowed depart 
ures from express stipulations, as in the reduction of 
the Continental money from forty to one, or nega 
tive, as the general non-performance of the public 
engagements. 

As to those of the first kind, without entering into 
a discussion of particular instances — without ex 
amining whether those which may have happened 
may have been produced by inexperience, necessity, 
levity, or design— it will be sufficient, in justification 
of the present Congress, to say that a large majority 

33° Alexander Hamilton 

of them had no share whatever in those acts which 
are the subject of complaint. And to those of the 
last kind, there always has been, and is, a conclusive 
and satisfactory answer to be given for Congress. 
The power of raising money is not vested in them. 
All they can do is to assign their quota to the several 
States, and to make requisitions from them. This 
they have not failed to do in the most ample manner; 
and if the States do not comply, to enable them to 
execute their engagements, the delinquency is not 
to be charged upon Congress. 

Should it be said that Congress ought not to have 
made engagements without the power of fulfilling 
them, this is to say that they ought to have given up 
the contest, and to have betrayed the liberty of 
America. It was necessary to incur debts to sup 
port the Revolution; and no man who is a sincere 
friend to it can be serious in advancing the position 
that this essential resource ought not to have been 
employed, from a scruple of that nature. 

If Congress, indeed, after a definitive conclusion 
of the peace, consent to be the instruments of future 
engagements, without more effectual provisions at 
their disposal, they will then merit the indignation of 
every honest man. 

But the present Congress have more than this gen 
eral argument to offer in their vindication. They 
can say, with truth, that so far from having com 
mitted any positive violations of faith, they have 
manifested a uniform and anxious solicitude for the 
restoration of public credit, and for doing complete 
justice to every class of public creditors. Having 

Vindication of Congress 33 1 

found, by repeated and daily experience, that the 
provisions of the Confederation were unequal to the 
purpose, they have had recourse to extraordinary 
expedients. The plan of April 18, 1782, for funding 
the public debt, is now depending before the several 
Legislatures; nor is it possible for them to give a 
more decisive proof of their disposition to justice 
than is contained in that plan. 

Congress stand in a very delicate and embarrassing 
situation. On the one hand they are blamed for not 
doing what they have no means of doing; on the 
other their attempts are branded with the imputa 
tions of a spirit of encroachment and a lust of power. 

In these circumstances, it is the duty of all those 
who have the welfare of the community at heart to 
unite their efforts to direct the attention of the people 
to the true source of the public disorders — the want 
of an EFFICIENT GENERAL GOVERNMENT, — and to 
impress upon them this conviction, that those States, 
to be happy, must have a stronger bond of UNION 
and a CONFEDERATION capable of drawing forth the 
resources of the country. This will be a more laud 
able occupation than that of cavilling against meas 
ures the imperfection of which is the necessary result 
of the Constitution. [The residue is not preserved.1] 

1 This is the statement of John C. Hamilton; and yet, in his History 
of the Republic (ii., 566, et seq.), he makes further quotations, appar 
ently from this paper. The editor has not been able to recover the 
complete paper. If it should be found before these volumes are all 
printed, the missing residue will be given in the appendix. 

ADDRESS OF THE ANNAPOLIS CONVENTION 
ADDRESS OF THE ANNAPOLIS CON 
VENTION1 
To the Honorable the Legislatures of Virginia, Dela 
ware, Pennsylvania, and New York. 
The commissioners from the said States, respect 
ively, assembled at Annapolis, humbly beg leave to 
report : That pursuant to their several appointments 
they met at Annapolis, in the State of Maryland, on 
the eleventh day of September, instant, and having 
proceeded to a communication of their powers, they 
found that the States of New York, Pennsylvania, 
and Virginia had, in substance, and nearly in the 
same terms, authorized their respective commis 
sioners to meet such commissioners as were or might 
be appointed by the other States in the Union, at 
such time and place as should be agreed upon by the 
said commissioners, to take into consideration the 
trade and commerce of the United States, to con 
sider how far a uniform system in their commercial 
intercourse and regulations might be necessary to 
their common interest and permanent harmony, and 

1 This convention was sparsely attended. Its only result was this 
address, which was much weakened to suit Edmund Randolph, and 
was not at all up to Hamilton's standard. It, however, did its work 
and produced the Philadelphia Convention. 
336 Alexander Hamilton 

to report to the several States such an act relative to 
this great object as, when unanimously ratified by 
them, would enable the United States in Congress 
assembled effectually to provide for the same. 

That the State of Delaware had given similar 
powers to their commissioners; with this difference 
only, that the act to be framed in virtue of these 
powers is required to be reported "to the United 
States in Congress assembled, to be agreed to by 
them, and confirmed by the Legislature of every 
State." 

That the State of New Jersey had enlarged the 
object of their appointment, empowering their com 
missioners " to consider how far a uniform system in 
their commercial regulations, and other important 
matters, might be necessary to the common interest 
and permanent harmony of the several States ; and 
to report such an act on the subject as, when ratified 
by them, would enable the United States in Con 
gress assembled effectually to provide for the ex 
igencies of the Union." 

That appointments of commissioners have also 
been made by the States of New Hampshire, Massa 
chusetts, Rhode Island, and North Carolina, none of 
whom, however, have attended. But that no in 
formation has been received by your commissioners 
of any appointment having been made by the States 
of Connecticut, Maryland, South Carolina, or Geor 
gia. That the express terms of the powers to your 
commissioners supposing a deputation from all the 
States, and having for their object the trade and 
commerce of the United States, your commissioners 

Address of the Annapolis Convention 337 

did not conceive it advisable to proceed to the busi 
ness of their mission under the circumstances of so 
partial and defective a representation. 

Deeply impressed, however, with the magnitude 
and importance of the object confided to them on 
this occasion, your commissioners cannot forbear to 
indulge an expression of their earnest and unani 
mous wish that speedy measures may be taken to 
effect a general meeting of the States in a future con 
vention for the same, and such other purposes as the 
situation of public affairs may be found to require. 

If in expressing this wish, or intimating any fur 
ther sentiment, your commissioners should seem to 
exceed the strict bounds of their appointment, they 
entertain a full confidence that a conduct dictated 
by an anxiety for the welfare of the United States 
will not fail to receive a favorable construction. In 
this persuasion, your commissioners submit an 
opinion that the idea of extending the powers of 
their deputies to other subjects than those of com 
merce, which had been adopted by the State of New 
Jersey, was an improvement on the original plan, 
and will deserve to be incorporated into that of a 
future convention. They are the more naturally 
led to this conclusion, as, in the course of their re 
flections on the subject, they have been induced to 
think that the power of regulating trade is of such 
comprehensive extent, and will enter so far into the 
general system of the Federal Government, that to 
give it efficacy, and to obviate questions and doubts 
concerning its precise nature and limits, may- re 
quire a correspondent adjustment of other parts of 

338 Alexander Hamilton 

the Federal system. That there are important de 
fects in the system of the Federal Government is 
acknowledged by the acts of all those States which 
have concurred in the present meeting; that the 
defects upon a closer examination may be found 
greater and more numerous than even these acts 
imply, is at least so far probable, from the embar 
rassments which characterize the present state of 
our national affairs, foreign and domestic, as may 
reasonably be supposed to merit a deliberate and 
candid discussion in some mode which will unite the 
sentiments and councils of all the States. 

In the choice of the mode, your commissioners are 
of the opinion that a CONVENTION of deputies from 
the different States for the special and sole purpose 
of entering into this investigation, and digesting a 
plan of supplying such defects as may be discovered 
to exist, will be entitled to a preference, from 
considerations which will occur without being par 
ticularized. Your commissioners decline an enu 
meration of those national circumstances on which 
their opinion respecting the propriety of a future 
convention with those enlarged powers is founded, 
as it would be an intrusion of facts and observa 
tions, most of which have been frequently the 
subject of public discussion, and none of which can 
have escaped the penetration of those to whom they 
would in this instance be addressed. 

They are, however, of a nature so serious as, in the 
view of your commissioners, to render the situation 
of the United States delicate and critical, calling for 
an exertion of the united virtue and wisdom of all 

Address of the Annapolis Convention 339 

the members of the Confederacy. Under this im 
pression your commissioners, with the most respect 
ful deference, beg leave to suggest their unanimous 
conviction, that it may effectually tend to advance 
the interests of the Union, if the States by which 
they have been respectively delegated would concur 
themselves and use their endeavors to procure the 
concurrence of the other States in the appointment 
of commissioners to meet at Philadelphia on the 
second Monday in May next, to take into considera 
tion the situation of the United States, to devise 
such further provisions as shall appear to them 
necessary to render the Constitution of the Federal 
Government adequate to the exigencies of the Union, 
and to report such an act for that purpose to the 
United States in Congress assembled as, when agreed 
to by them and afterwards confirmed by the Legis 
lature of every State, will effectually provide for the 
same. 

Though your commissioners could not with pro 
priety address these observations and sentiments to 
any but the States they have the honor to represent, 
they have nevertheless concluded, from motives of 
respect, to transmit copies of this report to the 
United States in Congress assembled, and to the Ex 
ecutives of the other States. 

RESOLUTIONS OFFERED IN THE LEGISLA 
TURE OF NEW YORK 
RESOLUTIONS OFFERED IN THE 
LEGISLATURE OF NEW YORK 

February 17, 1787. 

Resolved, (if the Honorable the Senate concur,) 
That the delegates of this State in the Congress 
of the United States of America be, and they are 
hereby, instructed to move in Congress for an act re 
commending to the States composing the Union, 
that a convention of representatives from the said 
States respectively be held, and meet at a time and 
place to be mentioned in such recommendation, for 
the purpose of revising the Articles of Confederation 
and Perpetual Union between the United States of 
America, by such alterations and amendments as a 
majority of the representatives in such convention 
shall judge proper and necessary to render them 
adequate to the preservation and support of the 
Union. 

February 26, 1787. 

Resolved, (if the Honorable the Senate concur 
herein,) That five delegates be appointed on the part 
of this State to meet such delegates as may be ap 
pointed on the part of the other States respectively, 
on the second Monday of May next, at Philadelphia, 
for the sole and express purpose of revising the Ar 
ticles of Confederation, and reporting to Congress 
344 Alexander Hamilton 

and to the several Legislatures such alterations and 
provisions therein as shall, when agreed to in Con 
gress, and confirmed by the several States, render 
the Federal Constitution adequate to the exigencies 
of government and the preservation of the Union; 
and that, in case of such concurrence, the two Houses 
of the Legislature will meet on Thursday next, at 
such place as the Honorable the Senate shall think 
proper, for the purpose of electing the said delegates 
by joint ballot. 

FEDERAL CONVENTION 

PROPOSITIONS FOR A CONSTITUTION OF GOVERN 
MENT x 

I. The supreme legislative power of the United 
States of America to be vested in two distinct bodies 
of men: the one to be called the Assembly, the other 
the Senate; who together shall form the Legisla 
ture of the United States, with power to pass all 
laws whatsoever, subject to the negative hereafter 
mentioned. 

II. The Assembly to consist of persons elected by 
the people, to serve for three years. 

III. The Senate to consist of persons elected to 
serve during good behavior. Their election to be made 
by electors chosen for that purpose by the people. 
In order to this, the States to be divided into election 
districts. On the death, removal, or resignation of 
any Senator, his place to be filled out of the district 
from which he came. 

1 These propositions were introduced June i8th, and Hamilton in 
presenting them made his great speech upon the Constitution. The 
more elaborate plan which follows does not seem to have been formally 
introduced in the convention, but was handed to Madison, who made 
a copy of it. I have here given the plans first, and then all that we 
have recorded either by Madison or Yates of Hamilton's speeches or re 
marks on any subject before the convention, at any time during its 
sessions. 
348 Alexander Hamilton 

IV. The supreme executive authority of the 
United States to be vested in a Governor, to be 
elected to serve during good behavior. His election 
to be made by electors chosen by electors chosen by 
the people, in the election districts aforesaid; or by 
electors chosen for that purpose by the respective 
Legislatures — provided that if an election be not 
made within a limited time, the President of the 
Senate shall be the Governor. The Governor to 
have a negative upon all laws about to be passed— 
and (to have) the execution of all laws passed — to 
be the Commander-in-Chief of the land and naval 
forces and of the militia of the United States — to 
have the entire direction of war when authorized or 
begun — to have, with the advice and approbation of 
the Senate, the power of making all treaties — to 
have the appointment of the heads or chief officers 
of the departments of finance, war, and foreign 
affairs — to have the nomination of all other officers 
(ambassadors to foreign nations included), subject 
to the approbation or rejection of the Senate — to 
have the power of pardoning all offences but treason, 
which he shall not pardon without the approbation 
of the Senate. 

V. On the death, resignation, or removal of 
the Governor, his authorities to be exercised by 
the President of the Senate (until a successor be 
appointed). 

VI. The Senate to have the sole power of declar 
ing war — the power of advising and approving all 
treaties — the power of approving or rejecting all 
appointments of officers, except the heads or chiefs 

Federal Convention 349 

of the departments of finance, war, and foreign 
affairs. 

VII. The supreme judicial authority of the United 
States to be vested in twelve judges, to hold their 
offices during good behavior, with adequate and per 
manent salaries. This court to have original juris 
diction in all causes of capture, and an appellate 
jurisdiction (from the courts of the several States) 
in all causes in which the revenues of the General 
Government or the citizens of foreign nations are 
concerned. 

VIII. The Legislature of the United States to 
have power to institute courts in each State for the 
determination of all causes of capture and of all 
matters relating to their revenues, or in which the 
citizens of foreign nations are concerned. 

IX. The Governor, Senators, and all officers of 
the United States to be liable to impeachment for 
mal and corrupt conduct, and upon conviction to be 
removed from office, and disqualified for holding any 
place of trust or profit. All impeachments to be 
tried by a court, to consist of the judges of the Su 
preme Court, chief or senior judge of the Superior 
Court of law of each State — provided that such 
judge hold his place during good behavior and have 
a permanent salary. 

X. All laws of the particular States contrary to 
the Constitution or laws of the United States to be 
utterly void. And the better to prevent such laws 
being passed the Governor or President of each State 
shall be appointed by the General Government, and 
shall have a negative upon the laws about to be 

35° Alexander Hamilton 

passed in the State of which he is Governor or 
President. 

XI. No State to have any forces, land or naval — 
and the militia of all the States to be under the sole 
and exclusive direction of the United States, the officers 
of which to be appointed and commissioned by them. 

CONSTITUTION OF GOVERNMENT BY THE PEOPLE OF 
THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA 

First Draught of Hamilton, 1787 

The people of the United States of America do 
ordain and establish this Constitution for the govern 
ment of themselves and their posterity. 

ARTICLE I 

Sec. i. The legislative power shall be vested in two 
distinct bodies of men, one to be called the Assembly, 
the other the Senate, subject to the negative herein 
after mentioned. 

Sec. 2. The executive power, with the qualifica 
tions hereinafter specified, shall be vested in a Presi 
dent of the United States. 

Sec. 3. The supreme judicial authority, except in 
the cases otherwise provided for in this Constitution, 
shall be vested in a court, to be called the SUPREME 
COURT, to consist of not less than six nor more than 
twelve judges. 

ARTICLE II 

Sec. i. The Assembly shall consist of persons to 
be called Representatives, who shall be chosen, ex- 

Federal Convention 351 

cept in the first instance, by the free male citizens 
and inhabitants of the several States comprehended 
in the Union, all of whom, of the age of twenty-one 
years and upwards, shall be entitled to an equal vote. 

Sec. 2. But the first Assembly shall be chosen in 
the manner prescribed in the last Article, and shall 
consist of one hundred members, of whom New 
Hampshire shall have five, Massachusetts thirteen, 
Rhode Island two, Connecticut seven, New York 
nine, New Jersey six, Pennsylvania twelve, Dela 
ware two, Maryland eight, Virginia sixteen, North 
Carolina eight, South Carolina eight, Georgia four. 

Sec. 3. The Legislature shall provide for the future 
election of Representatives, apportioning them in 
each State, from time to time, as nearly as may be to 
the number of persons described in the 4th Section 
of the 7th Article, so as that the whole number of 
Representatives shall never be less than one hundred, 
nor more than hundred. There shall be a cen 

sus taken for this purpose within three years after 
the first meeting of the Legislature, and within every 
successive period of ten years. The term for which 
Representatives shall be elected shall be determined 
by the Legislature, but shall not exceed three years. 
There shall be a general election at least once in 
three years, and the time of service of all the mem 
bers in each Assembly shall begin (except in filling 
vacancies) on the same day, and shall always end on 
the same day. 

Sec. 4. Forty members shall make a House suffi 
cient to proceed to business; but this number may 
be increased by the Legislature, yet so as never 

352 Alexander Hamilton 

to exceed a majority of the whole number of 
Representatives. 

Sec. 5. The Assembly shall choose its President 
and other officers, shall judge of the qualifications 
and elections of its own members, shall punish them 
for improper conduct in their capacity of Represen 
tatives, not extending to life or limb, and shall ex 
clusively possess the power of impeachment, except 
in the case of the President of the United States; 
but no impeachment of a member of the Senate shall 
be by less than two thirds of the Representatives 
present. 

Sec. 6. Representatives may vote by proxy, but 
no Representative present shall be proxy for more 
than one who is absent. 

Sec. 7. Bills for raising revenue, and bills for ap 
propriating monies for the support of fleets and 
armies, and for paying the salaries of the officers of 
government, shall originate in the Assembly, but 
may be altered and amended by the Senate. 

Sec. 8. The acceptance of an office under the 
United States by a Representative, shall vacate his 
seat in the Assembly. 

ARTICLE III 

Sec. i. The Senate shall consist of persons to be 
chosen, except in the first instance, by electors 
elected for that purpose by the citizens and inhab 
itants of the several States comprehended in the 
Union, who shall have in their own right, or in the 
right of their wives, an estate in land for not less than 
life, or a term of years, whereof at the time of giving 

Federal Convention 353 

their votes there shall be at least fourteen years un- 
expired. 

Sec. 2. But the full Senate shall be chosen in the 
manner prescribed in the last Article, and shall con 
sist of forty members, to be called Senators, of whom 
New Hampshire shall have , Massachusetts , 
Rhode Island , Connecticut , New York , 
New Jersey , Pennsylvania , Delaware , 
Maryland , Virginia , North Carolina , 
South Carolina , Georgia 

Sec. 3. The Legislature shall provide for the future 
elections of Senators; for which purpose the States 
respectively, which have more than one Senator, 
shall be divided into convenient districts to which 
the Senators shall be apportioned. A State having 
but one Senator shall be itself a district. On the 
death, resignation, or removal from office of a Sena 
tor, his place shall be supplied by a new election in 
the district from which he came. Upon each elec 
tion there shall not be less than six nor more than 
twelve electors chosen in a district. 

Sec. 4. The number of Senators shall never be less 
than forty, nor shall any State, if the same shall not 
hereafter be divided, ever have less than the number 
allotted to it in the second Section of this Article; 
but the Legislature may increase the whole num 
ber of Senators, in the same proportion to the 
whole number of Representatives as forty is to one 
hundred, and such increase, beyond the present 
number, shall be apportioned to the respective 
States in a ratio to the respective numbers of their 
Representatives. 

VOL. I. — 23. 

354 Alexander Hamilton 

Sec. 5. If States shall be divided, or if a new ar 
rangement of the boundaries of two or more States 
shall take place, the Legislature shall apportion the 
number of Senators (in elections succeeding such 
division or arrangement) to which the constituent 
parts were entitled according to the change of situa 
tion, having regard to the number of persons de 
scribed in the 4th Section of the 7th Article. 

Sec. 6. The Senators shall hold their places during 
good behavior, removable only by conviction, on im 
peachment for some crime or misdemeanor. They 
shall continue to exercise their offices when im 
peached until a conviction shall take place. Sixteen 
Senators, attending in person, shall be sufficient to 
make a house to transact business; but the Legisla 
ture may increase this number, yet so as never to 
exceed a majority of the whole number of Senators. 
The Senators may vote by proxy, but no Senator 
who is present shall be proxy for more than two who 
are absent. 

Sec. 7. The Senate shall choose its President and 
other officers, shall judge of the qualifications and 
elections of its members, and shall punish them for 
improper conduct in their capacity of Senators ; but 
such punishment shall not extend to life or limb, 
nor to expulsion. In the absence of their President 
they may choose a temporary President. The 
President shall only have a casting vote when the 
House is equally divided. 

Sec. 8. The Senate shall exclusively have the 
power of declaring war. No treaty shall be made 
without their advice and consent ; which shall also be 

Federal Convention 355 

necessary to the appointment of all officers, except 
such for which a different provision is made in this 
Constitution. 

ARTICLE IV 

Sec. i. The President of the United States of 
America (except in the first instance) shall be elected 
in the manner following: 

The judges of the Supreme Court shall, within 
sixty days after a vacancy shall happen, cause pub 
lic notice to be given in each State of such vacancy, 
appointing therein three several days for the several 
purposes following, to wit: a day for commencing 
the election of electors for the purposes hereinafter 
specified, to be called the first electors, which day 
shall be not less than forty nor more than sixty days 
after the day of the publication of the notice in each 
State; another day for the meeting of the electors, 
not less than forty nor more than ninety days from 
the day for commencing their election ; another day 
for the meeting of electors, to be chosen by the first 
electors, for the purpose hereinafter specified, and to 
be called the second electors, which day shall be not 
' less than forty nor more than sixty days after the 
day for the meeting of the first electors. 

Sec. 2. After notice of a vacancy shall have been 
given, there shall be chosen in each State a number 
of persons, as the first electors in the preceding Sec 
tion mentioned, equal to the whole number of the 
Representatives and Senators of such State in the 
Legislature of the United States; which electors 
shall be chosen by the citizens of such State having 

356 Alexander Hamilton 

an estate of inheritance or for three lives in land, or 
a clear personal estate of the value of one thousand 
Spanish milled dollars of the present standard. 

Sec. 3. These first electors shall meet in their re 
spective States at the time appointed, at one place, 
and shall proceed to vote by ballot for a President, 
who shall not be one of their own number, unless 
the Legislature, upon experiment, should hereafter 
direct otherwise. They shall cause two lists to be 
made of the name or names of the person or persons 
voted for, which they, or the major part of them, 
shall sign and certify. They shall then proceed each 
to nominate individually, openly, in the presence of 
the others, two persons, as for second electors; and 
out of the persons who shall have the four highest 
numbers of nominations, they shall afterwards, by 
ballot, by plurality of votes, choose two who shall 
be the second electors, to each of whom shall be 
delivered one of the lists before mentioned. These 
second electors shall not be any of the persons voted 
for as President. A copy of the same list, signed 
and certified in like manner, shall be transmitted by 
the first electors, to the seat of the government of the 
United States, under a sealed cover, directed to the 
President of the Assembly, which, after the meeting 
of the second electors shall be opened, for the in 
spection of the two Houses of the Legislature. 

Sec. 4. These second electors shall meet precisely 
on the day appointed, and not on another day, at 
one place. The chief-justice of the Supreme Court, 
or if there be no chief-justice, the judge junior in 
office, in such court, or if there be no one judge junior 

Federal Convention 357 

in office, some other judge of that court, by the choice 
of the rest of the judges, or of a majority of them, 
shall attend at the same place, and shall preside at 
the meeting, but shall have no vote. Two thirds of 
the whole number of the electors shall constitute a 
sufficient meeting for the execution of their trust. 
At this meeting, the list delivered to the respective 
electors shall be produced and inspected, and if there 
be any person who has a majority of the whole num 
ber of the votes given by the first electors, he shall 
be the President of the United States. But if there 
be no such person, the second electors so met shall 
proceed to vote by ballot for one of the persons, 
named in the lists, who shall have the three highest 
numbers of the votes of the first electors ; and if upon 
the first or any succeeding ballot, on the day of the 
meeting, either of those persons shall have a number 
of votes equal to a majority of the whole number of 
second electors chosen, he shall be the President; 
but if no such choice be made on the day appointed 
for the meeting, either by reason of the non-attend 
ance of the second electors, or their not agreeing, or 
any other matter, the person having the greatest 
number of votes of the first electors shall be the 
President. 

Sec. 5. If it should happen that the chief -justice 
or some other judge of the Supreme Court should not 
attend in due time, the second electors shall proceed 
to the execution of their trust without him. 

Sec. 6. If the judges should neglect to cause the 
notice required by the first Section of this Article to 
be given within the time therein limited, they may, 

358 Alexander Hamilton 

nevertheless, cause it to be afterwards given; but 
their neglect, if wilful, is hereby declared to be an 
offence, for which they may be impeached, and if 
convicted they shall be punished as in other cases of 
conviction on impeachment. 

Sec. 7. The Legislature shall, by permanent laws, 
provide such further regulations as may be necessary 
for the more orderly election of the President, not 
contravening the provisions herein contained. 

Sec. 8. The President, before he shall enter upon 
the execution of his office, shall take an oath or 
affirmation faithfully to execute the same, and to the 
utmost of his judgment and power to protect the 
rights of the people and preserve the Constitution 
inviolate. This oath or affirmation shall be ad 
ministered by the President of the Senate, for the 
time being, in the presence of both Houses of the 
Legislature. 

Sec. 9. The Senate and the Assembly shall always 
convene in session on the day appointed for the meet 
ing of the second electors, and shall continue sitting 
till the President take the oath or affirmation of 
office. He shall hold his office during good behavior, 
removable only by conviction upon an impeachment 
for some crime or misdemeanor. 

Sec. 10. The President, at the beginning of every 
meeting of the Legislature, as soon as they shall be 
ready to proceed to business, shall convene them to 
gether at the place where the Senate shall sit, and 
shall communicate to them all such matters as may 
be necessary for their information, or as may re 
quire their consideration. He may, by message, 

Federal Convention 359 

during the session, communicate all other matters 
which may appear to him proper. He may, when 
ever in his opinion the public business shall require 
it, convene the Senate and Assembly, or either of 
them, and may prorogue them for a time, not ex 
ceeding forty days at one prorogation; and if they 
should disagree about their adjournment, he may 
adjourn them to such time as he shall think proper. 
He shall have a right to negative all bills, resolutions, 
or acts of the two Houses of the Legislature about to 
be passed into laws. He shall take care that the 
laws be faithfully executed. He shall be the Com- 
mander-in-Chief of the army and navy of the United 
States and of the militia within the several States, 
and shall have the direction of war, when com 
menced; but he shall not take the actual command 
in the field of an army without the consent of the 
Senate and Assembly. All treaties, conventions, 
and agreements with foreign nations shall be made 
by him, by and with the advice and consent of the 
Senate. He shall have the appointment of the prin 
cipal or chief officer of each of the departments of 
war, naval affairs, finances, and foreign affairs; and 
shall have the nomination, and, by and with the 
consent of the Senate, the appointment of all other 
officers to be appointed under the authority of the 
United States, except such for whom different pro 
vision is made by this Constitution; and provided, 
that this shall not be construed to prevent the Legis 
lature from appointing, by name, in their laws, per 
sons to special and particular trusts created in such 
laws; nor shall be construed to prevent principals 

360 Alexander Hamilton 

in office, merely ministerial, from constituting depu 
ties. In the recess of the Senate he may fill vacan 
cies in offices, by appointments, to continue in force 
until the end of the next session of the Senate; and 
he shall commission all officers. He shall have 
power to pardon all offences except treason, for 
which he may grant reprieves until the opinion of 
the Senate and Assembly can be had, and with their 
concurrence may pardon the same. 

Sec. ii. He shall receive a fixed compensation 
for his services, to be paid to him at stated times, 
and not to be increased or diminished during his 
continuance in office. 

Sec. 12. If he depart out of the United States 
without the consent of the Senate and Assembly, he 
shall thereby abdicate his office. 

Sec. 13. He may be impeached for any crime or 
misdemeanor by the two Houses of the Legislature, 
two thirds of each House concurring; and if con 
victed, shall be removed from office. He may be 
afterward tried and punished in the ordinary course 
of law. His impeachment shall operate as a sus 
pension from office until the determination thereof. 

Sec. 14. The President of the Senate shall be 
Vice-President of the United States. On the death, 
resignation, impeachment, removal from office, or 
absence from the United States of the President 
thereof, the Vice-President shall exercise all the 
powers by this Constitution vested in the President, 
until another shall be appointed, or until he shall 
return within the United States, if his absence was 
with the consent of the Senate and Assembly. 

Federal Convention 361 

ARTICLE V 

Sec. i. There shall be a chief -justice of the Su 
preme Court, and he with the other judges thereof, 
shall hold their offices during good behavior, remov 
able only by conviction on impeachment for some 
crime or misdemeanor. Each judge shall have a 
competent salary, to be paid to him at stated times, 
and not to be diminished during his continuance in 
office. 

The Supreme Court shall have original jurisdiction 
in all causes in which the United States shall be a 
party; in all controversies between the United States 
and a particular State, or between two or more States, 
except such as relate to a claim of territory between 
the United States and one or more States, which 
shall be determined in the mode prescribed in the 
6th Article; in all cases affecting foreign ministers, 
consuls, and agents; and an appellate jurisdiction, 
both as to law and fact, in all cases which shall con 
cern the citizens of foreign nations, in all questions 
between the citizens of different States, and in all 
others in which the fundamental rights of this Con 
stitution are involved, subject to such exceptions 
as are herein contained, and to such regulations as 
the Legislature shall provide. 

The judges of all courts which may be constituted 
by the Legislature shall also hold their places during 
good behavior, removable only by conviction on im 
peachment for some crime or misdemeanor; and 
shall have competent salaries, to be paid at stated 
times, and not to be diminished during their con 
tinuance in office ; but nothing herein contained 

362 Alexander Hamilton 

shall be construed to prevent the Legislature from 
abolishing such courts themselves. 

All crimes, except upon impeachment, shall be 
tried by a jury of twelve men; and if they shall 
have been committed within any State, shall be tried 
within such State. And all civil causes arising under 
this Constitution of the like kind with those which 
have been heretofore triable by jury in the respective 
States, shall in like manner be tried by jury, unless 
in special cases the Legislature shall think proper 
to make different provision, to which provision the 
concurrence of two thirds of both Houses shall be 
necessary. 

Impeachments of the President and Vice-Presi 
dent of the United States, members of the Senate, the 
Governors and Presidents of the several States, the 
principal or chief officers of the departments enu 
merated in the loth Section of the 4th Article, am 
bassadors, and other like public ministers, the judges 
of the Supreme Court, generals and admirals of the 
navy, shall be tried by a court to consist of the 
judges of the Supreme Court, and the chief-justice, 
or first or senior judge of the Superior Court of law 
in each State, of whom twelve shall constitute a 
court. A majority of the judges present may con 
vict. All other persons shall be tried on impeach 
ment, by a court to consist of the judges of the 
Supreme Court, and six Senators drawn by lot ; a ma 
jority of whom may convict. Impeachments shall 
clearly specify the particular offence for which the 
party accused is to be tried; and judgment on con 
viction upon the trial thereof shall be either a re- 

Federal Convention 363 

moval from office singly, or removal from office and 
disqualification for holding any future office or place 
of trust. But no judgment on impeachment shall 
prevent prosecution and punishment in the ordinary 
course of law, provided that no judge concerned in 
such conviction shall sit as judge on the second trial. 
The Legislature may remove the disabilities in 
curred by conviction on impeachment. 

ARTICLE VI 

Controversies about the right of territory between 
the United States and particular States shall be 
determined by a court to be constituted in manner 
following: The State or States claiming in opposi 
tion to the United States, as parties, shall nominate 
a number of persons equal to double the number of 
the judges of the Supreme Court, for the time being, 
of whom none shall be citizens by birth of the States 
which are parties, nor inhabitants thereof, when 
nominated, and of whom not more than two shall 
have their actual residence in one State. Out of the 
persons so nominated the Senate shall elect one half, 
who, together with the judges of the Supreme Court, 
shall form the court. Two thirds of the whole num 
ber may hear and determine the controversy by 
plurality of voices. The States concerned may, at 
their option, claim a decision by the Supreme Court 
only. All the members of the court hereby instituted 
shall, prior to the hearing of the cause, take an oath 
impartially, and according to the best of their judg 
ments and consciences, to hear and determine the 
controversy. 

364 Alexander Hamilton 

ARTICLE VII 

Sec. i. The Legislature of the United States shall 
have power to pass all laws which they shall judge 
necessary to the common defence and safety, and to 
the general welfare of the Union. But no bill, reso 
lution, or act of the Senate and Assembly shall have 
the force of a law until it shall have received the 
assent of the President, or of the Vice-President 
when exercising the powers of the President; and if 
such assent shall not have been given within ten days 
after such bill, resolution, or other act shall have been 
presented for that purpose, the same shall not be a 
law. No bill, resolution, or other act not assented 
to shall be revived in the same session of the Legis 
lature. The mode of signifying such assent shall be 
by signing the bill, act or resolution, and returning it 
so signed to either house of the Legislature. 

Sec. 2. The enacting style of all laws shall be : " Be 
it enacted by the people of the United States of 
America." 

Sec. 3. No bill of attainder shall be passed, nor any 
ex-post-facto law; nor shall any title of nobility be 
granted by the United States, or by either of them; 
nor shall any person holding an office or place of 
trust under the United States, without the permis 
sion of the Legislature, accept any present, emolu 
ment, office, or title from a foreign prince or state. 
Nor shall any religious sect or denomination, or re 
ligious test for any office or place, be ever established 
by law. 

Sec. 4. Taxes on lands, houses, and other real es 
tate, and capitation taxes, shall be proportioned in 

Federal Convention 365 

each State by the whole number of free persons, 
except Indians not taxed, and by three fifths of all 
other persons. 

Sec. 5. The two Houses of the Legislature may by 
joint ballot appoint a Treasurer of the United States. 
Neither House (in the session of both Houses) with 
out the consent of the other shall adjourn for more 
than three days at a time. The Senators and Repre 
sentatives in attending, going to and coming from 
the session of their respective Houses shall be 
privileged from arrest except for crimes and breaches 
of the peace. The place of meeting shall always be 
at the seat of government, which shall be fixed by 
law. 

Sec. 6. The laws of the United States and the 
treaties which have been made under the articles of 
the Confederation, and which shall be made under 
this Constitution, shall be the supreme law of the 
land, and shall be so construed by the courts of the 
several States. 

Sec. 7. The Legislature shall convene at least once 
in each year, which, unless otherwise provided for by 
law, shall be the first Monday in December. 

Sec. 8. The members of the two Houses of the 
Legislature shall receive a reasonable compensation 
for their services, to be paid out of the treasury of 
the United States, and ascertained by law. The 
law for making such provision shall be passed, with 
the concurrence of the first Assembly, and shall ex 
tend to succeeding Assemblies; and no succeeding 
Assembly shall concur in an alteration of such pro 
vision so as to increase its own compensation; but 

366 Alexander Hamilton 

there shall be always a law in existence for making 
such provision. 

ARTICLE VIII 

Sec. i. The Governor or President of each State 
shall be appointed under the authority of the United 
States, and shall have a right to negative all laws 
about to be passed in the State of which he shall be 
Governor or President, subject to such qualifications 
and regulations as the Legislature of the United 
States shall prescribe. He shall in other respects 
have the same powers only which the Constitution 
of the State does or shall allow its Governor or 
President, except as to the appointment of officers 
of the militia. 

Sec. 2. Each Governor or President of a State shall 
hold his office until a successor be actually appointed, 
unless he die or resign or be removed from office by 
conviction on impeachment. There shall be no ap 
pointment of such Governor or President in the 
recess of the Senate. 

The Governors and Presidents of the several States 
at the time of the ratification of this Constitution, 
shall continue in office in the same manner and with 
the same powers as if they had been appointed pur 
suant to the first Section of this Article. 

The officers of the militia in the several States may 
be appointed under the authority of the United 
States, the Legislature whereof may authorize the 
Governors or Presidents of States to make such 
appointments, with such restrictions as they shall 
think proper. 

Federal Convention 367 

ARTICLE IX 

Sec. i. No person shall be eligible to the office of 
President of the United States unless he be now a 
citizen of one of the States, or hereafter be born a 
citizen of the United States. 

Sec. 2. No person shall be eligible as a Senator or 
Representative unless at the time of his election he 
be a citizen and inhabitant of the State in which he 
is chosen; provided that he shall not be deemed to 
be disqualified by a temporary absence from the 
State. 

Sec. 3. No person entitled by this Constitution to 
elect or to be elected President of the United States, 
or a Senator or Representative in the Legislature 
thereof, shall be disqualified but by the conviction 
of some offence for which the law shall have pre 
viously ordained the punishment of disqualification. 
But the Legislature may by law provide that persons 
holding offices under the United States, or either of 
them, shall not be eligible to a place in the Assembly 
or Senate, and shall be, during their continuance in 
office, suspended from sitting in the Senate. 

Sec. 4. No person having an office or place of trust 
under the United States shall, without permission 
of the Legislature, accept any present, emolument, 
office, or title from any foreign prince or State. 

Sec. 5. The citizens of each State shall be entitled 
to the rights, privileges, and immunities of citizens 
in every other State; and full faith and credit shall 
be given in each State to the public acts, records, 
and judicial proceedings of another. 

Sec. 6. Fugitives from justice from one State who 

368 Alexander Hamilton 

shall be found in another, shall be delivered up on 
the application of the State from which they fled. 

Sec. 7. No new State shall be erected within the 
limits of another, or by the junction of two or more, 
without the concurrent consent of the Legislatures of 
the United States and of the States concerned. The 
Legislature of the United States may admit new 
States into the Union. 

Sec. 8. The United States are hereby declared to 
be bound to guarantee to each State a republican 
form of government, and to protect each State as 
well against domestic violence as foreign invasion. 

Sec. 9. All treaties, contracts, and engagements of 
the United States of America, under the Articles of 
Confederation and Perpetual Union, shall have equal 
validity under this Constitution. 

Sec. 10. No State shall enter into a treaty, alliance, 
or contract with another, or with a foreign power, 
without the consent of the United States. * 

Sec. ii. The members of the Legislature of the 
United States, and of each State, and all officers, 
executive and judicial, of the one and of the other, 
shall take an oath or affirmation to support the 
Constitution of the United States. 

Sec. 12. This Constitution may receive such altera 
tions and amendments as may be proposed by the 
Legislature of the United States, with the concur 
rence of two thirds of the members of both Houses 
and ratified by the Legislatures of, or by conventions 
of deputies chosen by the people in, two thirds of the 
States composing the Union.1 

1 This plan and the propositions which precede it are very interesting 

Federal Convention 369 

[Article X., which relates to the mode of submit 
ting the Constitution, is omitted as totally unim 
portant.] 

to students of the Constitution, both in their resemblance to the instru 
ment as finally adopted and in their differences from it. Many of the 
clauses of the existing Constitution would seem to have been taken 
exactly from Hamilton's draft. The differences, however, are more 
important and more instructive, for they serve to display Hamilton's 
views of government and the principles on which he desired to work. 
His plan provides for a Senate chosen by electors, chosen in turn by 
voters with a property qualification, to hold for life or good behavior. 
To this body are confided the confirmation of appointments, the ratifi 
cation of treaties as at present, and the sole power of declaring war in 
addition. The President also is to hold during good behavior, with a 
power of absolute veto, and chosen by a double set of electors, chosen 
in turn by voters with a property qualification. The popular branch 
is to be chosen by universal, free, manhood suffrage, and is to hold the 
great power of originating all money bills as at present. This arrange 
ment gave great strength to the Executive, and put a powerful check 
upon the popular branch of the Legislature. 

It is in dealing with the States, however, that Hamilton's strong 
national and centralizing feelings come out most vividly. His plan 
provided that all governors of States should be appointed by the Presi 
dent, to hold during good behavior, and that they should have an 
absolute veto on all laws passed by the State Legislatures, and that 
all officers of the State militia should hold commissions from the 
United States. This arrangement would have crushed the States, but 
Hamilton was too strongly national and centralizing in his views to 
trouble himself on that score. He believed from his past experience 
that the peril to the future of the country lay in the powers and 
rights of States. From that quarter the danger and the subse 
quent civil war certainly came, but whether Hamilton's plan, if it 
had been adopted in 1787, would not have led to earlier and greater 
evils among a people wholly unprepared for a strong central govern 
ment, is, to say the least, highly problematic. It is worth remember 
ing, however, that Madison at this period believed most thoroughly 
that the central government should possess an absolute veto on all 
State laws. — (Writings of Madison, i., 285, 288, 347, and 355.) He 
thought this power absolutely essential for the new government, and 
he also believed in the principle of a property qualification for the 
electors of the upper branch of the Legislature (Ibid., 187). 

We cannot suppose that Hamilton believed for a moment that his 
plan as it stood, especially with its radical measures in regard to the 

VOL. I.— 24. 

37° Alexander Hamilton 

BRIEF OF SPEECH ON SUBMITTING HIS PLAN OF CONSTITU 
TION * 

Introduction 

I. Importance of the occasion. 
II. A solid plan, without regard to temporary opinions. 

III. If an ineffectual plan be again proposed, it will be 

get despair, and no government will grow out of 
CONSENT. 

IV. There seem to be but three lines of conduct : 

LA league offensive, treaty of commerce, and appor 
tionment of the public debt. 

II. An amendment of the present Confederation, by add 
ing such powers as the public mind seems nearest 
being matured to grant. 

III. The forming a new government to pervade the 
whole, with decisive powers; in short, with com 
plete sovereignty. 

States, had the least chance of success. He introduced it as an anti 
dote to the loose, inefficient scheme known as the New Jersey plan, 
and also, undoubtedly, to strengthen and invigorate the tone of the 
convention. He followed it up with a speech of remarkable ability, 
occupying five hours in delivery, which arrested the attention of the 
convention and had a marked effect upon its action. The plan and the 
speech certainly had the effect most desired by their author. They 
served to kill off the New Jersey plan and led to the adoption of more 
energetic principles. Soon after his speech Hamilton left the conven 
tion. He was perfectly helpless there, as his two colleagues, Yates 
and Lansing, always cast the vote of New York against his views, and 
he did not return until the close of the proceedings, when he signed his 
name to the Constitution as adopted. The meagre record of his 
speeches which follows is drawn from the reports made by Yates and 
Madison, and in each instance the source is indicated. Even these 
fragments have never been brought together before, and they serve 
to throw a great deal of light upon Madison's views upon govern 
ment and upon the formation of the Constitution. 

1 This brief comes from the Hamilton papers, and taken in conjunc 
tion with the minutes of Madison and Yates, which follow, gives us the 
best idea we can now obtain of this memorable speech. The two 
versions of Yates and Hamilton well deserve study. 

Federal Convention 371 

Last seems to be the prevailing sentiment. 
I. Its practicability to be examined. 

Immense extent unfavorable to representation. 
Vast expense. 
Double sets of officers. 
Difficulty of judging of local circumstances. 
Distance has a physical effect on men's minds. 
Difficulty of drawing proper characters from home. 
Execution of laws, feeble at a distance from govern 
ment — particularly in the collection of revenue. 
Sentiment of obedience — ) 
opinion. j 

I. Objections to the present Confederation; 

Intrusts the great interests of the nation to hands 

incapable of managing them. 
All matters in which foreigners are concerned. 
The care of the public peace — debts. 
Power of treaty, without power of execution. 
Common defence, without power to raise troops — 

have a fleet — raise money. 

Power to contract debts, without the power to pay. 
These great interests of the State must be well 

managed, or the public prosperity must be the 

victim. 

Legislates upon communities. 
Where the Legislatures are to act, they will 

deliberate. 
To ask money, not to collect it, and by an unjust 

measure. 

No sanction! ! 
Amendment of Confederation according to present 

ideas. 
i. Difficult, because not agreed upon any thing. Ex. 

— Impost. 
Commerce — different theories. 

372 Alexander Hamilton 

To ascertain the practicability of this, let us examine the 
principles of civil obedience. 

Supports of Government 

I. Interest to support it. 

II. Opinion of utility and necessity. 

III. Habitual sense of obligation. 

IV. Force. 

V. Influence. 

I. Interest — particular and general interests. 

Esprit de corps. 

Vox populi, vox Dei. 

First will decrease with the growth of the States. 
Necessity. 

This does not apply to Federal Government. 

This may dissolve, and yet the order of the com 
munity continue. 

Anarchy not a necessary consequence. 

III. HABITUAL sense of obligation. 

This results from administration of private justice. 
Demand of service or money odious. 

IV. FORCE — of two kinds. 

COERCION of laws — COERCION of arms. 
First does not exist — and the last useless. 
Attempt to use it, a war between the States. 
Foreign aid. 

Delinquency not confined to one. 
V. INFLUENCE— 

1. From municipal jurisdiction. 

2. Appointment of officers. 

3. Military jurisdiction. 

4. Fiscal jurisdiction. 

All these now reside in (the) particular States. 

Federal Convention 373 

Their governments are the chief sources of 
honor and emolument. 

AMBITION — AVARICE. 

To effect any thing, passions must be turned toward the 
General Government. 

Present Confederation cannot be amended, unless the 
most important powers be given to Congress, constituted 
as they are. 

This would be liable to all (the) objections against any 
form of general government, with the addition of the want 
of checks. 

Perpetual effort in each member. 

Influence of individuals in office to excite jealousy and 
clamor — State leaders. 

Experience corresponds. 

Grecian republics. 

Demosthenes says — Athens seventy-three years — Lace- 
daemon twenty-seven — Thebans after battle of Leuctra. 

Phocians — consecrated ground — Philip, etc. 

Germanic empire. 

Charlemagne and his successors. 

Diet — recesses . 

ELECTORS now seven, excluding others. 

Swiss cantons. 

Two diets. 

Opposite alliances. 

Berne — Lucerne . 

To strengthen the Federal Government, powers too 
great must be given to a single hand. 

League offensive and defensive, etc. 

Particular governments must exert themselves, etc. 

But liable to usual vicissitudes.) 

Internal peace affected. 

Proximity of situation — natural enemies. 

Partial confederacies from unequal extent. 

374 Alexander Hamilton 

Power inspires ambition. 

Weakness begets jealousy. 

Western territory. 

Objn. — GENIUS of republics pacific. 

Answer. Jealousy of commerce as well as jealousy of 
power begets war. 

Sparta — Athens — Thebes — Rome — Carthage — Venice 
— Hanseatic League. 

England as many popular as royal wars. 

Lewis the XIV. — Austria — Bourbons — William and 
Anne. 

Wars depend upon trifling circumstances. 

Where — Duchess of Marlborough's glove. 

Foreign conquest. 

Dismemberment — Poland . 

Foreign influence. 

Distractions set afloat vicious humors. 

Standing armies by dissensions. 

Domestic factions — Montesquieu. 

Monarchy in Southern States. 

8aP~ Federal rights — Fisheries. 

Wars — destructive. 

Loss of advantages. 

Foreign nations would not respect our rights nor grant 
us reciprocity. 

Would reduce us to a passive commerce. 

Fisheries — navigation of the lakes — Mississippi — Fleet. 

The General Government must, in this case, not only 
have a strong soul, but strong organs by which that soul 
is to operate. 

Here I shall give my sentiments of the best form of gov 
ernment — not as a thing attainable by us, but as a model 
which we ought to approach as near as possible. 

British constitution best form. 

Aristotle — Cicero — Montesquieu — Neckar. 

Federal Convention 375 

Society naturally divides itself into two political di 
visions — the few and the many, who have distinct 
interests. 

If government in the hands of the few, they will tyran 
nize over the many. 

If (in) the hands of the many, they will tyrannize over 
the few. It ought to be in the hands of both ; and they 
should be separated. 

This separation must be permanent. 

Representation alone will not do. 

Demagogues will generally prevail. 

And if separated, they will need a mutual check. 

This check is a monarch. 

Each principle ought to exist in full force, or it will not 
answer its end. 

The democracy must be derived immediately from the 
people. 

The aristocracy ought to be entirely separated; their 
power should be permanent, and they should have the 
caritas liberorum. 

They should be so circumstanced that they can have no 
interest in a change — as to have an effectual weight in the 
Constitution. 

Their duration should be the earnest of wisdom and 
stability. 

'Tis essential there should be a permanent will in a 
community. 

Vox populi, vox Dei. 

Source of government — the unreasonableness of the 
people — separate interests — debtors and creditors, etc. 

There ought to be a principle in government capable of 
resisting the popular current. 

No periodical duration will come up to this. 

This will always imply hopes and fears. 

Creature and Creator. 

Alexander Hamilton 

Popular assemblies governed by a few individuals. 
These individuals, seeing their dissolution approach, will 
sacrifice. 

The principle of representation will influence. 
The most popular branch will acquire an influence over 
the other. 

The other may check in ordinary cases, in which there is 
no strong public passion ; but it will not in cases where 
there is — the cases in which such a principle is most neces 
sary. 

tt^T" Suppose duration seven years, and rotation. 
One seventh will have only one year to serve. 

One seventh - two years. 

One seventh three years. 

One seventh four years. 

A majority will look to a dissolution in four years by 
instalments. 

The monarch must have proportional strength. He 
ought to be hereditary, and to have so much power, that 
it will not be his interest to risk much to acquire more. 

The advantage of a monarch is this — he is above cor 
ruption — he must always intend, in respect to foreign 
nations, the true interest and glory of the people. 

Republics liable to foreign corruption and intrigue — 
Holland — Athens. 

Effect of the British government. 

A vigorous execution of the laws, and a vigorous 

defence of the people, will result. 
Better chance for a good administration. 
It is said a republican government does not admit 

a vigorous execution. 

It is therefore bad ; for the goodness of a government 
consists in a vigorous execution. 

The principle chiefly intended to be established is this — 
that there must be a permanent will. 

Federal Convention 377 

Gentlemen say we need to be rescued from the demo 
cracy. But what the means proposed? 

A democratic Assembly is to be checked by a dem 
ocratic Senate, and both these by a democratic chief 
magistrate. 

The end will not be answered — the means will not be 
equal to the object. 

It will, therefore, be feeble and inefficient. 

Recapitulation 

I. Impossible to secure the union by any modification of 
Federal Government. 

II. League, offensive and defensive, full of certain evils 
and greater dangers. 

III. General Government, very difficult, if not impracti 
cable, liable to various objections. 

What is to be done? 

Answer. Balance inconveniences and dangers, and 
choose that which seems to have the fewest objections. 

Expense admits of this answer. The expense of the 
State governments will be proportionably diminished. 

Interference of officers not so great, because the objects 
of the General Government and the particular ones will 
not be the same — Finance — Administration of private 
justice. Energy will not be wanting in essential points, 
because the administration of private justice will be car 
ried home to men's doors by the particular governments. 

And the revenues may be collected from imposts, ex 
cises, etc. If necessary to go further, the General Gov 
ernment may make use of the particular governments. 

The attendance of members near the seat of govern 
ment may be had in the lower branch. 

And the upper branch may be so constructed as to in 
duce the attendance of members from any part. 
Alexander Hamilton 

But this proves that the government must be so con 
stituted as to offer strong motives. 

In short, to interest all the passions of individuals. 
And turn them into that channel. 

SPEECHES IN THE FEDERAL CONVENTION 
SPEECHES IN THE FEDERAL 
CONVENTION 

MONDAY, June 18, 1787. 

MR. HAMILTON said that he had been hitherto 
silent on the business before the convention, 
partly from respect to others whose superior abilities, 
age, and experience rendered him unwilling to bring 
forward ideas dissimilar to theirs; and partly from 
his delicate situation with respect to his own State, 
to whose sentiments, as expressed by his colleagues, 
he could by no means accede. The crisis, however, 
which now marked our affairs, was too serious to 
permit any scruples whatever to prevail over the 
duty imposed on every man to contribute his efforts 
for the public safety and happiness. He was obliged, 
therefore, to declare himself unfriendly to both plans. 
He was particularly opposed to that from New Jer 
sey, being fully convinced that no amendment of 
the Confederation, leaving the States in possession 
of their sovereignty, could possibly answer the pur 
pose. On the other hand, he confessed he was much 
discouraged by the amazing extent of country in 
expecting the desired blessings from any general 
sovereignty that could be substituted. As to the 
powers of the convention, he thought the doubts 
started on that subject had arisen from distinctions 
382 Alexander Hamilton 

and reasons too subtle. A Federal Government he 
conceived to mean an association of independent 
communities into one. Different confederacies have 
different powers, and exercise them in different ways. 
In some instances the powers are exercised over 
collective bodies, in others over individuals, as in 
the German Diet; and among ourselves, in cases of 
piracy. Great latitude, therefore, must be given to 
the signification of the term. The plan last pro 
posed departs, itself, from the Federal idea, as under 
stood by some, since it is to operate eventually on 
individuals. He agreed, moreover, with the honor 
able gentleman from Virginia (Mr. Randolph), that 
we owed it to our country to do, on this emergency, 
whatever we should deem essential to its happiness. 
The States sent us here to provide for the exigencies 
of the Union. To rely on and propose any plan not 
adequate to these exigencies, merely because it was 
not clearly within our powers, would be to sacrifice 
the means to the end. It may be said that the 
States cannot ratify a plan not within the purview 
of the Article of Confederation providing for altera 
tions and amendments. But may not the States 
themselves, in which no constitutional authority 
equal to this purpose exists in the Legislatures, have 
had in view a reference to the people at large? In 
the Senate of New York a proviso was moved that no 
act of the convention should be binding until it 
should be referred to the people and ratified; and 
the motion was lost by a single voice only, the reason 
assigned against it being that it might possibly be 
found an inconvenient shackle. 

Speeches in the Federal Convention 383 

The great question is: What provision shall we 
make for the happiness of our country? He would 
first make a comparative examination of the two 
plans — prove that there were essential defects in 
both — and point out such changes as might render a 
national one efficacious. The great and essential prin 
ciples necessary for the support of government are : 

1. An active and constant interest in supporting 
it. This principle does not exist in the States, in 
favor of the Federal Government. They have evi 
dently in a high degree the esprit de corps. They 
constantly pursue internal interests adverse to those 
of the whole. They have their particular debts, 
their particular plans of finance, etc. All these, 
when opposed to, invariably prevail over, the req 
uisitions and plans of Congress. 

2. The love of power. Men love power. The 
same remarks are applicable to this principle. The 
States have constantly shown a disposition rather 
to regain the powers delegated by them, than to part 
with more, or to give effect to what they had parted 
with. The ambition of their demagogues is known 
to hate the control of the General Government. It 
may be remarked, too, that the citizens have not 
that anxiety to prevent a dissolution of the General 
Government, as of the particular governments. A 
dissolution of the latter would be fatal ; of the former, 
would still leave the purposes of government attain 
able to a considerable degree. Consider what such 
a State as Virginia will be in a few years, a few com 
pared with the life of nations. How strongly will it 
feel its importance and self-sufficiency! 

384 Alexander Hamilton 

3. An habitual attachment of the people. The 
whole force of this tie is on the side of the State gov 
ernment. Its sovereignty is immediately before the 
eyes of the people; its protection is immediately 
enjoyed by them. From its hand distributive 
justice, and all those acts which familiarize and 
endear a government to a people, are dispensed to 
them. 

4. Force, by which may be understood a coercion 
of laws or coercion of arms. Congress have not the 
former, except in few cases. In particular States, 
this coercion is nearly sufficient; though he held it, 
in most cases, not entirely so. A certain portion of 
military force is absolutely necessary in large com 
munities. 

Massachusetts is now feeling this necessity, and 
making provision for it. But how can this force be 
exerted on the States collectively? It is impossible. 
It amounts to a war between the parties. Foreign 
powers also will not be idle spectators. They will 
interpose; the confusion will increase; and a disso 
lution of the Union will ensue. 

5. Influence, — he did not mean corruption, but a 
dispensation of those regular honors and emoluments 
which produce an attachment to the government. 
Almost all the weight of these is on the side of the 
States, and must continue so as long as the States 
continue to exist. All the passions, then, we see, 
of avarice, ambition, interest, which govern most 
individuals and all public bodies, fall into the current 
of the States, and do not flow into the stream of the 
General Government. The former, therefore, will 

Speeches in the Federal Convention 385 

generally be an overmatch for the General Gov 
ernment, and render any confederacy in its very 
nature precarious. Theory is in this case fully 
confirmed by experience. The Amphictyonic Coun 
cil had, it would seem, ample powers for general 
purposes. It had, in particular, the power of fining 
and using force against delinquent members. What 
was the consequence? Their decrees were mere sig 
nals of war. The Phocian war is a striking example 
of it. Philip at length, taking advantage of their 
disunion, and insinuating himself into their councils, 
made himself master of their fortunes. The German 
confederacy affords another lesson. The authority 
of Charlemagne seemed to be as great as could be 
necessary. The great feudal chiefs, however, exer 
cising their local sovereignties, soon felt the spirit, 
and found the means, of encroachments which re 
duced the imperial authority to a nominal sover 
eignty. The Diet has succeeded, which, though 
aided by a prince at its head, of great authority in 
dependently of his imperial attributes, is a striking 
illustration of the weakness of confederated govern 
ments. Other examples instruct us in the same 
truth. The Swiss Cantons have scarce any union 
at all, and have been more than once at war with one 
another. How then are all these evils to be avoided ? 
Only by such a complete sovereignty in the General 
Government as will turn all the strong principles 
and passions above-mentioned on its side. Does the 
scheme of New Jersey produce this effect? Does it 
afford any substantial remedy whatever? On the 
contrary it labors under great defects, and the defect 

VOL. I.— 25. 

Alexander Hamilton 

of some of its provisions will destroy the efficacy of 
others. It gives a direct revenue to Congress, but 
this will not be sufficient. The balance can only be 
supplied by requisitions; which experience proves 
cannot be relied on. If States are to deliberate on 
the mode, they will also deliberate on the object, of 
the supplies ; and will grant or not grant as they ap 
prove or disapprove of it. The delinquency of one 
will invite and countenance it in others. Quotas, 
too, must, in the nature of things, be so unequal, as 
to produce the same evil. To what standard will you 
resort? Land is a fallacious one. Compare Holland 
with Russia; France, or England, with other coun 
tries of Europe; Pennsylvania with North Carolina, 
— will the relative pecuniary abilities, in those in 
stances, correspond with the relative value of land? 
Take numbers of inhabitants for the rule, and make 
like comparison of different countries, and you will 
find it to be equally unjust. The different degrees 
of industry and improvement in different countries 
render the first object a precarious measure of 
wealth. Much depends, too, on situation. Con 
necticut, New Jersey, and North Carolina, not being 
commercial States, and contributing to the wealth 
of the commercial ones, can never bear quotas as 
sessed by the ordinary rules of proportion. They 
will, and must, fail in their duty. Their example 
will be followed, — and the Union itself be dissolved. 
Whence then, is the national revenue to be drawn? 
From commerce; even from exports, which, not 
withstanding the common opinion, are fit objects of 
moderate taxation; from excise, etc., etc. These, 

Speeches in the Federal Convention 387 

though not equal, are less unequal than quotas. 
Another destructive ingredient in the plan is that 
equality of suffrage which is so much desired by the 
small States. It is not in human nature that Vir 
ginia and the large States should consent to it; or, if 
they did, that they should long abide by it. It 
shocks too much all ideas of justice, and every 
human feeling. Bad principles in a government, 
though slow, are sure in their operation, and will 
gradually destroy it. A doubt has been raised 
whether Congress at present have a right to keep 
ships or troops in time of peace. I lean to the 
negative. 

Mr. Patterson's plan provides no remedy. If the 
powers proposed were adequate, the organization of 
Congress is such that they could never be properly 
and effectually exercised. The members of Congress 
being chosen by the States, and subject to recall, 
represent all the local prejudices. Should the powers 
be found effectual, they will from time to time be 
heaped on them, till a tyrannic sway shall be estab 
lished. The general power, whatever be its form, if 
it preserves itself, must swallow up the State powers. 
Otherwise, it will be swallowed up by them. It is 
against all the principles of a good government, to 
vest the requisite powers in such a body as Con 
gress. Two sovereignties cannot coexist within 
the same limits. Giving powers to Congress must 
eventuate in a bad government or in no govern 
ment. The plan of New Jersey, therefore, will not 
do. What, then, is to be done? Here I am em 
barrassed. The extent of the country to be governed 

388 Alexander Hamilton 

discourages me. The expense of a General Govern 
ment was also formidable; unless there was such 
a diminution of expense on the side of the State 
Governments as the case would admit. If they 
were extinguished, I am persuaded that great econ 
omy might be obtained by substituting a General 
Government. 

I do not mean, however, to shock the public 
opinion by proposing such a measure. On the other 
hand, I see no other necessity for declining it. They 
are not necessary for any of the great purposes of 
commerce, revenue, or agriculture. Subordinate au 
thorities, I am aware, would be necessary. There 
must be district tribunals; corporations for local 
purposes. But cm bono the vast and expensive ap 
paratus now appertaining to the States? The only 
difficulty of a serious nature which occurs to me is 
that of drawing Representatives from the extremes 
to the centre of the community. What inducements 
can be offered that will suffice? The moderate 
wages for the first branch could only be a bait to lit 
tle demagogues. Three dollars or thereabouts, I sup 
pose, would be the utmost. The Senate, I fear, from 
a similar cause, would be filled by certain undertak 
ers who wish for particular offices under the gov 
ernment. This view of the subject almost leads me 
to despair that a republican government could be 
established over so great an extent. I am sensible, 
at the same time, that it would be unwise to propose 
one of any other form. In my private opinion, I 
have no scruple in declaring, supported as I am by 
the opinion of so many of the wise and good, that 

Speeches in the Federal Convention 389 

the British government is the best in the world ; and 
that I doubt much whether anything short of it will 
do in America. I hope gentlemen of different opin 
ions will bear with me in this, and beg them to re 
collect the change of opinion on this subject which 
has taken place, and is still going on. It was once 
thought that the power of Congress was amply suf 
ficient to secure the end of their institution. The 
error was now seen by every one. The members 
most tenacious of republicanism are as loud as any 
in declaiming against the vices of democracy. This 
progress of the public mind leads me to anticipate 
the time when others as well as myself will join in the 
praise bestowed by Mr. Neckar on the British con 
stitution, namely, that " it is the only government 
in the world which unites public strength with in 
dividual security.'* 

In every community where industry is encouraged, 
there will be a division of it into the few and the 
many. Hence, separate^nterests will arise. There 
will be debtors and creditors, etc. Give all power to 
the many, they will oppress the few. Give all power 
to the few, they will oppress the many. Both, 
therefore, ought to have the power, that each may 
defend itself against the other. To the want of this 
check we owe our paper-money instalment laws, etc. 
To the proper adjustment of it the British owe the ex 
cellence of their constitution. Their House of Lords 
is a most noble institution. Having nothing to 
hope for by a change, and a sufficient interest, by 
means of their property, in being faithful to the 
national interest, they form a permanent barrier 

39° Alexander Hamilton 

against every pernicious innovation whether at 
tempted on the part of the Crown or of the Com 
mons . No temporary Senate will have firmness enough 
to answer the purpose. The Senate of Maryland, 
which seems to be so much appealed to, has not yet 
been sufficiently tried. Had the people been unani 
mous and eager in the late appeal to them on the 
subject of a paper emission, they would have yielded 
to the torrent. Their acquiescing in such an appeal 
is a proof of it. Gentlemen differ in their opinions 
concerning the necessary checks, from the different 
estimates they form of the human passions. They 
suppose seven years a sufficient period to give the 
Senate an adequate firmness, from not duly con 
sidering the amazing violence and turbulence of the 
democratic spirit. When a great object of govern 
ment is pursued which seizes the popular passions, 
they spread like wildfire and become irresistible. I 
appeal to the gentlemen from the New England 
States whether experience has not there verified the 
remark. As to the. Executive, it seemed to be ad 
mitted that no good one could be established on 
republican principles. Was not this giving up the 
merits of the question ; for can there be a good gov 
ernment without a good Executive? The English 
model was the only good one on this subject. The 
hereditary interest of the king was so interwoven 
with that of the nation, and his personal emolument 
so great, that he was placed above the danger of 
being corrupted from abroad, and, at the same time, 
was both sufficiently independent and sufficiently 
controlled to answer the purpose of the institution 

Speeches in the Federal Convention 391 

at home. One of the weak sides of republics was 
their being liable to foreign influence and corruption. 
Men of little character, acquiring great power, be 
come easily the tools of intermeddling neighbors. 
Sweden was a striking instance. The French and 
English had each their parties during the late revo 
lution, which was effected by the predominant in 
fluence of the former. What is the inference from 
all these observations ? That we ought to go as far, 
in order to attain stability and permanency, as re 
publican principles will admit. Let one branch of 
Legislature hold their places for life, or, at least, 
during good behavior. Let the Executive, also, be 
for life. I appeal to the feelings of the members 
present whether a term of seven years would induce 
the sacrifice of private affairs, which an acceptance 
of public trust would require, so as to ensure the ser 
vices of the best citizens. On this plan we should 
have in the Senate a permanent will, a weighty in 
terest, which would answer essential purposes. But 
is this a republican government? it will be asked. 
Yes, if all the magistrates are appointed and vacan 
cies are filled by the people, or by a process of election 
originating with the people. I am sensible that an 
Executive, constituted as I propose, would have, in 
fact, but little of the power and independence that 
might be necessary. On the other plan of appoint 
ing him for seven years, I think, the Executive ought 
to have but little power. He would be ambitious, 
with the means of making creatures, and as the ob 
ject of his ambition would be to prolong his power, it 
is probable that in case of war he would avail him- 

39 2 Alexander Hamilton 

self of the emergency to evade or refuse a degradation 
from his place. An Executive for life has not this 
motive for forgetting his fidelity, and will therefore 
be a safer depository of power. It will be objected, 
probably, that such an Executive will be an elective 
monarch, and will give birth to the tumults which 
characterize that form of government. I reply that 
" monarch" is an indefinite term. It marks not either 
the degree or duration of power. If this executive 
magistrate would be a monarch for life, the other 
proposed by the Report from the Committee of the 
Whole would be a monarch for seven years. The 
circumstance of being elective was also applicable 
to both. It had been observed by judicious writers, 
that elective monarchies would be the best if they 
could be guarded against the tumults excited by the 
ambition and intrigues of competitors. I am not 
sure that tumults are an inseparable evil. I think 
this character of elective monarchies has been taken 
rather from particular cases than from general prin 
ciples. The election of Roman emperors was made 
by the army. In Poland the election is made by 
great rival princes, with independent power, and am 
ple means of raising commotions. In the German 
empire the appointment is made by the electors and 
princes, who have equal motives and means for ex 
citing cabals and parties. Might not such a mode of 
election be devised among ourselves as will defend 
the community against these effects in any dangerous 
degree ? 

Having made these observations, I will read to 
the committee a sketch of a plan which I should 

Speeches in the Federal Convention 393 

prefer to either of those under consideration. I am 
aware that it goes beyond the ideas of most mem 
bers. But will such a plan be adopted out of doors? 
In return I would ask, Will the people adopt the 
other plan? At present they will adopt neither. 
But I see the Union dissolving, or already dissolved. 
I see evils operating in the States which must soon 
cure the people of their fondness for democracies. 
I see that a great progress has been already made, 
and is still going on, in the public mind. I think, 
therefore, that the people will in time be unshackled 
from their prejudices; and whenever that happens, 
they will themselves not be satisfied at stopping 
where the plan of Mr. Randolph would place them, 
but be ready to go as far at least as he proposes. I 
do not mean to offer the paper I have sketched as a 
proposition to the committee. It is meant only to 
give a more correct view of my ideas, and to suggest 
the amendments which I should propose to the plan 
of Mr. Randolph, in the proper stages of its future 
discussion. [Col. Hamilton then read his sketch, 
which has already been given in the preceding prop 
ositions and plan.] — Madison Papers. 
Monday, June iSth,1 Col. Hamilton said: 
To deliver my sentiments on so important a 
subject, when the first characters in the Union 

1 This is Yates's report of the preceding speech. It is a little more 
life-like and vigorous than Madison's. Judge Yates, however, was 
Hamilton's colleague, and in utter opposition to him on all points, so 
that personal prejudices probably make this version less fair and 
authentic than that of Madison. Madison's report, moreover, has the 
advantage of having been examined and approved by Hamilton him 
self. 

394 Alexander Hamilton 

have gone before me, inspires me with the greatest 
diffidence, especially when my own ideas are so ma 
terially dissimilar to the plans now before the com 
mittee. My situation is disagreeable, but it would 
be criminal not to come forward on a question of 
such magnitude. I have well considered the sub 
ject, and am convinced that no amendment of the 
Confederation can answer the purpose of a good 
government, so long as State sovereignties do, in 
any shape, exist; and I have great doubts whether 
a national government, on the Virginia plan, can be 
made effectual. What is federal? An association 
of several independent states as one. How or in 
what manner this association is formed is not so 
clearly distinguishable. We find the Diet of Ger 
many has, in some instances, the power of legisla 
tion on individuals. We find the United States of 
America have it, in an extensive degree, in the cases 
of piracies. Let us now review the powers with which 
we are invested. We are appointed for the sole 
and express purpose of revising the Confederation, 
and to alter or amend it so as to render it effectual 
for the purposes of a good government. Those who 
suppose it must be federal lay great stress on the 
terms sole and express, as if these words intended a 
confinement to a federal government; when the 
manifest import is no more than that the institution 
of a good government must be the sole and express 
object of your deliberations. Nor can we suppose 
an annihilation of our powers by forming a national 
government, as many of the States have made, in 
their constitutions, no provision for any altera- 

Speeches in the Federal Convention 395 

tion; and thus much I can say for the State I have 
the honor to represent, that, when our credentials 
were under consideration in the Senate, some mem 
bers were for inserting a restriction in the powers, 
to prevent an encroachment on the constitution. It 
was answered by others ; and thereupon the resolve 
carried on the credentials that it might abridge 
some of the constitutional powers of the State, and 
that, possibly, in the formation of a new Union, it 
would be found necessary. This appears reasonable, 
and therefore leaves us at liberty to form such a 
national government as we think best adapted for 
the good of the whole. I have, therefore, no diffi 
culty as to the extent of our powers, nor do I feel 
myself restrained in the exercise of my judgment 
under them. We can only propose and recom 
mend; the power of ratifying or rejecting is still in 
the States. But on this great question I am still 
greatly embarrassed. I have before observed my 
apprehension of the inefficacy of either plan; and I 
have great doubts whether a more energetic govern 
ment can pervade this wide and extensive country. 
I shall now show that both plans are materially 
defective. 

1. A good government ought to be constant, and 
ought to contain an active principle. 

2. Utility and necessity. 

3. An habitual sense of obligation. 

4. Force. 

5. Influence. 

I hold it that different societies have all different 
views and interests to pursue, and always prefer 

396 Alexander Hamilton 

local to general concerns. For example: New York 
Legislature made an external compliance lately to 
a requisition of Congress; but do they not, at the 
same time, counteract their compliance by grati 
fying the local objects of the State, so as to defeat 
their concession? And this will ever be the case. 
Men always love power, and States will prefer their 
particular concerns to the general welfare; and as 
States become larger and important, will they not 
be less attentive to the general government? What, 
in process of time, will Virginia be? She contains 
now half a million of inhabitants; in twenty-five 
years she will double the number. Feeling her own 
weight and importance, must she not become in 
different to the concerns of the Union? And where, 
in such a situation, will be found national attach 
ment to the general government? By " force" I 
mean the coercion of law and the coercion of arms. 
Will this remark apply to the power intended to be 
vested in the government to be instituted by either 
plan ? A delinquent must be compelled to obedience 
by force of arms. How is this to be done? If you 
are unsuccessful, a dissolution of your government 
must be the consequence; and in that case the in 
dividual Legislatures will reassume their powers; 
nay, will not the interests of the States be thrown 
into the State governments? By influence I mean 
the regular weight and support it will receive from 
those who will find it their interest to support a 
government intended to preserve the peace and 
happiness of the community of the whole. The 
State governments, by either plan, will exert the 

Speeches in the Federal Convention 397 

means to counteract it. They have their State 
judges and militia all combined to support their 
State interests; and these will be influenced to op 
pose a national government. Either plan is there 
fore precarious. The national government cannot 
long exist when opposed by such a weighty rival. 
The experience of ancient and modern confederacies 
evinces this point, and throws considerable light on 
the subject. The Amphictyonic Council of Greece 
had a right to require of its members troops, money, 
and the force of the country. Were they obeyed in 
the exercise of these powers? Could they preserve 
the peace of the greater states and republics? Or 
where were they obeyed? History shows that their 
decrees were disregarded, and that the stronger 
states, regardless of their power, gave law to the 
lesser. Let us examine the federal institution of 
Germany. It was instituted upon the laudable prin 
ciple of securing the independency of the several 
states of which it was composed, and to protect 
them against foreign invasion. Has it answered 
these good intentions? Do we not see that their 
councils are weak and distracted, and that it cannot 
prevent the wars and confusions which the respec 
tive electors carry on against each other? The 
Swiss cantons, or the Helvetic union, are equally 
inefficient. Such are the lessons which the expe 
rience of others affords us, and from whence results 
the evident conclusion that all federal governments 
are weak and distracted. To avoid the evils de- 
ducible from these observations, we must establish 
a general and national government, completely 

398 Alexander Hamilton 

sovereign, and annihilate the State distinctions and 
State operations; and, unless we do this, no good 
purpose can be answered. What does the Jersey 
plan propose? It surely has not this for an object. 
By this we grant the regulation of trade and a 
more effectual collection of revenue and some partial 
duties. These at five or ten per cent, would only 
perhaps amount to a fund to discharge the debt 
of the corporation. Let us take a review of the 
variety of important objects, which must neces 
sarily engage the attention of a national govern 
ment. You have to protect your rights against 
Canada on the north, Spain on the south, and your 
western frontier against savages. You have to 
adopt necessary plans for the settlement of your 
frontiers, and to institute the mode in which settle 
ments and good government are to be made. How 
is the expense of supporting and regulating these 
important matters to be defrayed? By requisition 
on the States according to the Jersey plan? Will 
this do it? We have already found it ineffectual. 
Let one State prove delinquent, and it will encourage 
others to follow the example; and thus the whole 
will fail. And what is the standard to quota among 
the States their respective proportions? Can lands 
be the standard? How would that apply between 
Russia and Holland? Compare Pennsylvania with 
North Carolina; or Connecticut with New York. 
Does not commerce or industry in the one or other 
make a great disparity between these different 
countries, and may not the comparative value of 
the States from these circumstances make an un- 

Speeches in the Federal Convention 399 

equal disproportion when the data is numbers? I 
therefore conclude that either system would ulti 
mately destroy the Confederation or any other gov 
ernment which is established on such fallacious 
principles. Perhaps imposts, taxes on specific ar 
ticles, would produce a more equal system of draw 
ing a revenue. Another objection to the Jersey 
plan is the unequal representation. Can the great 
States consent to this? If they did, it would even 
tually work its own destruction. How are forces to 
be raised by the Jersey plan? By quotas? Will 
the States comply with the requisition? As much 
as they will with the taxes. Examine the present 
Confederation and it is evident they can raise no 
troops, nor equip vessels, before war is actually de 
clared. They cannot, therefore, take any prepar 
atory measure before an enemy is at your door. 
How unwise and inadequate their powers! And 
this must ever be the case when they attempt to 
define powers. Something will always be wanting. 
Congress, by being annually elected, and subject to 
recall, will ever come with the prejudices of their 
States, rather than the good of the Union. Add, 
therefore, additional powers to a body thus organ 
ized, and you establish a sovereignty of the worst 
kind, consisting of a single body. Where are the 
checks? None. They must either prevail over the 
State governments, or the prevalence of the State 
governments must end in their dissolution. This is 
a conclusive objection to the Jersey plan. Such are 
the insuperable objections to both plans; and what 
is to be done on this occasion? I confess I am at a 

400 Alexander Hamilton 

loss. I foresee the difficulty, on a consolidated 
plan, of drawing a representation from so extensive 
a continent to one place. What can be the induce 
ments for gentlemen to come six hundred miles to a 
national Legislature? The expense would at least 
amount to £100,000. This, however, can be no 
conclusive objection, if it eventuates in an extinc 
tion of State governments. The burden of the 
latter would be saved, and the expense then would 
not be great. State distinctions would be found un 
necessary; and yet, I confess, to carry government 
to extremities, the State governments, reduced to 
corporations and with very limited powers, might 
be necessary, and the expense of the national gov 
ernment become less burdensome. Yet, I confess, 
I see great difficulty of drawing forth a good rep 
resentation. What, for example, will be the in 
ducements for gentlemen of fortune and abilities to 
leave their houses and business to attend annu 
ally and long? It cannot be the wages; for these, 
I presume, must be small. Will not the power, 
therefore, be thrown into the hands of the dema 
gogue or middling politician, who, for the sake of a 
small stipend and hopes of advancement, will offer 
himself as a candidate, and the real men of weight 
and influence, by remaining at home, add strength 
to the State governments? I am at a loss to know 
what must be done; I despair that a republican 
form of government can remove the difficulties. 
Whatever may be my opinion, I would hold it, how 
ever, unwise to change that form of government. I 
believe the British government forms the best model 

Speeches in the Federal Convention 401 

the world ever produced, and such has been its prog 
ress in the minds of many, that this truth gradually 
gains ground. This government has for its object 
public strength and individual security. It is said 
with us to be unattainable. If it was once formed 
it would maintain itself. 

All communities divide themselves into the few 
and the many. The first are the rich and well-born, 
the other the mass of the people. The voice of the 
people has been said to be the voice of God; and, 
however generally this maxim has been quoted and 
believed, it is not true in fact. The people are 
turbulent and changing; they seldom judge or de 
termine right. Give, therefore, to the first class a 
distinct, permanent share in the government. They 
will check the unsteadiness of the second, and, as 
they cannot receive any advantage by a change, 
they therefore will ever maintain good government. 
Can a democratic Assembly, who annually revolve 
in the mass of the people, be supposed steadily to 
pursue the public good? Nothing but a permanent 
body can check the imprudence of democracy. 
Their turbulent and uncontrolling disposition re 
quires checks. The Senate of New York, although 
chosen for four years, we have found to be inefficient. 
Will, on the Virginia plan, a continuance of seven 
years do it? It is admitted that you cannot have 
a good Executive upon a democratic plan. See the 
excellency of the British Executive. He is placed 
above temptation. He can have no distinct interests 
from the public welfare. Nothing short of such an 
executive can be efficient. The weak side of a 

402 Alexander Hamilton 

republican government is the danger of foreign influ 
ence. This is unavoidable, unless it is so con 
structed as to bring forward its first characters in its 
support. I am, therefore, for a general government, 
yet would wish to go the full length of republican 
principles. Let one body of the Legislature be con 
stituted during good behavior or life. Let one 
Executive be appointed who dares execute his 
powers. It may be asked: Is this a republican 
system? It is strictly so, as long as they remain 
elective. And let me observe, that an Executive is 
less dangerous to the liberties of the people when in 
office during life, than for seven years. It may be 
said, this constitutes an elective monarchy. Pray, 
what is a monarchy? May not the governors of the 
respective States be considered in that light? But, 
by making the Executive subject to impeachment, 
the term monarchy cannot apply. These elective 
monarchs have produced tumults in Rome, and are 
equally dangerous to peace in Poland; but this can 
not apply to the mode in which I would propose the 
election. Let electors be appointed in each of the 
States to elect the Executive, [here Mr. H. produced 
his plan, a copy whereof is hereunto annexed,] to 
consist of two branches; and I would give them the 
unlimited power of passing all laws, without excep 
tion. The Assembly to be elected for three years, 
by the people in districts. The Senate to be elected 
by electors to be chosen for that purpose by the 
people, and to remain in office during life. The 
Executive to have the power of negativing all laws; 
to make war or peace, with their advice, but to have 

Speeches in the Federal Convention 403 

the sole direction of all military operations, and to 
send ambassadors, and appoint all military officers; 
and to pardon all offenders, treason excepted, un 
less by advice of the Senate. On his death or re 
moval, the President of the Senate to officiate, with 
the same powers, until another is elected. Su 
preme judicial officers to be appointed by the Ex 
ecutive and the Senate. The Legislature to appoint 
courts in each State, so as to make the State gov 
ernments unnecessary to it. All State laws which 
( contravene the general laws to be absolutely void. 
An officer to be appointed in each State, to have a 
negative on all State laws. All the militia, and the 
appointment of officers, to be under the national 
government. I confess that this plan and that 
from Virginia are very remote from the idea of the 
people. Perhaps the Jersey plan is nearest their 
expectation. But the people are gradually ripening 
in their opinions of government; they begin to be 
tired of an excess of democracy; and what even is 
the Virginia plan, but "pork still, with a little 
change of sauce." — Votes, " Secret Proceedings," etc. 
June i Qth, Colonel Hamilton said: I agree to the 
proposition. I did not intend, yesterday, a total 
extinguishment of State governments; but my 
meaning was, that a national government ought to 
be able to support itself without aid or interference 
of the State governments, and that therefore it was 
necessary to have full sovereignty. Even with cor 
porate rights, the States will be dangerous to the 
national government, and ought to be extinguished, 
new modified, or reduced to a smaller scale. — Yates. 

404 Alexander Hamilton 

June 1 9th, Colonel Hamilton said: That he coin 
cided with the proposition as it stood in the report. 
He had not been understood yesterday. By an 
abolition of the States, he meant that no boundary 
could be drawn between the National and State 
Legislatures; that the former must therefore have 
indefinite authority. If it were limited at all the 
rivalship of the States would gradually subvert it. 
Even as corporations, the extent of some of them, 
as Virginia, Massachusetts, etc., would be formida 
ble. As States, he thought they ought to be abol 
ished. But he admitted the necessity, of leaving in 
them subordinate jurisdictions. The examples of 
Persia and the Roman empire, cited by Mr. Wilson, 
were, he thought, in favor of his doctrine, the great 
powers delegated to the satraps and proconsuls 
having frequently produced revolts and schemes of 
independence. — Madison Papers. 

June 1 9th, Colonel Hamilton said: I agree to Mr. 
Wilson's remark. Establish a weak government 
and you must at times overleap the bounds. Rome 
was obliged to create dictators. Cannot you make 
propositions to the people because we before confed 
erated on other principles? The people can yield 
to them if they will. The three great objects of 
government — agriculture, commerce, and revenue — 
can only be secured by a general government. — 
Yates. 

June 1 9th, Colonel Hamilton said: That he as 
sented to the doctrine of Mr. Wilson. He denied 
the doctrine that the States were thrown into a 
state of nature. He was not yet prepared to admit 

Speeches in the Federal Convention 405 

the doctrine that the Confederacy could be dis 
solved by partial infractions of it. He admitted 
that the States met now on an equal footing, but 
could see no inference from that against concerting 
a change of the system in this particular. He 
took this occasion of observing, for the purpose of 
appeasing the fear of the small States, that two cir 
cumstances would render them secure under a na 
tional government in which they might lose the 
equality of rank which they now held : one was the 
local situation of the three largest States, Virginia, 
Massachusetts, and Pennsylvania. They were sepa 
rated from each other by distance of place, and 
equally so by all the peculiarities which distinguish 
the interests of one State from those of another. 
No combination, therefore, could be dreaded. In 
the second place, as there was a gradation in the 
States, from Virginia, the largest, down to Delaware, 
the smallest, it would always happen that ambitious 
combinations among a few States might and would 
be counteracted by defensive combinations of greater 
extent among the rest. No combination has been 
seen among the large counties, merely as such, 
against lesser counties. The more close the union 
of the States, and the more complete the authority 
of the whole, the less opportunity will be allowed to 
the stronger States to injure the weaker. — Madison 
Papers. 

June 2ist, Col. Hamilton said: It is essential to 
the democratic rights of the community, that this 
branch ' be directly elected by the people. Let us 

1 The Senate. 

406 Alexander Hamilton 

look forward to probable events. There may be a 
time when State legislation will cease, and such an 
event ought not to embarrass the national govern 
ment. — Yates. 

June 2ist: Col. Hamilton considered the motion r 
as intended manifestly to transfer the election from 
the people to the State Legislatures, which would 
essentially vitiate the plan. It would increase that 
State influence which could not be too watchfully 
guarded against. All, too, must admit the possibil 
ity, in case the general government should maintain 
itself, that the State governments might gradually 
dwindle into nothing. The system, therefore, should 
not be engrafted on what might possibly fail. — 
Madison Papers. 

June 2ist, Col. Hamilton said: There is a medium 
in every thing. I confess three years is not too 
long. A representative ought to have full freedom 
of deliberation and ought to exert an opinion of his 
own. I am convinced the public mind will adopt a 
solid plan. In the government of New York, al 
though higher-toned than that of any other State, 
still we find great listlessness and indifference in the 
electors ; nor do they, in general, bring forward the 
first characters to the Legislature. The public mind 
is perhaps not now ready to receive the best plan of 
government, but certain circumstances are now 
progressing which will give a different complexion 
to it. — Yates. 

June 2ist: Col. Hamilton urged the necessity of 

1 Motion by Pinckney to have upper branch appointed in such man 
ner as State Legislatures may direct. 

Speeches in the Federal Convention 407 

three years.1 There ought to be neither too much 
nor too little dependence on the popular sentiments. 
The checks in the other branches of the government 
would be but feeble, and would need every auxiliary 
principle that could be interwoven. The British 
House of Commons were elected septennially, yet the 
democratic spirit of the constitution had not ceased. 
Frequency of elections tended to make the people 
listless to them, and to facilitate the success of little 
cabals. This evil was complained of in all the 
States. In Virginia it had been lately found neces 
sary to force the attendance and voting of the people 
by severe regulations. — Madison Papers. 

June 22d, Col. Hamilton said: I do not think the 
States ought to pay the members, nor am I for a 
fixed sum. It is a general remark, that he who pays 
is the master. If each State pays its own members, 
the burden would be disproportionate, according to 
the distance of the States from the seat of gov 
ernment. If a national government can exist, 
members will make it a desirable object to attend, 
without accepting any stipend; and it ought to 
be so organized as to be efficient. 

It has been often asserted, that the interests of 
the general and of the State Legislatures are precisely 
the same. This cannot be true. The views of the 
governed are often materially different from those 
who govern. The science of policy is the knowledge of 
human nature. A State government will ever be the 
rival power of the general government. It is there 
fore highly improper that the State Legislatures 

1 For the lower branch. 

4°8 Alexander Hamilton 

should be the paymasters of the members of the na 
tional government. All political bodies love power, 
and it will often be improperly attained. — Votes. 

June 22d, Col. Hamilton said; In all general 
questions which become the subjects of discussion, 
there are always some truths mixed with falsehoods. 
I confess, there is danger where men are capable of 
holding two offices. Take mankind in general, they 
are vicious, their passions may be operated upon. 
We have been taught to reprobate the danger of in 
fluence in the British government, without duly re 
flecting how far it was necessary to support a good 
government. We have taken up many ideas upon 
trust, and at last, pleased with our own opinions, 
establish them as undoubted truths. Hume's opin 
ion of the British constitution confirms the remark, 
that there is always a body of firm patriots, who 
often shake a corrupt administration. Take man 
kind as they are, and what are they governed by? 
Their passions. There may be in every government 
a few choice spirits, who may act from more worthy 
motives. One great error is that we suppose man 
kind more honest than they are. Our prevailing 
passions are ambition and interest; and it will ever 
be the duty of a wise government to avail itself of 
the passions, in order to make them subservient to 
the public good; for these ever induce us to action. 
Perhaps a few men in a State may, from patriotic 
motives, or to display their talents, or to reap the 
advantage of public applause, step forward; but, if 
we adopt the clause,1 we destroy the motive. I am, 

1 Forbidding representatives to hold any other office. 

Speeches in the Federal Convention 409 

therefore, against all exclusions and refinements, 
except only in this case: that, when a member 
takes his seat, he should vacate every other office. 
It is difficult to put any exclusive regulation into 
effect. We must, in some degree, submit to the 
inconvenience. — Yates. 

On the question of ineligibility of members of 
Congress to office, Colonel Hamilton said, June 22d: 
There are inconveniences on both sides. We must 
take man as we find him; and if we expect him to 
serve the public, must interest his passions in doing 
so. A reliance on pure patriotism had been the 
source of many of our errors. He thought the re 
mark of Mr. Gorham a just one. It was impossible 
to say what would be the effect in Great Britain of 
such a reform as had been urged. It was known 
that one of the ablest politicians (Mr. Hume) had 
pronounced that all that influence on the side of the 
Crown which went under the name of corruption, was 
an essential part of the weight which maintained the 
equilibrium of the constitution. — Madison Papers. 

On tenure of Senate, Col. Hamilton said, June 
22d: That he did not mean to enter particularly 
into the subject. He concurred with Mr. Madison 
in thinking we were now to decide for ever the fate 
of republican government; and that if we did not 
give to that form due stability and wisdom, it would 
be disgraced and lost among ourselves, disgraced 
and lost to mankind for ever. He acknowledged 
himself not to think favorably of republican govern 
ment; but addressed his remarks to those who did 
think favorably of it, in order to prevail on them to 

410 Alexander Hamilton 

tone their government as high as possible. He pro 
fessed himself to be as zealous an advocate for liberty 
as any man whatever; and trusted he should be as 
willing a martyr to it, though he differed as to the 
form in which it was most eligible. He concurred, 
also, in the general observations of Mr. Madison on 
the subject, which might be supported by others 
if it were necessary. It was certainly true, that 
nothing like an equality of property existed; that 
an inequality would exist as long as liberty existed, 
and that it would unavoidably result from that very 
liberty itself. This inequality of property consti 
tuted the great and fundamental distinction in so 
ciety. When the tribunitial power had levelled the 
boundary between the patricians and plebeians, 
what followed? The distinction between rich and 
poor was substituted. He meant not, however, to 
enlarge on the subject. He arose principally to re 
mark that Mr. Sherman seemed not to recollect that 
one branch of the proposed government was so 
formed as to render it particularly the guardians of 
the poorer orders of citizens; nor to have adverted 
to the true causes of the stability which had been 
exemplified in Connecticut. Under the British sys 
tem, as well as the Federal, many of the great powers 
appertaining to government, particularly all those 
relating to foreign nations, were not in the hands of 
the government there. Their internal affairs, also, 
were extremely simple, owing to sundry causes, 
many of which were peculiar to that country. Of 
late the government had entirely given way to the 
people, and had, in fact, suspended many of its 

Speeches in the Federal Convention 411 

ordinary functions, in order to prevent those tur 
bulent scenes which had appeared elsewhere. He 
asks Mr. Sherman whether the State, at this time, 
dare impose and collect a tax on the people? To 
these causes, and not to the frequency of elections, 
the effect, as far as it existed, ought to be chiefly 
ascribed. — Madison Papers. 

June 26th, Col. Hamilton said: This question has 
already been considered in several points of view. 
We are now forming a republican government. Real 
liberty is never found in despotism or the extremes 
of democracy, but in moderate governments. Those 
who mean to form a solid republican government 
ought to proceed to the confines of another govern 
ment. As long as offices are open to all men, and no 
constitutional rank is established, it is pure republic 
anism. But if we incline too much to democracy, we 
shall soon shoot into a monarchy. The difference of 
property is already great among us. Commerce and 
industry will still increase the disparity. Your gov 
ernment must meet this state of things, or com 
binations will in process of time undermine your 
system. What was the tribunitial power of Rome? 
It was instituted by the plebeians as a guard against 
the patricians. But was this a sufficient check? 
No! The only distinction which remained at Rome 
was, at last, between the rich and the poor. The 
gentleman from Connecticut forgets that the dem 
ocratic body is already secure in a representation. 
As to Connecticut, what were the little objects of 
their government before the Revolution? Colonial 
concerns merely. They ought now to act on a more 

4*2 Alexander Hamilton 

extended scale; and dare they do this? Dare they 
collect the taxes and requisitions of Congress? Such 
a government may do well if they do not tax, and 
this is precisely their situation. — Votes. 

June 29th, Col. Hamilton said: The course of my 
experience in human affairs might, perhaps, restrain 
me from saying much on this subject. I shall, how 
ever, give utterance to some of the observations I 
have made during the course of this debate. The 
gentleman from Maryland has been at great pains 
to establish positions which are not denied. Many 
of them, as drawn from the best writers on govern 
ment, are become self-evident principles. But I 
doubt the propriety of his application of those prin 
ciples in the present discussion. He deduces from 
them the necessity that States entering into a con 
federacy must retain the equality of votes. This 
position cannot be correct. Facts contradict it. 
The Parliament of Great Britain asserted a suprem 
acy over the whole empire, and the celebrated 
Judge Blackstone labors for the legality of it, 
although many parts were not represented. This 
parliamentary power we opposed as contrary to our 
colonial rights. With that exception, throughout 
that whole empire it is submitted to. 

May not the smaller and greater States so modify 
their respective rights as to establish the general in 
terest of the whole without adhering to the right of 
equality? Strict representation is not observed in 
any of the State governments. The Senate of New 
York are chosen by persons of certain qualifications 
to the exclusion of others. 

Speeches in the Federal Convention 413 

The question after all is — Is it our interest, in 
modifying this general government, to sacrifice in 
dividual rights to the preservation of the rights of 
an artificial being, called States? There can be no 
truer principle than this — That every individual of 
the community at large has an equal right to the pro 
tection of government. If, therefore, three States 
contain a majority of the inhabitants of America, 
ought they to be governed by a minority? Would 
the inhabitants of the great States ever submit to 
this? If the smaller States maintain this principle 
through a love of power, will not the larger, from the 
same motives, be equally tenacious to preserve their 
power? They are to surrender their rights — for 
what? For the preservation of an artificial being. 
We propose a free government. Can it be so, if 
partial distinctions are maintained? 

I agree with the gentleman from Delaware, that 
if the State governments are to act in the general 
government, it affords the strongest reason for ex 
clusion. In the State of New York five counties 
form a majority of representatives, and yet the 
government is in no danger, because the laws have 
a general operation. The small States exaggerate 
their danger, and on this ground contend for an un 
due proportion of power. But their danger is in 
creased if the larger States will not submit to it. 
Where will they form new alliances for their sup 
port? Will they do this with foreign powers? 
Foreigners are jealous of our increasing greatness, 
and would rejoice in our distractions. Those who 
have had opportunities of conversing with foreigners 

4H Alexander Hamilton 

respecting sovereigns in Europe, have discovered in 
them an anxiety for the preservation of our demo 
cratic governments, probably for no other reason 
but to keep us weak. Unless your government is 
respectable, foreigners will invade your rights, and 
to maintain tranquillity it must be respectable. 
Even to observe neutrality you must have a strong 
government. 

I confess our present situation is critical. We 
have just finished a war which has established our 
independence and loaded us with a heavy debt. We 
have still every motive to unite for our common 
defence. Our people are disposed to have a good 
government, but this disposition may not always 
prevail. It is difficult to amend confederations; it 
has been attempted in vain, and it is perhaps a 
miracle that we are now met. We must therefore 
improve the opportunity and render the present 
system as perfect as possible. Their good-sense 
and, above all, the necessity of their affairs will in 
duce the people to adopt it. — Votes. 

June 2Qth, Mr. Hamilton observed: That indi 
viduals forming political societies modify their rights 
differently, with regard to suffrage. Examples of it 
are found in all the States. In all of them, some 
individuals are deprived of the right altogether, not 
having the requisite qualification of property. In 
some of the States, the right of suffrage is allowed 
in some cases, and refused in others. To vote for 
a member in one branch a certain quantum of 
property, to vote for a member in another branch 
of the Legislature a higher quantum of property, 

Speeches in the Federal Convention 415 

is required. In like manner, States may modify 
their right of suffrage differently, the larger exer 
cising a larger, the smaller a smaller, share of it. 
But as States are collections of individual men, 
which ought we to respect most, the rights of the 
people composing them, or of the artificial beings 
resulting from the composition? Nothing could be 
more preposterous or absurd than to sacrifice the 
former to the latter. It has been said that if the 
smaller States renounce their equality, they renounce 
at the same time their liberty. The truth is, it is a 
contest for power, not for liberty. Will the men 
composing the small States be less free than those 
composing the larger? The State of Delaware, 
having forty thousand souls, will lose power if she 
has one tenth only of the votes allowed to Pennsyl 
vania, having four hundred thousand; but will the 
people of Delaware be less free, if each citizen has 
an equal vote with each citizen of Pennsylvania? 
He admitted that common residence within the 
same State would produce a certain degree of attach 
ment, and that this principle might have a certain 
influence on public affairs. He thought, however, 
that this might, by some precautions, be in a great 
measure excluded; and that no material incon 
venience could result from it, as there could not be 
any ground for combination among the States whose 
influence was most dreaded. The only considerable 
distinction of interests lay between the carrying and 
non-carrying States, which divides, instead of unit 
ing, the largest States. No considerable incon 
venience had been found from the division of the 

4i 6 Alexander Hamilton 

State of New York into different districts of differ 
ent sizes. Some of the consequences of a dissolution 
of the Union and the establishment of partial con 
federacies had been pointed out. He would add 
another of a most serious nature. Alliances will im 
mediately be formed with different rival and hos 
tile nations of Europe, who will foment disturbances 
among ourselves, and make us parties to all their 
own quarrels. Foreign nations having no American 
dominion are, and must be, jealous of us. Their 
representatives betray the utmost anxiety for our 
fate, and for the result of this meeting, which must 
have an essential influence on it. It had been said 
that respectability in the eyes of foreign nations was 
not the object at which we aimed; that the proper 
object of republican government was domestic tran 
quillity and happiness. This was an ideal distinc 
tion. No government could give us tranquillity 
and happiness at home which did not possess suffi 
cient stability and strength to make us respectable 
abroad. This was the critical moment for forming 
such a government. We should run every risk in 
trusting to future amendments. As yet we retain 
the habits of union. We are weak, and sensible of 
our weakness. Henceforward the motives will be 
come feebler and the difficulties greater. It is a 
miracle that we are now here, exercising our tranquil 
and free deliberations on the subject. It would be 
madness to trust to future miracles. A thousand 
causes must obstruct a reproduction of them. — 
Madison Papers. 

Aug. 1 3th, Col. Hamilton said: That he was, in 

Speeches in the Federal Convention 417 

general, against embarrassing the government with 
minute restrictions.1 There was, on one side, the 
possible danger that had been suggested. On the 
other side, the advantage of encouraging foreigners 
was obvious and admitted. Persons in Europe of 
moderate fortunes will be fond of coming here, 
where they will be on a level with the first citizens. 
He moved that the section be so altered as to re 
quire merely ''citizenship and inhabitancy." The 
right of determining the rule of naturalization will 
then leave a discretion to the Legislature on this 
subject, which will answer every purpose. — Madison 
Papers. 

Sept. 5th, Mr. Hamilton said: That he had been 
restrained from entering into the discussions by his 
dislike of the scheme of government in general ; but 
as he meant to support the plan to be recommended 
as better than nothing, he wished in this place to 
offer a few remarks. He liked the new modification, 
on the whole, better than that in the printed report. 
In this the President was a monster, elected for 
seven years, and ineligible afterward; having great 
powers in appointments to office; and continually 
tempted, by this constitutional disqualification, to 
abuse them in order to subvert the government. 
Although he should be made re-eligible, still, if ap 
pointed by the Legislature, he would be tempted to 

1 Just after this speech, Hamilton, crippled in all his efforts by the 
departure of his colleagues, Yates and Lansing, left the convention, and 
did not return until September. Yates and Lansing had withdrawn 
July 5th, and did not return at all. The State of New York had, 
therefore, no representation, and Hamilton could only cast his indi 
vidual vote, which was, of course, utterly without effect. 
VOL. i.— 27. 

4]8 Alexander Hamilton 

make use of corrupt influence to be continued in 
office. It seemed particularly desirable, therefore, 
that some other mode of election should be devised. 
Considering the different views of different States, 
and the different districts, Northern, Middle, and 
Southern, he concurred with those who thought 
that the votes would not be concentred, and that 
the appointment would, consequently, in the present 
mode, devolve on the Senate. The nomination to 
offices will give great weight to the President. Here, 
then, is a mutual connection and influence, that will 
perpetuate the President, and aggrandize both him 
and the Senate. What is to be the remedy? He 
saw none better than to let the highest number 
of ballots, whether a majority or not, appoint the 
President. What was the objection to this ? Merely 
that too small a number might appoint. But, as 
the plan stands, the Senate may take the candidate 
having the smallest number of votes, and make him 
President. — Madison Papers. 

Sept. 8th, Col. Hamilton expressed himself with 
great earnestness and anxiety in favor of the motion.1 
He avowed himself a friend to a vigorous govern 
ment, but would declare, at the same time, he held 
it essential that the popular branch of it should be 
on a broad foundation. He was seriously of opinion 
that the House of Representatives was on so narrow 
a scale as to be really dangerous, and to warrant a 
jealousy in the people for their liberties. He re 
marked that the connection between the President 

1 By Mr. Williamson, to increase the number of the House of 
Representatives . 

Speeches in the Federal Convention 419 

and Senate would tend to perpetuate him, by corrupt 
influence. It was the more necessary on this ac 
count that a numerous representation in the other 
branch of the Legislature should be established. — 

Sept. loth, Mr. Hamilton seconded the motion,1 
but, he said, with a different view from Mr. Gerry. 
He did not object to the consequences stated by 
Mr. Gerry. There was no greater evil in subject 
ing the people of the United States to the major 
voice, than the people of a particular State. It had 
been wished by many, and was much to have been 
desired, that an easier mode of introducing amend 
ments had been provided by the Articles of the Con 
federation. It was equally desirable now, that an 
easy mode should be established for supplying de 
fects which will probably appear in the new system. 
The mode proposed was not adequate. The State 
Legislatures will not apply for alterations but with 
a view to increase their own powers. The National 
Legislature will be the first to perceive, and will 
be most sensible to, the necessity of amendments; 
and ought also to be empowered, whenever two 
thirds of each branch should concur, to call a con 
vention. There could be no danger in giving this 
power, as the people would finally decide in the case. 
— Madison Papers. 

Sept. 1 7th, Mr. Hamilton expressed his anxiety 
that every member should sign. A few characters 

1 Motion by Mr. Gerry to reconsider Article 19, providing for amend 
ments to the Constitution, because it gave too much power to the 
majority of the States. 

420 Alexander Hamilton 

of consequence, by opposing, or even refusing to 
sign the Constitution, might do infinite mischief by 
kindling the latent sparks that lurk under an en 
thusiasm in favor of the convention, which may 
soon subside. No man's ideas were more remote 
from the plan than his own were known to be ; but 
is it possible to deliberate between anarchy and 
convulsion on one side, and the chance of good to be 
expected from the plan on the other? — Madison 

IMPRESSIONS AS TO THE NEW CONSTITUTION x 

SEPTEMBER, 1787. 

The new Constitution has in favor of its success 
these circumstances: A very great weight of influ 
ence of the persons who framed it, particularly in 
the universal popularity of General Washington. 
The good- will of the commercial interest throughout 
the States, which will give all its efforts to the estab 
lishment of a government capable of regulating, pro 
tecting, and extending the commerce of the Union. 
The good- will of most men of property in the several 
States, who wish a government of the Union able 
to protect them against domestic violence, and the 
depredations which the democratic spirit is apt to 

1 This paper appears in the works in quotation marks, and is also 
given in Hamilton's History of the Republic (iii. , p. 356) . Whether it was 
a letter to a friend, a simple memorandum for the writer's own behoof, 
or a contribution to the newspapers. I have been unable to determine. 
I do not find it in Madison, but whatever the origin or object of the 
paper it is of interest, as showing Hamilton's views of the Constitution 
when the convention adjourned. 

Speeches in the Federal Convention 421 

make on property, and who are besides anxious for 
the respectability of the nation. The hopes of the 
creditors of the United States, that a general govern 
ment possessing the means of doing it, will pay the 
debt of the Union. A strong belief in the people at 
large of the insufficiency of the present Confedera 
tion to preserve the existence of the Union, and of 
the necessity of the Union to their safety and pros 
perity; of course, a strong desire of a change, and 
a predisposition to receive well the propositions of 
the convention. 

Against its success is to be put the dissent of two 
of three important men x in the convention, who 
will think their characters pledged to defeat the 
plan; the influence of many inconsiderable men in 
possession of considerable offices under the State 
governments, who will fear a diminution of their 
consequence, power, and emolument, by the estab 
lishment of the general government, and who can 
hope for nothing there; the influence of some con 
siderable men 2 in office, possessed of talents and 
popularity, who, partly from the same motives, and 
partly from a desire of playing a part in a convulsion 
for their own aggrandizement, will oppose the quiet 
adoption of the new government (some considerable 
men out of office, from motives of ambition, may be 
disposed to act the same part). Add to these causes 

1 Gerry, of Massachusetts, and Randolph and Mason, of Virginia, 
refused to sign. Yates and Lansing, of New York, and Luther Martin, 
of Martin, of Maryland, left the convention before the work was com 
pleted. Randolph came over to the support of the Constitution, but 
all the others resisted its ratification by their respective States. 

a For example, George Clinton, Governor of New York. 

422 Alexander Hamilton 

the disinclination of the people to taxes, and of 
course to a strong government; the opposition of 
all men much in debt, who will not wish to see a 
government established, one object of which is to 
restrain the means of cheating creditors ; the demo- 
cratical jealousy of the people, which may be alarmed 
at the appearance of institutions that may seem 
calculated to place the power of the community in 
few hands, and to raise a few individuals to stations 
of great pre-eminence; and the influence of some 
foreign powers, who, from different motives, will not 
wish to see an energetic government established 
throughout the States. 

In this view of the subject it is difficult to form 
any judgment whether the plan will be adopted or 
rejected. It must be essentially matter of conjec 
ture. The present appearances and all other cir 
cumstances considered, the probability seems to be 
on the side of its adoption. 

But the causes operating against its adoption are 
powerful, and there will be nothing astonishing in 
the contrary. 

If it do not finally obtain, it is probable the dis 
cussion of the question will beget such struggles, 
animosities, and heats in the community, that this 
circumstance, conspiring with the real necessity of an 
essential change in our present situation, will pro 
duce civil war. Should this happen, whatever par 
ties prevail, it is probable governments very different 
from the present in their principles will be estab 
lished. A dismemberment of the Union, and mon 
archies in different portions of it, may be expected. 

Speeches in the Federal Convention 423 

It may, however, happen that no civil war will take 
place, but several republican confederacies be estab 
lished between different combinations of the par 
ticular States. 

A reunion with Great Britain, from universal dis 
gust at a state of commotion, is not impossible, 
though not much to be feared. The most plausible 
shape of such a business would be the establishment 
of a son of the present monarch in the supreme gov 
ernment of this country, with a family compact. 

If the government be adopted it is probable Gen 
eral Washington will be the President of the United 
States. This will ensure a wise choice of men to 
administer the government, and a good administra 
tion. A good administration will conciliate the 
confidence and affection of the people, and perhaps 
enable the government to acquire more consist 
ency than the proposed constitution seems to prom 
ise for so great a country. It may then triumph 
altogether over the State governments, and reduce 
them to an entire subordination, dividing the larger 
States into smaller districts. The organs of the 
general government may also acquire additional 
strength. 

If this should not be the case in the course of a 
few years, it is probable that the contests about the 
boundaries of power between the particular govern 
ments and the general government, and the mo 
mentum of the larger States in such contests, will 
produce a dissolution of the Union. This, after all, 
seems to be the most likely result. 

But it is almost arrogance in so complicated a 

424 Alexander Hamilton 

subject, depending so entirely on the incalculable 
fluctuations of the human passions, to attempt even 
a conjecture about the event. 

It will be eight or nine months before any certain 
judgment can be formed respecting the adoption of 
the plan. 

COMMENTS ON THE OPPOSITION TO 
THE CONSTITUTION 

1787. 

Mr. Hamilton, in his absence from New York on 
public duty (with how much propriety and temper 
his fellow-citizens must decide), has been attacked, 
by name, as the writer of a publication printed in 
Mr. Childs' paper of the 2ist of July last. In fixing 
that publication upon him, there is certainly no mis 
take; nor did he ever mean to be concealed.1 

He left his name with the printer, to be disclosed 
to any person who should apply for it on the part 
of the Governor, with instructions to make that 
circumstance known ; which was accordingly done. 
The fairness of this conduct speaks for itself. The 
citizens of the State have too much good-sense to be 
deceived into an opinion that it could have been 
dictated by a wanton disposition to calumniate a 
meritorious character. They must and will con- 

1 July 2ist, Hamilton published a brief note in a New York news 
paper sharply criticising Governor Clinton's course of opposition to the 
convention and its work. He was led to do this by the belief that 
Clinton had caused the withdrawal of Yates and Lansing. The points 
made in the letter of July aist are all covered by these "comments," 
which were drawn out by a reply (signed "Republican") to the letter 
of July 2 1 st. 

Speeches in the Federal Convention 425 

sider it as an honorable and open attempt to un 
mask, what appeared to the writer, the pernicious 
intrigue of a man high in office, to preserve power 
and emolument to himself, at the expense of the 
union, the peace, and the happiness of America. 

To say that it would have been derogatory to the 
first magistrate of the State to enter the lists in a 
newspaper with an "anonymous scribbler," is a 
miserable subterfuge. Though Mr. Hamilton, to 
avoid the appearance of ostentation, did not put his 
name to that piece, yet, having left it with the 
printer to be communicated to the party concerned, 
there is no pretence to consider it in the light of an 
anonymous publication. If the matter alleged had 
been false, the Governor had his choice of two modes 
of vindicating himself from the assertion: one, by 
giving a simple and direct denial to it in the public 
prints; the other, by having a personal explana 
tion on the subject with the writer. Neither of 
these modes could have wounded his dignity. The 
first is practised in most governments where pub 
lic opinion is respected. A short paragraph to the 
following effect would have answered the purpose: 

" The printer of this paper is atithorized to assure 
the public that his Excellency the Governor never 
made use of the expressions attributed to him in a 
publication contained in Mr. Childs' paper of the 2ist 
July, nor of any others of similar import." 

This would have thrown it upon Mr. Hamilton to 
bring forward to public view the sources of his in 
formation, and the proofs of his charge. And this 
he has too much regard for his reputation not to 

426 Alexander Hamilton 

have been prepared to do. This he is still ready to 
do, whenever such a denial shall appear. 

The Governor, if he had any objection to this mode 
of proceeding, might have had recourse to the other, 
that of a personal explanation with the writer. Mr. 
Hamilton would have conceived himself bound, by 
the principles of candor and honor, to declare on 
what grounds he had proceeded; and, if he could 
have been satisfied they were erroneous, to retract 
the imputations founded upon them. Would it have 
impaired the dignity of the first magistrate of a re 
public to have had such an explanation from any 
reputable citizen? Would it have impaired his dig 
nity to have had such an explanation with a citizen, 
who is at this moment acting in an important and 
delicate trust by the appointment of the Legislature 
of the State? 

Mr. Hamilton freely submits to the judgment of 
his fellow-citizens, whether there was any thing in 
the manner of his animadversions that preclude such 
an explanation. They were strong and pointed; 
but he flatters himself they were free from indecorum. 
He states the charge as matter of report; and makes 
his observations hypothetically, even seeming to 
admit a possibility of misrepresentation. As he was 
not himself present at the conversation, but spoke 
from the information of those who were, he could 
not with propriety have expressed himself in more 
positive terms. As he was speaking of an officer of 
the first rank in the State, he was disposed to use 
as much moderation in the manner of exhibiting his 
misconduct as was consistent with that explicitness 

Speeches in the Federal Convention 427 

and energy which were necessary to place it in its 
proper light. 

These remarks, while they explain Mr. Hamilton's 
motives, will serve to refute the cavil respecting his 
doubt of the truth of the fact alleged by him. He 
now declares that, from the nature of his informa 
tion, he has no doubt of the kind; and that, since the 
publication, he has understood, from different par 
tisans of the Governor, that he did not deny the ex 
pressions attributed to him to be in substance true, 
with some minute and unessential distinctions. 

It is insinuated that the circulation of the fact is 
calculated to produce the evil pretended to be 
guarded against, by diffusing through the com 
munity a knowledge of the Governor's sentiments. 

This remark admits of an obvious answer. If his 
Excellency was predetermined to oppose the meas 
ures of the convention, as his conduct indicates, he 
would take care himself to propagate his sentiments 
in the manner in which it could be done with most 
effect. This appears to have been his practice. It 
was therefore proper that the antidote should go 
along with the poison; and that the community 
should be apprised that he was capable of forming 
such a predetermination before, it can be presumed, 
he had any knowledge of the measures themselves 
on which to found his judgment. 

A cry is attempted to be raised against the pub 
lication of Mr. Hamilton, as if it were an invasion of 
the right of the first magistrate of the State to de 
liver his sentiments on a matter of public concern. 
The fallacy of this artifice will easily be detected. 

428 Alexander Hamilton 

The Governor has an undoubted right to give his 
sentiments freely on every public measure. Under 
proper circumstances it will be always his duty to do 
it. But every right may be abused by a wrong exer 
cise of it. Even the constitutional powers vested in 
him may be so employed as to subject him justly not 
only to censure, but to impeachment. The only 
question then is whether he has, in the present in 
stance, used his right properly or improperly; 
whether it became him, by anticipation, to endeavor 
to prejudice the community against the "unknown 
and undetermined measures of a body, to which the 
general voice of the Union had delegated the im 
portant trust of concerting and proposing a plan for 
reforming the national Constitution/' Let every 
man answer this question to himself. 

The apologists for the Governor, in the intemperate 
ardor of their zeal for his character, seem to forget 
another right very precious to the citizens of a free 
country, — that of examining the conduct of their 
rulers. These have an undoubted right, within the 
limits of the Constitution, to speak and to act . . . 
their sentiments; but the citizen has an equal right 
to discuss the propriety of these sentiments, or of 
the manner of advancing or supporting them. To 
attempt to abridge this last right, by rendering 
the exercise of it odious, is to attempt to abridge a 
privilege, the most essential of any to the security 
of the people. The laws, which afford sufficient pro 
tection to the magistrate, will punish the excess of 
this privilege; within the bounds they allow, it is 
the bulwark of public liberty. 

Speeches in the Federal Convention 429 

But observations of either kind might mutually 
have been spared. There is no danger that the rights 
of a man at the head of the government (possessing 
all the influence to be derived from long continuance 
in office, the disposition of lucrative places and con 
summate talents for popularity) can be injured by the 
voice of a private individual. There is as little 
danger that the spirit of the people of this country 
will ever tolerate attempts to seduce, to awe, or 
to clamor them out of the privilege of bringing 
the conduct of men in power to the bar of public 
condemnation . 

To all the acclamation and abuse with which the 
Republican winds up his performance and labors to 
mislead the public attention from its true object, but 
one answer will be given. It is the trick of the party 
to traduce every independent man opposed to their 
views, the better to preserve to themselves that 
power and consequence to which they have no other 
title than their arts of deceiving the people. 

Mr. Hamilton can, however, defy all their malev 
olent ingenuity to produce a single instance of his 
conduct, public or private, inconsistent with the 
strictest rules of integrity and honor — a single in 
stance that may even denominate him selfish or 
interested — a single instance in which he has either 
"forfeited" the confidence of the people or failed of 
obtaining any proof of their favor for which he has 
been a candidate. It would be ingratitude in him 
not to acknowledge that the marks of their con 
fidence have greatly exceeded his deserts. 

APPENDIX 

SINCE the note to the Vindication of Congress (p. 3) 
was printed, a thorough search among the Hamilton pa 
pers has shown that all that exists of the Vindication 
among the original MSS. has been printed, with the excep 
tion of the following additional paragraph : 

" It may appear extraordinary that these observations 
should be introductory to remarks on the transaction 
which at this time principally engages the public atten 
tion, to wit, the removal of Congress from this city ; but 
there is a chain of ideas which naturally connects the gen 
eral opinion of Congress with the judgment to be passed 
upon their conduct in this particular instance. This 
chain will easily be traced by men of discernment." 

Nothing has been discovered to show where Mr. J. C. 
Hamilton obtained the extracts, apparently from the 
Vindication, given in his History of the Republic, ii., 564 
et seq. 

43* 

THIS BOOK IS DUE ON THE LAST DATE 
STAMPED BELOW 

AN INITIAL FINE OF 25 CENTS 

WILL BE ASSESSED FOR FAILURE TO RETURN THIS BOOK 
ON THE DATE DUE. THE PENALTY WILL INCREASE TO 
50 CENTS ON THE FOURTH DAY AND TO $1.00 ON THE 
SEVENTH DAY OVERDUE. 

UClfllBI 
UEJUN301980 

I 

Vt JUN 8 1985 

UCU 

E JUN 3 0 1986. 

D LIBRARY 

M 

EJUN 30 

UCU UBKAKY 

DUE JUN 16 1969 J^M 

9/60(B801084 458 

£302 
H3 

v. / 

21^620 

3 1175 00371 1317