H*r 

^ 

BOOK 973.4.H18 V.8 c. 1 
HAMILTON # WORKS 

^^^Si-^eQ&^^^S-fe,- 

Constitutional jEMtlon 

The Works of 

e 

lOO- 

Alexander Hamilton 

Edited by 

Henry Cabot Lodge 

^* The sacred rights of mankind are not to be rummaged for among old parchments or 
musty records. They are written, as with a sunbeam, in the whole volume of human nature, 
by the hand of the Divinity itself, and can never be erased or obscured by mortal power." 

[Hamilton— Z/^^ Farmer Refuted^ ^IIS-, ■^^- i8.] 

" We are laboring hard to establish in this country principles more and more national^ 
and free from all foreign ingredients, so that we may be neither ' Greeks nor Trojans,' but 
truly Americans." — [Hamilton to King, 1796, Rx.. 39.] 

Volume VIII 

G. P. Putnam's Sons 
New York and London 
^be fcnickecbocKer ipresa 

Ube fintcfierboc^et ^ress, Dew l^rfc 

CONTENTS 

PAGE 

Miscellaneous Papers: 

Cincinnati 3 

Speeches in the New York Assembly, 1787 . 5 

Speech on Acceding to the Independence of 

Vermont ....... 42 

EuLOGiuM on Major-General Greene . . 63 
Presidential Etiquette: 

Hamilton to Washington .... 83 

Washington to Hamilton . . . . 87 

Public Lands: 

Report of a Uniform System for the Dis- 
position OF THE Lands, the Property 
OF THE United States .... 87 

Heads of Topics for President's Speech 

OF December 8, 1790 .... 94 

Apportionment of Representatives: — Ham- 
ilton TO Washington .... 95 

Indian Affairs ...... 100 

President's Speech ..... 102 

Indian Affairs . . ,. . . . 109 

Convening Congress: — Hamilton to Wash- 
ington . . . . . . .110 

Objects to be Communicated in Speech and 

Messages . . . . . . .115 

President's Speech . . . . .116 

President's Message . . . . .119 

Proclamation for a National Thanksgiving. 120 
IV 

Contents 

Miscellaneous Papers — Continued: 

Explanation . . . . . . .122 

Washington's Speech to Congress . . 153 
Message for Washington to Congress in 
Reply to a Call for Papers Relating 

to the Treaty with Great Britain . 161 

Farewell Address ...... 181 

Washington's Farewell Address . . . 187 

Part of Washington's Speech to Congress . 214 
Address to the Electors of the State op 

New York 'Ssi 223 

Examination of Jefferson's Message to 

Congress of December 7, 1801 . . 246 

Lansing or Burr 373 

Law Briefs ....... 376 

Carriage Tax ....... 378 

The Law of Libel . . . . . . 383 

Speech in the Case of Harry Croswell . 387 

Fragment on the French Revolution . . 425 

Defence of the Funding System . . . 429 

\ 

MISCELLANEOUS PAPERS 

VOL. VIII. — 1. 


CINCINNATI ^ 

New York, July 6, 1786. 

'X'HE committee to whom was referred the pro- 
^ ceedings of the Society of the Cincinnati, at 
their last general meeting, beg leave to report, that 
they have attentively considered the alterations pro- 
posed at the meeting to be made in the original Con- 
stitution of that Society ; and, though they highly 
approve the motives which dictated those alterations, 
they are of opinion it would be inexpedient to adopt 
them, and this chiefly on the two following accounts : 
''First. — Because the institution, as proposed to 
be altered, would contain in itself no certain pro- 
vision for the continuance of the Society, beyond 
the lives of the present members ; this point being 
left to the regulation of charters, which may never be 

I The Society of the Cincinnati, founded in 1783, by the Revolu- 
tionary officers, excited a great deal of foolish hostility on account of 
what were considered its perilous aristocratic military and hereditary 
features. Prejudice was so strong that modifications were considered 
necessary, and were finally made in accordance with the advice of 
Washington, President of the Society. The main alterations were 
made in 1784, at the first general meeting, but the question continued 
to be mooted for some years, and was kept active by the formation of 
the State Societies, and it was n this connection that the above report 
was written. 

4 Alexander Hamilton 

obtained, and which, in the opinion of this commit- 
tee, so far as affects this object, ought never to be 
granted, since the dangers apprehended from the 
institution could then only cease to be imaginary, 
when it should receive the sanction of a legal estab- 
lishment. The utmost the Society ought to wish or 
ask from the several legislatures is, to enable it to 
appoint trustees to hold its property, for the charita- 
ble purposes to which it is destined." 

'' Second. — Because by a fundamental article it 
obliges the Society of each State to lend its funds to 
the State ; a provision which would be improper, for 
two reasons: one, that in many cases the Society 
might be able to dispose of its funds to a much 
greater advantage; the other, that the State might 
not always choose to borrow from the Society." 

But while the committee entertained this opin- 
ion with respect to the proposed alterations, they 
are, at the same time, equally of opinion, that some 
alterations in the original Constitution will be 
proper, as well in deference to the sense of many of 
our fellow citizens, as in conformity to the true 
spirit of the institution itself. The alterations they 
have in view respect principally the duration or 
succession of the Society, and the distinction be- 
tween honorary and regular members. As to the 
first, the provision intended to be made appears to 
them to be expressed in terms not sufficiently ex- 
plicit; and, as far as it may intend, an hereditary 
succession by right of primogeniture, is liable to this 
objection — that it refers to birth what ought to belong 
to merit only: a principle inconsistent with the genius 

The New York Assembly 5 

of the Society founded on friendship and patriotism. 
As to the second, the distinction holds up an odious 
difference between men who have served their coun- 
try in one way, and those who have served it in an- 
other, and improper in a Society where the character 
of patriot ought to be an equal title to all its members. 
The committee, however, decline proposing any 
specific substitute for the parts of the original con- 
stitution which appear to them exceptionable; as 
they are of opinion any alterations necessary to be 
made can only be digested in a general meeting of 
the Society, specially authorized to agree upon and 
finally establish those alterations. With a view to 
this, they beg leave to recommend that a circular- 
letter be written from the Society to the different 
State Societies, suggesting the expediency of in- 
structing and empowering their delegates at the 
next general meeting, to concur in such alterations 
as may appear to that meeting proper, after a full 
communication of what shall be found to be the 
sense of the several Societies. 

SPEECHES IN THE NEW YORK ASSEMBLY, 

1787^ 

JANUARY 19TH. — SPEECH ON THE ANSWER OF THE 
HOUSE TO GOVERNOR CLINTON 'S MESSAGE^ 

This now leads us to examine the important ques- 
tion presented to us by the proposed amendment. 

' These Speeches, with the exception of that on the Independence of 
Vermont, are now included for the first time in Hamilton's Works. 
They are taken from the contemporary newspaper report. 

2 Congress had asked for an extra session of the Legislature, to 

6 Alexander Hamilton 

For my own part, I have seen with regret the pro- 
gress of this business, and it was my earnest wish 
to have avoided the present discussion. I saw with 
regret the first appHcation of Congress to the Gover- 
nor, because it was easy to perceive that it involved 
a delicate dilemma: Either the Governor, from con- 
sideration of inconvenience, might refuse to call the 
Assembly, which would derogate from the respect 
due to Congress; or he might call them, and, by 
being brought together at an unreasonable period 
before the time appointed by law for the purpose, 
they would meet with reluctance and perhaps with 
a disposition less favorable than might be wished to 
the views of Congress themselves. 

I saw, with equal regret, the next step of the busi- 
ness. If a conference had been desired with Con- 
gress, it might have been had — circumstances might 
have been explained; reasons might have been as- 
signed satisfactory to them for not calling the Legis- 
lature, and the affair might have been compromised. 
But instead of this, the Governor thought fit to an- 
swer by a flat denial, founded on a constitutional 
amendment, and the idea of an invasion of the right 
of free deliberation was brought into view. I earn- 
estly wished the matter to have rested here. I 
might appeal to gentlemen in the House — and par- 
ticularly to the honorable gentleman who is so zeal- 
ous in support of the amendment — that, before the 

reconsider their action as to granting revenue, and Governor Clinton 
had refused to call an extra session as requested. This was the point 
involved in the debate on the answer of the House to the Governor's 
message, which drew with it approval or censure of the Governor's 
course. 

The New York Assembly 7 

speech appeared, I discovered a solicitude that, by 
passing the subject over in silence, it might give 
occasion to the present discussion. 

H( He H: Hi H( H( 

The question by the honorable member on my 
right has been wrongly stated. He says it is this: 
whether a request of Congress to convene the Legis- 
lature is conclusive upon the Governor of the State? 
or whether a bare intimation of that honorable body 
lays him under a constitutional necessity of con- 
vening the Legislature? But this is not the true 
question. From the shape in which the business 
comes before us, the inquiry truly is: whether a 
solemn application of the United States to the Ex- 
ecutive of the State to convene the Legislature for 
the purpose of deliberating on a matter which is 
considered by that body as of essential importance 
to the Union, and which has been viewed in a similar 
light by most of the other States individually, is 
such an extraordinary occasion as left the Governor 
under no constitutional impediment to a compliance ? 
And, it may be added, whether that application, 
under all the circumstances, was an attempt to in- 
vade the freedom of deliberation in this House ? 

Here let us ask, what does the Constitution say 
upon the subject? Simply this, that the governor 
"shall have power to convene the Assembly and 
Senate on extraordinary occasions." But what is 
an extraordinary occasion? What circumstances 
are to concur, what ingredients combine, to consti- 
tute one? What general rule can be imagined by 
which to define the precise meaning of these vague 

8 Alexander Hamilton 

terms, and draw the line between an ordinary and 
an extraordinary occasion? Will the gentleman on 
my right (that is, the ever-ready-to-jump-up-in-a- 
Jack-in-the-box - fashion - to-say-it-is-n 't- when- A . -H . - 
says-it-is Mr. Jones) furnish us with such a criterion? 
Profoundly skilled as he is in law (at least the local 
laws of the State) , I fancy it will be difficult for him 
to invent one that will suit his present purpose. Let 
him consult his law books, they will not relieve his 
embarrassment. It is easy to see that the clause 
allows the greatest latitude to opinion. What one 
may think a very extraordinary occasion, another 
may think a very ordinary one, according to his bias, 
his interest, or his intellect. 

If there is any rule at all, it is this: the governor 
shall not call the Legislature with a view to the ordi- 
nary details of the State administration. Whatever 
does not fall within this description, and has any 
pretensions to national importance in any view, 
leaves him at liberty to exercise the discretion vested 
in him by the Constitution. There is at least no 
constitutional bar in the way. The United States 
are entrusted with the management of the general 
concerns and interests of the community ; they have 
the power of war and peace ; they have the power of 
treaty. 

Our affairs with respect to foreign nations are left 
to their direction. We must entertain very diminu- 
tive ideas of the Government of the Union, to con- 
ceive that their earnest call on a subject which they 
deem of great national magnitude, which affects 
their engagements with two respectable foreign pow- 

The New York Assembly 9 

ers, France and the United Netherlands, which relates 
to the preservation of their faith at home and abroad, 
is not such an occasion as would justify the Execu- 
tive, upon the terms of the Constitution, in conven- 
ing the Legislature. If this doctrine is maintained, 
where will it lead to ? what kind of emergency must 
exist before the Constitution will authorize the Gov- 
ernor to call the Legislature ? Is the preservation of 
our national faith a matter of such trivial moment? 
Is the fulfilment of the public engagements, domestic 
and foreign, of no moment? Must we wait for the 
fleets of the United Netherlands or of France to en- 
force the observance of them, before the Executive 
will be at liberty to give the Legislature an oppor- 
tunity of deliberating on the means of their just de- 
mand? This is straining the indefinite words of 
the Legislature to a most unreasonable extreme. It 
would be a tenable position to say that the call of the 
United States is alone sufficient to satisfy the idea 
of an extraordinary occasion. It is easy to conceive 
that such a posture of European affairs might exist 
as would render it necessary to convene the different 
Legislatures to adopt measures for the public safety, 
and at the same time inexpedient to disclose the ob- 
ject till they were assembled. Will we say that Con- 
gress would be bound to communicate the object of 
their call to the Executive of every State; or that 
the Executive of this State, in complying with their 
request, would be guilty of a violation of the Con- 
stitution? But the present case is not that of a 
mere general request; it is specifically to deliberate 
upon an object of acknowledged importance in one 

lo Alexander Hamilton 

view or another. On one hand it is alleged to be es- 
sential to the honor, interest, and perhaps the exist- 
ence of the Union; on the other, it is said to be on 
principles subversive of the Constitution and dan- 
gerous to the liberty of the subject. It is therefore 
a matter of delicacy and moment. And the urgent 
call of the Union to have it considered, cannot fall 
within the notion of so common and so ordinary an 
occasion as would prohibit the Executive from sum- 
moning a meeting of the Legislature. 

The only argument urged to denominate it such, 
is that it had been recently determined upon by the 
Legislature. But there is an evident fallacy in this 
position. The call was addressed to a new and 
different body, really different in the contemplation 
of the Constitution, and materially different in fact 
with respect to the members who compose it. A 
large proportion of the members of the present 
House were not the members of the last. For 
aught that either Congress or the Governor could 
officially know, there might have been a total change 
in the individuals, and, therefore, a total difference 
in the sentiments. No inference, of course, could 
be fairly drawn from the conduct of the last Legis- 
lature to that of the present. Indeed, however it 
might be wished to prepossess the members of the 
former House with a contrary idea, it is plain that 
there is no necessary connection between what they 
did at that time and what it may be proper for them 
to do now. The act of the last session proves the 
conviction of the House then, that the grant of the 
impost was an eligible measure. Many members 

The New York Assembly n 

were led to suppose that it would answer the pur- 
pose, and might have been accepted by Congress. 
If the experiment has shown that they were mistaken 
in their expectations, and if it should appear to them 
that Congress could not for good reasons accept it, 
the same motives which induced them to the grant 
already made, would determine them to consent to 
such alterations as would accommodate it to the 
views of Congress and the other States, and make it 
practicable to carry the system into execution. 

It may be observed that as Congress accompanied 
their request with an explanation of the object, they, 
by that mode of procedure, submitted the whole 
matter to the discretion of the Governor, to act ac- 
cording to the estimate formed in his own mind as 
to its importance. 

It is not denied that the Governor had a discre- 
tion upon the occasion. It is not contended that he 
was under a constitutional necessity to convene the 
Legislature. The resolution of Congress itself does 
not imply or intimate this. They do not pretend to 
require, they only earnestly recommend. The Gov- 
ernor might at his peril refuse, responsible, however, 
for any ill consequences that might have attended 
his refusal. But the thing contended for is this: 
that the call of the United States, under the circum- 
stances, was sufficient to satisfy the terms of the 
Constitution empowering him to convene the Legis- 
lature on extraordinary occasions; and left him at 
full liberty to comply. 

The admission of his discretion does not admit 
that it was properly exercised, nor does it admit that 

12 Alexander Hamilton 

the footing upon which he placed his refusal was 
proper. It does not admit that the Constitution in- 
terposed an obstacle in his way, or that the request 
of Congress implied any thing hostile to the right of 
free deliberation. 

This is the aspect under which the business pre- 
sents itself to our consideration, as well from the cor- 
respondence between Congress and the Governor, as 
from the manner in which it is ushered to us in the 
speech. A general approbation of his conduct is an 
approbation of the principle by which it is professed 
to have been actuated. 

Are we ready to say that the Constitution would 
have been violated by a compliance ? Are we ready to 
say that the call upon us to deliberate is an attempt 
to infringe the freedom of deliberation ? If we are not 
ready to say both, we must reject the amendment. 

In particular, I think it must strike us all that 
there is something singularly forced in intimating 
that the application of Congress to the Governor of 
the State to convene a new Legislature to consider 
a very important national subject, has any thing in 
it dangerous to the freedom of our deliberations. 

I flatter myself we should all have felt ourselves as 
much at liberty to have pursued our sentiments if we 
had met upon an extraordinary call, as we do now 
when met according to our own appointments. There 
yet remains an important light in which the subject 
merits consideration. I mean as it respects the au- 
thority of the State itself: By deciding that the ap- 
plication of Congress, upon which the debate turns, 
was not such an extraordinary occasion as left the 

The New York Assembly 13 

Governor at liberty to call the Legislature, we may 
form a precedent of a very dangerous tendency; we 
may impose a sense on the Constitution very differ- 
ent from the true meaning of it, and may fetter the 
present or a future executive with very inconvenient 
restraints. A few more such proceedings may tie 
up the hands of the Governor in such a manner as 
would either oblige him to act at an extreme peril, 
or to omit acting when public exigencies required it. 
The mere sense of one governor would be no pre- 
cedent for his successor; but that sense, approved by 
both Houses of the Legislature, would become a rule 
of conduct. Suppose a few more precedents of the 
kind, on different combinations of circumstances 
equally strong, and let us ask ourselves : What would 
be the situation of the Governor whenever he came 
to deliberate on the propriety of exercising the dis- 
cretion in this respect vested in him by the Constitu- 
tion? Would he not be apt to act with a degree of 
caution, or, rather, timidity, which, in certain emer- 
gencies, might be productive of very pernicious con- 
sequences? A mere intimation of the Constitution 
to him not to call the Legislature in their recess upon 
every trifling affair, which is its true import, would 
be turned into an injunction not to do it but upon 
occasions of the last necessity. 

We see, therefore, that the question upon which 
we are called to decide is not less delicate as it re- 
spects the Constitution of the State itself, than as it 
respects the Union ; and that, in every possible view, 
it is most prudent to avoid the determination. Let 
the conduct of the Governor stand on its own merits. 

14 Alexander Hamilton 

If he was right, our approbation will not make him 
more right; if he was wrong, it would be improper 
to sanction his error. 

Several things have been said in the debate which 
have no connection with it; but to prevent their 
making improper impressions, it may not be amiss to 
take some notice of them. The danger of a power 
in Congress to compel the convening of the Legisla- 
ture at their pleasure has been strongly insisted upon. 
It has been urged that, if they possessed it, they 
might make it an engine to fatigue the Legislature 
into a compliance with their measures. Instances of 
an abuse of a like power in the Crown under the 
former government have been cited. 

It is a sufficient answer to all this to say that no 
such power has been contended for. I do not assert 
that their request obliged the Governor to convene 
the Legislature. I only maintain that their request 
on an important national subject was such an occa- 
sion as left him free to do it without any color for 
imputing to him a breach of the Constitution ; and 
that, from motives of respect to the Union, and to 
avoid any further degradation of its authority, al- 
ready at too low an ebb, he ought to have complied. 
Admitting, in the fullest extent, that it would be 
dangerous to allow to Congress the power of requir- 
ing the Legislature to be convened at pleasure, yet 
no injury nor inconvenience can result from suppos- 
ing the call of the United States upon a matter by 
them deemed of importance to be an occasion suffi- 
ciently extraordinary to authorize not to oblige the 
governor to comply with it. 

The New York Assembly 15 

I cannot forbear remarking that it is a common 
artifice to endeavor to insinuate a resemblance be-^i 
tween the king under the former government and I 
Congress, although no two things could be more : 
unlike each other. Nothing can be more dissimilar 
than a monarch, permanent, hereditary, the source 
of honor and emolument; and a republican body, 
composed of individuals appointed annually, liable 
to be recalled within the year, and subject to a con- 
tinual rotation, which, with few exceptions, is the 
fountain neither of honor nor emolument. If we 
will exercise our judgments, we shall plainly see that 
no such resemblance exists, and that all inferences 
deducted from the comparison must be false. 

Upon every occasion, however foreign such ob- 
servations may be, we hear a loud cry raised about 
the danger of intrusting power to Congress ; we are , 
told it is dangerous to trust power anywhere; that I 
power is liable to abuse, — with a variety of trite max- ' 
ims of the same kind. General propositions of this na- 
ture are easily framed, the truth of which cannot be 
denied, but they rarely convey any precise idea. To 
these we might oppose other propositions, equally 
true and equally indefinite. It might be said that 
too little power is as dangerous as too much ; that it 
leads to anarchy, and froni anarchy to despotism. 
But the question still recurs: What is the too much 
or too little? Where is the measure or standard to 
ascertain the happy mean? 

Power must be granted, or civil society cannot 
exist ; the possibility of abuse is no argument against 
the thing. This possibility is incident to every 

1 6 Alexander Hamilton 

species of power, however placed or modified. The 
United States, for instance, have the power of war 
and peace; it cannot be disputed that conjunctures 
might occur in which that power might be turned 
against the rights of the citizen. But where can we 
better place it? In short, where else can we place 
it at all ? 

In our State constitutions, we might discover 
powers liable to be abused to very dangerous pur- 
poses. I shall instance only the council appoint- 
ments. In that council the governor claims and 
exercises the power of nominating to all others. 

This power of nomination, in its operation, 
amounts to a power of appointment, for it can always 
be so managed as to bring in persons agreeable to 
him and exclude all others. Suppose a governor 
disposed to make this an instrument of personal 
influence and aggrandizement ; suppose him inclined 
to exclude from office all independent men, and to 
fill the different departments of the State with persons 
devoted to himself, what is to hinder him from doing 
it ? Who can say how far the influence arising from 
such a prerogative might be carried? Perhaps this 
power, if closely inspected, is a more proper subject 
of republican jealousy, than any power possessed by 
or asked by the United States — fluctuating and vari- 
able as this body is. But as my intention is not to 
instil any unnecessary jealousies, I shall prosecute 
these observations no further. They are only urged 
to show the imperfections of himian institutions, and 
to confirm the principle that the possibility of a 
power being abused is no argimient against its exist- 

The New York Assembly 17 

ence. Upon the whole, let us venture with caution 
upon constitutional ground. Let us not court nor 
invite discussions of this kind. Let us not endeavor 
still more to weaken and degrade the Federal Govern- 
ment by heaping fresh marks of contempt on its 
authority. Perhaps the time is not far distant when 
we may be inclined to disapprove what we now seem 
anxious to commend, and may wish we had cherished 
the Union with as much zeal as we now discover 
apprehension of its encroachment. 

I hope, Mr. Chairman, the House will not agree 
to the amendment. In saying this I am influenced 
by no other motive than a sense of duty. I trust my 
conduct will be considered in this light. I cannot 
give my consent to put any thing upon our minutes 
which, it appears to me, we may one day have 
occasion to wish obliterated from them. 

January 2jd 

[The House resolved itself into a Committee of the Whole on the 
paragraph in the election bill enabling the inspector to take aside any 
ignorant person and examine him privately touching his ballot. A 
debate arose.] 

Col. Hamilton thought it was very apparent, if 
the clause prevailed, that it would tend to increase 
rather than prevent an improper influence. For, 
though an inspector takes an oath that his conduct 
shall be impartial, yet he can easily interpret the 
oath so as to correspond with his own wishes. If 
he is an honest man, he will think the public good 
concerned in promoting a candidate to whom he is 
attached; and under this impression may see no 
harm in recommending him to a person offering his 

VOL. VIII.— 2. 

t8 Alexander Hamilton 

vote. His suggestion will be generally attended 
with success, and the consequence will be that the 
inspector will have the disposition of the votes of 
almost all unlettered persons in favor of the party to 
which he inclines. Here, then, is a more concentred 
influence over the illiterate and uninformed part of 
the community, than they would have been subject 
to if left to themselves. Here they will be liable to 
an influence more dangerous than the one we wish 
to avoid. The question then is, whether it is better 
to leave them to an accidental influence or imposi- 
tion, or to subject them to a more regular and exten- 
sive influence. The appointment of inspectors will 
then become more than it is, an object of party, and 
it will always be in their power to turn the scale of a 
contested election. On the contrary, if the voters 
are left to themselves, the activity of the different 
parties will make the chance equal; and the influ- 
ence on one hand will be balanced by an equal degree 
on the other. I move we strike out the clause. 

[Mr. Jones did not agree; thought inspector's influence would be 
good, he being under oath, and a man of reputation. Mr. Harper 
thought inspectors should be obliged not to mention, nominate, or 
propose any person whatever.] 

Col. Hamilton observed this was one of those sub- 
jects more plausible in theory than practice. The 
gentleman's reply did not answer, nor could it, the 
objections he had made. The question is, whether 
it is better to let the illiterate take the chance of im- 
position from two parties equally active, the imposi- 
tion of the one side being equally balanced by the 
exertions of the other, or leave it to party views con- 

The New York Assembly 19 

centred in one person on whom the certain fate of 
the election depends. I do not mean to impeach the 
actions of the inspectors, for at present they can 
have little bias; but if the clause takes place, though 
an inspector means to do his duty impartially, yet I 
believe his friendly attention to A being more than 
to B will lead us to conceive that he will have little 
scruple to ask for the vote for A, whom he recom- 
mends to be as good or a better person than the 
other. Now if this happen, sure, there are very few 
ignorant persons but will be greatly influenced by 
such inspectors, and on them turns the fate of the 
elections. There is also another reason which should 
induce us not to admit the proposed mode: it will 
occasion a great delay, as some inspectors will have 
to take down and examine the tickets proposed by 
the illiterate, while the others will find it difficult to 
attend to the polls. There is therefore the objec- 
tion of delay as well as influence to avoid, which 
makes it necessary to strike out the clause altogether. 
I repeat once more it is better to leave them to par- 
ties who are equal in their exertions, equally send 
about tickets, and whose chance of influence is equal. 

[After more debate the question was put on striking out, and lost.] 

January 24th 

[The House went into a Committee of the Whole on the election bill. 
A debate arose upon the clause authorizing the inspector, or any other 
I>erson offering himself to poll, to take an oath of abjuration of ecclesi- 
astical as well as civil obedience. Mr. Jones did not think it proper to 
make alteration. Oath of naturalization provides for this point. He 
went on ground of Constitution, and no other. House could not make 
any alteration.] 

Mr. Hamilton declared the Constitution to be their 

20 Alexander Hamilton 

creed and standard, and ought never to be departed 
from ; but in the present instance it was proper first 
to examine how far it applied to the subject under 
consideration: that there were two different bodies 
in the State to which this has reference; these were 
the Roman Catholics already citizens and those com- 
ing from abroad. Between these two were great 
distinctions. The foreigner who comes among us 
and will become a citizen, who wishes a naturaliza- 
tion, may with propriety be asked these terms ; it 
may be necessary he should abjure his former 
sovereign. For the natural subject, the man bom 
amongst us, educated with us, possessing our man- 
ners, with an equally ardent love of his native 
country, to be required to take the same oath of 
abjuration — what has he to abjure? He owes no 
fealty to any other power upon earth ; nor is it likely 
his mind should be led astray by bigotry or the in- 
fluence of foreign powers. Then, why give him oc- 
casion to be dissatisfied with you, by bringing forward 
a test which will not add to his fidelity? Moreover, 
the clause in the Constitution confines this test to 
foreigners, and, if I am not misinformed, it was not 
till after much debate and warm contention that it 
got admittance, and then only by a small majority in 
the convention. 

It was a question with him whether it was proper 
to propose this test in the case before them. But he 
was decidedly against going so far as to extend it to 
ecclesiastical matters. Why should we wound the 
tender conscience of any man? and why present 
oaths to those who are known to be good citizens? 

The New York Assembly 21 

Why alarm them? Why set them upon inquiry 
which is useless and unnecessary? You give them 
reason to suppose that you expect too much of them, 
and they cannot but refuse compliance. The Con- 
stitution does not require such a criterion to try 
the fidelity of any citizen. It is solely intended for 
aliens and foreigners coming from abroad, with man- 
ners and habits different from our own, and whose 
intentions are concealed. 

Instead, Mr. Chairman, of going so far, I would 
propose to stop at the word State, and strike out all 
that followed. Then it would read thus: 

''I, , do swear, etc., that I renounce and ab- 
jure all allegiance and obedience to the king of 
Great Britain, etc., and to every foreign king, prince, 
power, potentate, and state." 

This will bind the person only in civil matters, and 
is all that we ought or can require. A man will not 
then be alarmed in his interpretation, and it will not 
set his mind to inquire if his religious tenets are 
affected, and how much inconvenience would be 
avoided. Again, sir, we should be cautious how we 
carry the principle of requiring and multiplying tests 
upon our fellow-citizens, so far as to practise it to the 
exclusion and disfranchisement of any. And as a 
doubt must arise with every member on the pro- 
priety of extending this abjuration oath, it will be 
their best mode to decide for the amendment, as in 
all cases where there is a doubt it is our duty to 
oppose the measure. 

[Mr. Harper thought oath a proper one, and should vote for it.] 

Mr. Hamilton mentioned again that, so far as the 

22 Alexander Hamilton 

Constitution went, it was a rule, and must be 
adopted, but he questioned the propriety of extend- 
ing it. 

[Whole clause, without amendment, was agreed to.] 

[Another clause in the bill ordered the judges of election for gover- 
nor and lieutenant-governor to destroy the whole ballot of every dis- 
trict where there was an excess of even one vote.] 

Mr. Hamilton showed this to be a very great in- 
justice to the district, as it was in the power of the 
clerk or any officer, by putting in an additional bal- 
lot, to set aside the votes of five hundred persons; 
he therefore moved that, in any case where there was 
an excess, such excess should be destroyed by lot. 

[Motion opposed by Mr. Jones and adopted.] 

January 2yth 

[Discussion on clause in election bill prohibiting pensioners, and 
officers tmder Congress from sitting in Assembly or Senate. Question 
arose whether the Legislature possessed the power of abridging the 
constitutional rights of the people.] 

Mr. Hamilton observed they were going on dan- 
gerous ground. The best rule the committee could 
follow was that held out in the Constitution, which 
it would be safest to adhere to without alteration or 
addition. If we once depart from this rule, there is 
no saying where it will end. To-day, a majority of 
the persons sitting here, from a particular mode 
of thinking, disqualify one description of men. A 
future Legislature, from a particular mode of think- 
ing in another point, disqualify another set of men. 
One precedent is the pretext of another, till we 
narrow the ground of qualifications to a degree sub- 
versive of the spirit of the Constitution. It is impos- 
sible to suppose that the convention who framed the 

The New York Assembly 23 

Constitution were inattentive to this point. It is a 
matter of too much importance not to have been 
well considered; they have fixed the qualifications 
of electors with precision ; they have defined those of 
senator and governor, but they have been silent as to 
the qualifications of members of Assembly. It may 
be said that, being silent, they have left the matter 
to the discretion of the Legislature. But is not the 
language of the framers of the Constitution rather 
this: We will fix the qualifications of electors; we 
will take care that persons absolutely indigent shall 
be excluded; we will provide that the right of voting 
shall be on a broad and secure basis; and we will 
trust to the discretion of the electors themselves the 
choice of those who are to represent them in Assem- 
bly. Every qualification implies a disqualification. 
The persons who do not possess the qualification 
required are ineligible. Is not this to restrain the 
freedom of choice allowed by the Constitution to the 
body of electors? An improper exercise of this lib- 
erty cannot constitutionally be presumed. Why, 
therefore, should we circumscribe it within limits 
unknown to the Constitution? Why should we 
abridge the rights of any class of citizens in so im- 
portant an article? 

By the Constitution every citizen is eligible to a 
seat in the Assembly. If we say certain descriptions 
of persons shall not be so eligible, what is this but 
to deprive all those who fall within that description 
of an essential right allowed them by the Constitu- 
tion ? 

I have observed that if we once break the ground 

24 Alexander Hamilton 

of departing from the simple plan of the Constitu- 
tion, it may lead us much further than we now in- 
tend. From the prevalency of a certain system it is 
now proposed to exclude all persons from seats who 
hold offices under Congress. The pretence is to 
guard against an improper influence. I may think 
another species of influence more dangerous. I have 
taken notice, upon a former occasion, of the decisive 
agency of the Executive in the appointment of all 
officers. If the persons who derive their official ex- 
istence from that source sit in this House, it cannot 
be denied that it might give the executive an undue 
influence in the Legislative deliberations. If, in the 
vicissitude of human events, a majority of a future 
Legislature should view the subject in this light, and 
if the principle of a right to admit disqualifications 
unknown to the Constitution be admitted in prac- 
tice, all persons holding office under the State would 
then be excluded. I wish here to be clearly under- 
stood. I mean only to reason on general principles, 
without any particular reference whatever. I have 
hitherto confined myself to the general principle of 
the clause. There are, however, particular objec- 
tions. One just occurs to me: there are officers 
who have been wounded in the service, and who now 
have pensions under the United States as the price 
of their blood; would it be just, would it not be 
cruel on this account to exclude men from a share in 
the government which they have at every hazard 
contributed to establish? This instance strikes me; 
other members may probably think of other cases 
equally strong against the exclusion ; further reflec- 

The New York Assembly 25 

tions may suggest others that do not now occur. If 
the committee, however, should resolve to adopt it; 
for the sake of consistency they must carry it one 
step further — they must say that no member of 
Congress shall hold a seat. For surely if it be dan- 
gerous that the servants of Congress should have a 
seat in this House, it is more dangerous that the 
members themselves should be allowed this privilege. 
But I would not be understood to advocate this 
extension of the clause. I am against the whole 
business. I am for adhering to the present pro- 
visions of the Constitution. I repeat, if we once break 
the ground of innovation, we may open the door to 
mischief which we neither know nor think of. 

[Mr. Jones opposes Mr. H.'s opinion and wishes clause retained.] 

Mr. Hamilton. — I still continue, Mr. Chairman, of 
the same opinion on this subject. The more I con- 
sider the matter, the more forcibly am I struck that 
it will be dangerous to introduce qualifications un- 
known to the Constitution. Is it possible to sup- 
pose the framers of the Constitution were inattentive 
to this important subject, or that they did not 
maturely consider the propriety of annexing qualifica- 
tions to the elected? From the silence of the Con- 
stitution it is inferred that it was intended to leave 
this point to the discretion of the Legislature. I 
rather infer that the intention of the Constitution 
was to leave the qualifications of their representa- 
tives wholly to the electors themselves. The lan- 
guage of the Constitution : Let us take care that the 
persons to elect are properly qualified, that they are 
in such a situation in point of property as not to be 

26 Alexander Hamilton 

absolutely indigent and dependent, and let us trust 
to them the care of choosing proper persons to repre- 
sent them. The Constitution will not presume that 
whole districts and counties of electors duly qualified 
will choose men improper for the trust. Let us, on 
our part, be cautious how we abridge the freedom 
of choice allowed them by the Constitution, or the 
right of being elected, which every citizen may claim 
under it. I hold it to be a maxim which ought to be 
sacred in our form of government, that no man 
ought to be deprived of any right or privilege which 
he enjoys under the Constitution, but for some 
offence proved in due course of law. To declare 
qualifications or disqualifications by general descrip- 
tions in legislative acts, would be to invade this im- 
portant principle. It would be to deprive in the 
gross all those who had not the requisite qualifica- 
tions, or who were objects of those disqualifications, 
to that right to a share in the administration of the 
republic which the Constitution gives them, and that 
without any offence to incur a forfeiture. As to the 
objection that the electors might even choose a for- 
eigner to represent them within the latitude of the 
Constitution, the answer is that common sense would 
not tolerate such a construction. The Constitution, 
from the fundamental policy of a republican govern- 
ment, must be understood to intend citizens. But 
the gentleman (Mr. Jones) has not adverted to the 
fact that the same difficulty would attend the case 
of electors where he admits there is no power in the 
Legislature to make alterations. The expression 
there is, every male inhabitant possessed of certain 

The New York Assembly 27 

property shall vote ; but there surely could never be 
a doubt that such inhabitant must also be a citizen. 

But let us pursue the subject a little further: com- 
merce, it will be admitted, leads to an increase 
of individual property; property begets influence. 
Though a Legislature composed as we are will always 
take care of the rights of the middling and lower 
classes, suppose the majority of the Legislature to 
consist at a future day of wealthy men, what would 
hinder them, if the right of innovating on the Con- 
stitution be admitted, from declaring that no man 
not worth ten thousand pounds should be eligible to 
a seat in either House ? Would not this introduce a 
principle fatal to the genius of our present Constitu- 
tion? 

In making this observation, I cannot be suspected 
of wishing to increase the jealousy — already suffi- 
ciently high — of men of property. My situation, 
prospects, and connections forbid the supposition. 
But I mean to lay honestly before you the dangers 
to which we expose ourselves by letting in the prin- 
ciple which the clause under consideration rests upon. 
I give no opinion on the expediency of the exclusion 
proposed. I only say, in my opinion the Constitu- 
tion does not permit it, and I shall be against any 
qualification or disqualification — either of electors or 
elected — not prescribed by the Constitution. To me 
it appears that the qualifications of both ought to be 
fundamental in a republican government, not liable 
to be varied or added to by the Legislature, and that 
they should for ever remain where the Constitution 
has left them. I see no other safe ground. It is 

28 Alexander Hamilton 

to be lamented that men, to carry some favorite 
point in which their party or prejudices are inter- 
ested, will inconsiderately introduce principles and 
precedents which lead to successive innovations de- 
structive of the liberty of the subject and the safety 
of the government. For my part, I shall uniformly 
oppose every innovaton not known in the provisions 
of the Constitution. I therefore move that the 
clause be struck out. 

February 6th 

[Discussion on amendment to exclude all British adherents who had 
been engaged in privateering in war.] 

Mr. Hamilton observed that, when the discrim- 
inating clauses, admitted into the bill by that House 
were introduced, he was restrained, by motives of 
respect for the sense of a respectable part of the 
House, from giving it any further opposition than 
a simple vote. The limited operation they would 
have, made him less anxious about their adoption. 
But he could not reconcile it to his judgment or feel- 
ings to observe a like silence on the amendment pro- 
posed by the Senate. Its operation would be very 
extensive ; it would include almost every man in the 
city engaged in navigation during the war. 

We had, in a former debate, travelled largely over 
the ground of the Constitution, as applied to legis- 
lative disqualifications. He would not repeat what 
he had said, but he hoped to be indulged by the 
House in explaining a sentence in the Constitution, 
which seems not well understood by these gentlemen. 
In one article it says, that no man shall be dis- 
franchised or deprived of any right he enjoys under 

The New York Assembly 29 

the Constitution, but by the law of the land or the 
judgment of his peers. 

Some gentlemen hold that the law of the land will 
include an act of the Legislature. But Lord Coke, 
that great luminary of the law, in his comment upon 
a similar clause in Magna Charta, interprets the law 
of the land to mean presentment and indictment 
and process of outlawry, as contradistinguished from 
trial by jury. But if there were any doubt upon the 
Constitution, the bill of rights enacted in this very 
session removes it. It is there declared that no man 
shall be disfranchised or deprived of any right but 
by due process of law, or the judgment of his peers. 
The words ''due process" have a precise technical 
import, and are only applicable to the process and 
proceedings of courts of justice; they can never be 
referred to an act of the Legislature. 

Are we willing, then, to endure the inconsistency 
of passing a bill of rights and committing a direct 
violation of it in the same session? In short, are 
we ready to destroy its foundations at the moment 
they are laid? 

Our having done it, to a certain degree, is to be 
lamented; but it is no argument for extending it. 

He would now make some remarks on the ex- 
pediency and justice of the clause, distinct from con- 
stitutional considerations. 

The word privateer is indefinite. It may include 
letters of marque. The merchants of this city during 
war must, generally speaking, abandon their means 
of livelihood or be concerned in navigation. If con- 
cerned in navigation, they must of necessity have 

30 Alexander Hamilton 

their vessels armed for defence. They would natu- 
rally take out letters of marque. If every owner 
of a letter of marque is disfranchised, the body of 
your merchants will probably be in this situation. 
Is it politic or wise to place them in it? Is it ex- 
pedient to force, by exclusions and discriminations, 
a numerous and powerful class of citizens to be 
unfriendly to the government? 

He knew many individuals who would be com- 
prehended, who are well affected to the prosperity 
of the country, who are disposed to give every sup- 
port to the government, and who, some of them at 
least, even during the war had manifested an attach- 
ment to the American cause. But there is one view 
in which the subject merits consideration, that must 
lay hold on all our feelings of justice. By the mari- 
time law, a majority of the owners have a right to 
dispose of the destination of the vessel. The dis- 
sent of the minority is of no avail. It may have 
happened, and probably has happened in many in- 
stances, that vessels have been employed as priva- 
teers on letters of marque, by a majority of the 
owners, contrary to the sense of the minority. 

Would it be just to punish the innocent with the 
guilty, to take away the rights of the minority for 
an offence committed by the majority, without their 
participation, perhaps contrary to their inclination? 

He would mention a further case, not equally 
strong, but of considerable force to incline the House 
against the amendment. He had been informed 
that in one or more instances during the war, some 
zealous people had set on foot subscriptions for fitting 

The New York Assembly 31 

out privateers, perhaps at the instigation of the 
British Government; and had appHed to persons 
suspected of an attachment to us to subscribe, mak- 
ing their comphance a test of their loyalty. Several 
individuals, well disposed to our cause, to avoid be- 
coming objects of persecution, had complied; would 
it not be too rigorous to include them in so heavy a 
penalty? But if there are any of us who are con- 
scious of greater fortitude, such persons should not 
on that account be too severe on the weakness of 
others. They should thank nature for its bounty 
to them, and should be indulgent to human frailty. 
How few are there who would have had strength of 
mind enough in such circumstances to hazard, by a 
refusal, being marked out as the objects of military 
resentment? I hope, Mr. Speaker, as well from 
motives of justice, as a regard to the Constitution, 
we shall stop where we are, and not go any farther 
into the dangerous practice of disqualifying citizens 
by general descriptions. I hope we shall reject the 
amendment, sir! 

[Question was determined in the negative,] 

February 14th 

[Bill considered for settling intestate estates, proving wills, and 
granting letters of administration.] 

Mr. Hamilton said he did not rise to oppose the 
motion of the gentleman who last spoke [Jones]. 
He should probably vote with him on the question; 
but he confessed he did not view it in quite so clear 
a light as that gentleman appeared to do. There 
appeared to him to be difficulties in the case, which 
he would candidly lay before the House to assist its 

32 Alexander Hamilton 

judgment. The objection is that a new court is 
erected or an old one invested with a new jurisdic- 
tion, in which it is not bound to proceed according 
to the course of the common law. The question is, 
What is meant in the Constitution by this phrase, 
"the common law"? These words have in a legal 
view two senses, one more extensive, the other more 
strict. 

In their most extensive sense they comprehend the 
constitution of all those courts which were estab- 
lished by immemorial custom, such as the Court 
of Chancery, the Ecclesiastical Court, etc., though 
these courts proceed according to a peculiar law. In 
their more strict sense they are confined to the course 
of proceedings in the courts of Westminster in Eng- 
land, or in the Supreme Courts in this State. If the 
words are understood in the first sense, the bill under 
consideration is not unconstitutional; if in the last, 
it is tmconstitutional. For it gives to an old court 
a new jurisdiction, in which it is not to proceed ac- 
cording to the course of the common law in this last 
sense. And to give new jurisdiction to old courts, 
not according to the course of the common law, is in 
my opinion as much an infringement in substance of 
this part of the Constitution, as to erect new courts 
with such jurisdiction. To say the reverse would be 
to evade the Constitution. 

But though I view it as a delicate and difficult 
question, yet I am fairly inclined to think that the 
more extensive sense may be adopted; with this 
limitation, that such new jurisdiction must proceed 
according to the course of those courts having by 

The New York Assembly 33 

the common law cognizance of the subject-matter. 
They ought, however, never to be extended to ob- 
jects which at common law belonged to the jurisdic- 
tion of the courts at Westminster, and which, in this 
State, are of the peculiar cognizance of the Supreme 
Court. At common law, the Ecclesiastical Courts, 
not the courts of Westminster, had cognizance of 
intestacies and testamentary causes. The bill pro- 
poses that the Court of Probate shall have cognizance 
of the same causes and proceed in the same manner 
as the Ecclesiastical Courts, except as to inflicting 
ecclesiastical penalties. 

This distinction I have taken will, I think, bear us 
out in passing the bill under consideration. But it is 
certainly a point not without considerable difficulty. 

[Question was called and put: Will the House pass the law? Deter- 
mined in the affirmative.] 

February i^th 

[House went into Committee of Whole on Tax Bill.] 

Mr. Hamilton observed that, as the present bill 
exhibited a new system of taxation, it might be 
proper to enter into some explanations of its prin- 
ciples. It was agreed on all hands that the system 
heretofore in use was full of defects, both in the view 
of equality among individuals and of revenue to the 
State. From the Legislature to the assessor, all 
was conjecture and uncertainty. To begin with the 
Legislature, — what criterion could any man possi- 
bly have by which to estimate the relative abilities 
of the several counties ? For his part he had thought 
maturely of the subject, but could find none. The 
whole must either be a business of honest guessing, 

VOL, VIII. — 3. 

34 Alexander Hamilton 

or interested calculations of county convenience, in 
which each member would seek to transfer the burden 
from his own county to another. The same thing 
must happen in the subdivisions among the districts 
by the supervisors ; and, in a still more striking man- 
ner, in the apportionment of the tax to individuals 
by the assessors. How can they possibly ascertain 
the comparative abilities of individuals? — appear- 
ances more than realities must govern. The mer- 
chant or factor who has a large store of goods, for 
which, perhaps, he owes more than the amount, 
will pay much more than a man of less apparent 
gains, though ten times as much property. This he 
mentioned by way of example. The same thing 
happened among other orders of society. To- 
day, an assessor, my friend, taxes me at ten pounds. 
To-morrow, one less my friend will tax me four times 
the sum. Infinite differences must happen from the 
different degrees of judgment men possess, from their 
different biasses and inclinations. A great inequal- 
ity results, and all is uncertainty. 

Theoretical and practical financiers have agreed in 
condemning the arbitrary in taxation. By the ar- 
bitrary is meant the leaving the amount of tax to be 
paid by each person to the discretion of the officers 
employed in the management of the revenue. It is 
indeed another word for assessment, where all is left 
to the discretion of the assessors. 

The English writers have justly boasted the su- 
periority of their system over that of France and 
some other countries; because little or nothing is 
left to the discretion of the ofBcers of the revenue. 

The New York Assembly 35 

And the ablest observers among the French have 
acknowledged the advantage. The celebrated M. 
Necker in a late publication has taken especial notice 
of this circumstance. The opinion of that states- 
man, who conducted the finances of France for sev- 
eral years, and during the most critical periods of 
the late war, with infinite ability and success, is a 
most respectable authority in a matter of this kind. 

These had no small share in his disapprobation of a 
practice which puts one citizen so much in the power 
of another. 

He would not say that the practice was contrary 
to the provisions of our Constitution ; but it was cer- 
tainly repugnant to the genius of our government. 
What is the power of the supervisors and assessors, 
but a power to tax in detail, while the Legislature 
taxes in gross ? Is it proper to transfer so important 
a trust from the hands of the Legislature to the 
officers of the particular districts? Equality and 
certainty are the two great objects to be aimed at in 
taxation. The present bill does not pretend to reach 
absolute equality. This is impossible. No human 
plan can attain it. The variety of circumstances to 
be taken into the calculations are too complicated to 
be comprised in any scheme that could be devised. 
But the principles of the present bill will approach 
much nearer to equality than the former system, 
and it will have the great advantage of certainty. It 
leaves nothing to discretion. Every man can him- 
self estimate what he has to pay, without being 
dependent on the caprices, the affections, or the 
enmities of another. 

3^ Alexander Hamilton 

The bill in its present form is but an imperfect 
sketch. It is in the power of the committee to make 
it better. No doubt the combined wisdom of the 
House will improve it. The land tax, in particular, 
may require great alterations. He had not been 
able to satisfy himself on this part of the plan. All 
this was, of course, submitted to the discretion of the 
committee. One thing only was clear. Any change 
would be for the better, and time and experience 
would mature and ameliorate it. 

[The bill was taken into consideration. Amendments were pro- 
posed and adopted.] 

February 21st 

[Debate on fees allowed for certain legal services.] 

Col. Hamilton expressed a hope that the House 
would not carry matters to an extreme. It would 
be, he thought, as improper to make the fees of the 
profession too low as to make them too high. Gen- 
tlemen who practised the law, if they were men of 
ability, would be paid for the services required of 
them; and if the law did not allow a proper com- 
pensation, it would be evaded. Names might be 
given to things and charges made; against which 
there would be no guard. In Pennsylvania and 
Jersey attempts had been made to reduce the emolu- 
ments of the profession below the proper standard. 
This had afforded no relief ; on the contrary, the ex- 
penses of the law and the profits of the practisers 
had increased since the experiment, the only effect of 
which had been to transfer the expense from the de- 
linquent debtor to the injured creditor. If the legal 
fees amount to a compensation, in most cases the 

The New York Assembly zi 

practiser would content himself with them; if they 
did not, he would consider himself justified in making 
the best bargain he could, — the consequences of 
which were obvious. While differences would arise 
among mankind, and that there would be differences 
was certain, lawyers would be necessary, and for 
their services they would be paid. He, therefore, 
was of the opinion, that in going through the bill, 
the House should agree that reasonable allowances 
should be made for the services mentioned in the bill, 
or they would defeat their own object. 

March 8th 

[Motion that no freeholder or citizen shall be hereafter imprisoned 
for any sum less than £io, but that execution shall issue and remain 
in force against the debtor till, from time to time by different seizures 
of his effects, the creditors shall be satisfied.] 

Col. Hamilton confessed that his own judgment 
was not clearly made up on this subject. It was not, 
however, a new one to him. It was a question 
which had two sides, both of which deserved a se- 
rious attention. The clause as it stood, in his opinion, 
was not proper. It might be right to say what shall 
be done in future contracts. But it will be wrong to 
meddle with the past. It was very probable, if the 
clause was passed, it would prevent people in poor 
circumstances from getting assistance from the 
wealthy; this ought to be considered. Many a poor 
man who can be favored with a credit of ;^io finds a 
material advantage in it; if the security be taken 
away there will be an end to credit. He would wish 
that every man in distress should meet relief. He 

38 Alexander Hamilton 

was willing to come into any measure that would 
effect this purpose. 

March 20th 

[Debate on bill for relief of certain public creditors.] 

Col. Hamilton supposed that it was agreed on all 
hands that some relief should be granted. There 
were, he said, two questions before the committee: 
one, if they would put them on a footing with other 
citizens; and the other, if they did not merit some- 
thing more. If, said he, you receive their certifi- 
cates and grant them your own, you extend to them 
only that reli-ef which you have already given to 
your other citizens, who purchased up the loan-office 
certificates of other States. But there can be no 
difference between any one species of our debt; and 
there can be no substantial difference between taking 
a certificate of this State and a certificate of the 
United States. Much has been said about discrim- 
inating, but all arguments of discrimination amount 
to nothing. Whether we, by this assumption, make 
our State a creditor State or not, cannot be deter- 
mined. The present calculation of the public debts 
is no criterion to go by. He remembered, he said, 
that when he was in Congress the liquidated debt 
was somewhere about $40,000,000, and that it was 
supposed the unliquidated debt was $40,000,000 
more. If this is the case, which he believed it was, 
the State of New York would be a debtor State. 
From the situation of public affairs, it is to be re- 
gretted that there is no system existing which can 
give general relief to public creditors. In the present 

The New York Assembly 39 

instance, it is only required that you do that justice 
to one part of your citizens which you have already 
done to another part. If we should make our State 
a creditor State, by extending this relief to our 
citizens, can we not obtain redress, if our Confedera- 
tion exists, and God forbid that it may not? He 
was willing, he said, to extend the relief; he did not 
want to confine it to any particular class of people. 

March 21st 

[Debate on repealing part of the Trespass Act.^] 

Col. Hamilton said that this amendment to the 
trespass law was only to repeal that part which was 
in violation of the pubHc treaty. The courts of jus- 
tice were at present in a delicate dilemma, obliged 
either to explain away a positive law of the State, or 
openly violate the national faith by counteracting 
the very words and spirit of the treaties now in 
existence. Because the treaty declares a general 
amnesty, and this State, by this law declares that no 
person shall plead any military order for a trespass 
committed during the war. He said no State was 
so much interested in the due observance of the 
treaty as the State of New York, the British having 
possession of its western frontiers, and which they 
hold under the sanction of our not having complied 
with our national engagements. He hoped the 
House would have too much wisdom not to do away 
this exception, and indeed he expected the bill would 
be readily agreed to. 

[Bill was agreed to almost unanimously.] 

I This was an Act to punish persons who held property of patriots 
during the war, and to prevent their pleading a military order in 
defence. 

40 Alexander Hamilton 

March 22d 
[Motion for laying ;;^i 3,000 tax on New York County.] 

Col. Hamilton did not suppose that any arguments 
would have much influence on the decision of this 
question. There is no criterion to go by, and we fall 
into the greatest uncertainty. A gentleman has 
told us plainly, that he has been intriguing and mak- 
ing the best bargain for his county. He would not 
say that New York had made any conditions. He 
hoped that the intrigues might not have the effect 
that was sought. The county of Albany, he said, 
was always rated too low. It was only required to 
pay £7,000 with 70,000 inhabitants; while Suffolk, 
with only 14,000, paid ;^4,5oo. He asked if the 
House would permit intrigues to have such an effect. 
The county of Kings, which numbers only 3,000 in- 
habitants, and contains 18,500 acres of land, is to 
pay ;£2,4oo. Richmond County, which is equally 
small, is also overrated; is this right? New York 
had ever been rated too high. One of the gentlemen 
from New York had proposed ;£ 12,000 from the mere 
despair of coming at an equality, but this sum is too 
high. He asked if it was justice that the city and 
county of New York, which was not a tenth part 
of the value or population of the State, should bear 
one fourth of its burdens. He hoped this would 
be considered, and no partiality exhibited by the 
Legislature. 

March 24th 

[Bill for establishing university.] 

Col. Hamilton hoped that the House would not 
recommit the bill. There was no doubt, he said, 

The New York Assembly 41 

but the Legislature possessed the right to give this 
power. There were frequent examples of the kind 
in Great Britain, where this power had been granted. 
No disadvantage, he said, could arise from it; on the 
contrary, many would be the benefits. He there- 
fore wished the bill might be finished, as no doubt 
existed with him of the power and the propriety of 
the Legislature granting those privileges which were 
mentioned in the bill. 

April 1 2th 

[Bill to repeal citation acts.] 

Mr. Hamilton advocated the bill with great ability 
and candor. He mentioned the bad effects of the 
present laws, the difficulties that the courts of justice 
threw in the way of them, and the impossibility ever 
to amend them in such a manner as to have them 
acted upon. He urged the influence the opinion of 
our courts ought to have on the Legislature. The 
courts were not interested, and their decisions were 
perfectly impartial. He asked if the Southern Dis- 
trict of the State, instead of having fared tolerably 
well, had been ruined, would the Legislature have 
compelled their debtors who were without the lines 
to have paid additional sums. This he did not be- 
lieve. And why, then, said he, compel the creditors 
to take a less sum? He mentioned that in several 
instances the severity of the law fell on gentlemen 
who were attached to the American cause, and 
who had acted meritoriously in the Revolution. It 
was certainly not right to view all the creditors 
as enemies. Remarking on the ill effects of the 

42 Alexander Hamilton 

Legislature interfering in private contracts, and the 
violation of public faith which it occasioned, he ob- 
served that it would destroy all credit, and be the 
means of injuring many whom the Legislature had 
intended to benefit. 

[Bill passed unanimously.] 

SPEECH ON ACCEDING TO THE INDEPENDENCE OF 

VERMONT 

April. — The counsel for the petitioners has entered 
into a large field of argument against the present 
bill. He has endeavored to show that it is con- 
trary to the Constitution, to the maxims of sound 
policy, and to the rights of property. His observa- 
tions have not been destitute of weight. They ap- 
pear to have the more force, as they are to a certain 
degree founded in truth. But it is the province of 
the committee to distinguish the just limits of the 
principles he has advanced; how far they extend, 
and where they terminate. To aid the committee 
in this inquiry shall be my endeavor, and following 
the counsel for the petitioners through the different 
heads of his argument, I hope to be able to show, that 
neither of the objections he has urged stands in the 
way of the measure proposed, and that the Con- 
stitution permits, policy demands it, and justice 
acquiesces in its adoption. 

The first objection is drawn from that great prin- 
ciple of the social compact, — that the chief object of 
government is to protect the rights of individuals by 
the united strength of the community. The justness 

The Independence of Vermont 43 

of this principle is not to be disputed, but its extent 
remains to be ascertained. It must be taken with 
this limitation : The united strength of the commun- 
ity ought to be exerted for the protection of individ- 
uals so far as there is a rational prospect of success; 
so far as is consistent with the safety and well-being 
of the whole. The duty of a nation is always limited 
by these considerations: It is bound to make efforts 
and encounter hazards for the protection of its mem- 
bers, proportioned to its abilities, warranted by a 
reasonable expectation of a favorable issue, and 
compatible with its eventual security. But it is not 
bound to enter into or prosecute enterprises of a mani- 
fest rashness and folly; or which, in the event of suc- 
cess, would be productive of more mischief than good. 

This qualification of the principle can no more be 
denied than the principle itself. The counsel for the 
petitioners indeed admits it in substance, when he 
admits that a case of extreme necessity is an ex- 
ception to the rule: but he adds that this necessity 
should be apparent and unequivocal. 

What constitutes a case of extreme necessity ad- 
mits of no precise definition. It is always a question 
of fact, to be determined by a consideration of the 
condition of the parties and the particular circum- 
stances of the case itself. A case of necessity then 
exists, when every discerning unprejudiced man, 
well acquainted with facts, must be convinced that 
a measure cannot be undertaken or pursued with a 
probability of success. To determine this an experi- 
ment is not always necessary: circumstances may 
exist so decisive and palpable in their nature, as to 

44 Alexander Hamilton 

render it the extreme of temerity to begin as well as 
to continue an experiment. The propriety of doing 
either the one or the other must equally be decided 
by a judicious estimate of the national situation. 

The tendency of the principle contended for, on 
the application of it in argument, has been to prove 
that the State ought to employ the common strength 
of the society to protect the rights of its citizens, in- 
terested in the district of territory in question, by 
reducing the revolted inhabitants of that district to 
an obedience to its laws. The inquiry therefore is: 
Can this be done ? Is the State in a situation to un- 
dertake it? Is there a probability that the object 
will be more attainable at a future day? Is there 
not rather a probability that it will be every day 
more out of our reach, and that leaving things in 
their present state will be attended with serious dan- 
gers and inconveniences? Is it even desirable, if 
practicable, to reduce the people in question under 
subjection to this State? 

In pursuing this inquiry we ought to bear in mind 
that a nation is never to regulate its conduct by re- 
mote possibilities or mere contingencies, but by such 
probability as may reasonably be inferred from the 
existing state of things and the usual course of 
human affairs. 

With this caution, no well-informed mind can be 
at a loss in what manner to answer the questions I 
have proposed. A concise review of the past, and 
a dispassionate consideration of the present, will 
enable us to judge with accuracy of the obligations 
and interests of the State. 

The Independence of Vermont 45 

The pretensions to independence of the district of 
territory in question began shortly after the com- 
mencement of the late Revolution. We were then 
engaged in a war for our existence as a people, which 
required the utmost exertion of our resources to give 
us a chance of success. To have diverted any part 
' of them from this object to that of subduing the in- 
habitants of Vermont, to have involved a domestic 
quarrel which would have compelled that hardy and 
numerous body of men to throw themselves into the 
arms of the power with which we were then con- 
tending, instead of joining their efforts to ours in 
the common cause of American liberty, as they for 
a long time did, with great advantage to it, would 
have been a species of frenzy, for which there could 
have been no apology, and would have endangered 
the fate of the Revolution more than any one step 
we could have taken. 

This idea is too obvious to need being enlarged 
upon. The most prejudiced will acquit the State 
from blame for not trying the effect of force against 
that people during the continuance of the war. 
Every moderate measure, every thing short of hos- 
tility or a total sacrifice of those rights, which were 
the original cause of the revolt, and which are the 
occasion of the opposition to the present bill, were 
tried. Conciliating laws were passed, overtures 
made, negotiations carried on in Congress, but all to 
no purpose. 

The peace found the Vermonters in a state of 
actual independence, which they had enjoyed for 
several years — organized under a regular form of 

4^ Alexander Hamilton 

government, and increased in strength by a consider- 
able accession of numbers. It found this State the 
principal seat of the war, exhausted by peculiar exer- 
tions and overwhelmed in debt. The embarrass- 
ments arising from this situation press us daily. The 
utmost exertion of wisdom in our public councils 
would not be more than equal to extricating us from 
them. As matters stand, the public debts are un- 
provided for, and the public credit prostrate. 

Are we now in a situation to undertake the reduc- 
tion of Vermont ; or are we likely speedily to be in such 
a situation ? Where are our resources,where our public 
credit, to enable us to carry on an offensive war? 

We ought to recollect that, in war, to defend or 
attack are two different things. To the first, the 
mountains, the wilderness, the militia, sometimes 
even the poverty of a country, will suffice. The lat- 
ter requires an army and a treasury. 

The population of Vermont will not be rated too 
high, if stated at nearly one half of that of New York. 
Can any reasonable man suppose that New York, 
with the load of debt the Revolution has left upon 
it, and under a popular government, would be able 
to carry on with advantage an offensive war against 
a people half as numerous as itself, in their own ter- 
ritory; a territory defended as much by its natural 
situation as by the numbers and hardihood of its 
inhabitants? Can it be imagined that it would be 
able, finally, to reduce such a people to its obedience? 
The supposition would be chimerical, and the at- 
tempt madness. 

Can we hope a more favorable posture of affairs 

The Independence of Vermont 47 

hereafter? Will not the population and strength of 
Vermont increase in ratio to our own? There is, 
perhaps, no essential difference between their govern- 
ment and ours. The necessity of making provision, 
in one way or another, for the exigencies of the 
Union, and for the discharge of the debts of the 
State, must continue to subject our citizens to 
heavier burthens than are borne by the inhabitants 
of that country, who have no call for revenue beyond 
the support of their domestic administration. A 
country possessing a fertile soil, exempt from taxes, 
cannot fail of having a rapid growth. 

The enterprise will of course become more difficult 
by delay ; and procrastination can only serve to ren- 
der the claims of the State and its citizens, in the 
opinion of mankind, obsolete, and to give the con- 
sent of time to the connection which the people of 
Vermont have, in all appearance, already formed 
with the British Government. This last point I 
shall discuss more fully in another place. 

I have confined myself in my reasoning to an ex- 
amination of what is practicable on the part of this 
State alone. No assistance is to be expected from 
our neighbors. Their opinion of the origin of the 
controversy between this State and the people of 
Vermont, whether well or ill founded, is not gener- 
ally in our favor ; and it is notorious that the Eastern 
States have uniformly countenanced the independ- 
ence of that country. This might suggest to us 
reflections that would confirm the belief of the im- 
practicability of destroying, and the danger of at- 
tempting to destroy, that independence. 

48 Alexander Hamilton 

The scheme of coercion would ill suit even the 
disposition of our own citizens. The habits of think- 
ing to which the Revolution has given birth, are not 
adapted to the idea of a contest for dominion over 
a people disinclined to live under our government. 
And, in reality, it is not the interest of the State ever 
to regain dominion over them by force. We shall do 
well to advert to the nature of our government, and 
to the extent of this State, according to its acknow- 
ledged limits. Are we sure we shall be able to govern 
what we already possess? or would it be wise to 
wish to try the strength of our government over a 
numerous body of people disaffected to it, and com- 
pelled to submit to its authority by force ? For my 
part I should regard the reunion of Vermont to this 
State as one of the greatest evils that could be- 
fall it ; as a source of continual embarrassment and 
disquietude. 

It is hinted by the counsel for the petitioners, that 
many of the inhabitants of Vermont are desirous of 
living under our government; and sanguine tem- 
pers have long ago predicted that they would shortly 
grow weary of their independence, throw it off, and 
become reunited with us and New Hampshire, of 
their own accord. There are clear principles of 
human nature, to which we may resort to falsif}^ this 
prediction. In popular governments, the sentiments 
of the people generally take their tone from their 
leaders. The leaders of Vermont cannot desire a 
reunion with New York, because this would amount 
to an abdication of their own power and consequence. 
The people of Vermont will not desire it ; because no 

The Independence of Vermont 49 

people ever desired to pass from a situation in whix:h 
they were exempted from taxes, and in which they 
suffered no particular oppression, to one in which 
they would be subject to burthens comparatively 
heavy. 

I pass now to an examination of the constitution- 
ality of the measure proposed by the bill. It is 
observed, that by the Constitution the counties of 
Charlotte, Cumberland, and Gloucester, are con- 
stituent parts of the State; that one article of it 
declares that no power shall be exercised over the 
people, but such as is derived from and granted by 
them ; that no express power is given to the Legisla- 
ture to dismember any part of the State; and that 
this silence of the Constitution is a tacit reservation 
of that power to the people. 

To all this I answer, that the sovereignty of the 
people, by our Constitution, is vested in their repre- 
sentatives in Senate and Assembly, with the inter- 
vention of the Council of Revision, and, that the 
power of dismembering the State, under certain cir- 
cumstances, is a necessary appendage of the sover- 
eignty. The practice of nations, and the authority 
of writers, conspire to establish this principle; and 
the safety of society requires it. There are certain 
situations of kingdoms and states, in which the sac- 
rifice of a part is essential to the preservation or 
welfare of the rest. 

History furnishes abundant examples of such 
sacrifices. Nations, in making peace, frequently 
cede parts of their territories to each other. Civil 
commotions have many times produced similar 

VOL. VIII.— 4, 

50 Alexander Hamilton 

dismemberments. The monarchy of Spain, after a 
destructive and fruitless contest to preserve it, was 
obliged, at last, to surrender its dominion over the 
Netherlands. The crown of Austria was, in like man- 
ner, compelled to abandon its jurisdiction over the 
Swiss Cantons. And the United States are a recent 
and still more signal instance of the exercise of the 
same right. Neither of these instances has been cen- 
sured or condemned, nor the power of the sovereign 
to accede to the separation called in question. 

The celebrated author quoted by the counsel for 
the petitioners is explicit on this article, and decides 
with clearness that the prince or body intrusted with 
the sovereign authority may, in certain emergencies, 
dismember the empire, and lop off a limb for the 
good of the body. This inference from the silence 
of a constitution, is the reverse of that drawn by the 
counsel of the petitioners. Doubts have been raised 
by particular theorists upon the subject; but their 
theories were too abstract for practice, and are now 
exploded by the ablest writers on the laws of nations. 
Indeed, those doubts were chiefly applied to the case 
of a cession, or relinquishment, of a part of the em- 
pire still in possession of the sovereign. It has long 
been considered as a clear point, that where a part 
of an empire is actually severed, by conquest, or a 
revolution, the prince, or body vested with the ad- 
ministration of the government, has a right to assent 
to and to ratify that separation. This is an obvious 
and important distinction; from which other infer- 
ences of moment will be drawn in another place. It 
will be found in Vattel, book four, chapter second. 

The Independence of Vermont 51 

Vermont is, in fact, severed from New York, and 
has been so for years. There is no reasonable pro- 
spect of recovering it, and the attempt would be 
attended with certain and serious calamities. The 
Legislature have, therefore, an undoubted right to 
relinquish it, and policy dictates that it should be 
done. 

It is of no force to say that this principle would 
authorize the dismemberment of Long Island, or of 
any other part of the State. There is no doubt, 
the same circumstances concurring, the same conse- 
quences would result, but not sooner ; and it will be 
the duty of the State to endeavor to prevent a simi- 
lar extremity. 

The next thing, in the order observed by the coun- 
sel for the petitioners, that presents itself to our 
discussion, is the policy of the measure. 

Against this it is objected, that the precedent 
would be dangerous, that the facility with which 
the Vermonters will have accomplished their object, 
might invite other parts of this State and the United 
States to follow their example. 

To this I answer, that examples have little to do 
with the revolutions of empire. Wherever such a 
state of things exists as to make it the interest or 
the inclination of a large body of people to separate 
from the society with which they have been con- 
nected, and at the same time to afford a prospect of 
success, they will generally yield to the impulse, with- 
out much inquiry or solicitude about what has been 
done by others, or upon other occasions; and when 
this is not the case, precedents will never create the 

52 Alexander Hamilton 

disposition. Events of this kind are not produced 
or controlled by the ordinary operations of human 
policy, care, or contrivance. 

But, whatever may be the effect of the example, 
it is too late to prevent or redress the evil. It sprang 
up under circumstances which forbade the applica- 
tion of an effectual remedy, and it has now acquired 
a maturity which would mock all our efforts to 
counteract it. Vermont is lost to New York, be- 
yond the possibility of a recovery; and a passive 
acquiescence in its independence cannot make it 
more formidable, as an example, than a direct recog- 
nition of it. Success and impunity are the ingredi- 
ents that are to constitute the force of the example, 
and these will exist in either case. 

On the other hand, the policy of the measure re- 
sults from two important considerations. The one, 
that by the union of Vermont to the Confederacy, it 
must of course bear a proportion of the public bur- 
dens ; the other, that it would be detached from the 
completion of a connection, already in all appear- 
ance begun, with a foreign power. The incorpora- 
tion of Vermont into the Confederacy is by the bill 
made an express condition of the acknowledgment 
of their independence. 

The first advantage was too obvious to be denied, 
though observations have been made to diminish its 
importance. Its inland situation has been noted as 
a circumstance that precluded the expectation of any 
considerable revenue from it. But the same thing 
might be said of the interior parts of this and of 
the other States; and yet we should make a much 

The Independence of Vermont 53 

worse figure than we do if our resources were to be 
drawn wholly from our Atlantic settlements. The 
country of Vermont is fertile and will soon be popu- 
lous, and the resources which it may be capable of 
affording at a day not far remote, though not of 
great magnitude, will by no means be contemptible. 

But the principal advantage to be expected from 
the measure is the one mentioned last. Here it is 
asked, Where is the evidence of the fact, where 
the proof of the connection? Would Great Britain, 
which has so recently, in a solemn treaty, acknow- 
ledged the territory in question to be comprehended 
within the limits of the United States, derogate from 
that treaty, and for so insignificant an object, as a 
connection with a small comer of one of the States, 
hazard a rupture with the whole Confederacy? 

Not expecting a formal call for the evidence of the 
fact, my memory is not prepared to enter into all the 
details requisite to its full elucidation. I well re- 
member that during the later periods of the war, a 
variety of circumstances produced a conviction of 
its existence everywhere, — in the army, in the Legis- 
lature, and in Congress. Among other transactions 
that came to my knowledge, I shall mention one 
as nearly as my recollection will serve me. Some 
time in the year 1781, Fay and Ira Allen, two of the 
most influential individuals in that country, went 
into Canada, and we were well informed had re- 
peated interviews with General Haldimand. Not 
long after, a party of the British, under St. Leger, 
penetrated as far as Ticonderoga. 

A detachment from that body fell in by accident 

54 Alexander Hamilton 

with a small party of Vermonters, fired upon them, 
killed one of their nimiber, and took the rest pris- 
oners. Discovering their mistake, they interred the 
dead body with the honors of war, and sent the 
prisoners home loaded with kindnesses and caresses. 
From that period a free intercourse subsisted be- 
tween Canada and Vermont. This is one proof, and 
a pretty decisive one, to show that a connection was 
formed during the war. I doubt not there are others 
equally strong, within the recollection of other mem- 
bers of the committee. Since the peace, this inter- 
course has been cultivated with reciprocal zeal, and 
there are circumstances related (which I shall not 
repeat, as they do not come to me with sufficient 
authenticity) that look strongly to a continuance of 
the connection. 

If this connection ever existed, what reason have 
we to believe that it has been since dissolved? To 
me, I confess, there appears none. On the contrary, 
the situation of the parties in my opinion forbids the 
supposition of its dissolution. 

I flatter myself, those who know my manner of 
thinking will acquit me of a disposition to sow 
groundless jealousies of any nation. I consider a 
conduct of this kind, as undignified and indelicate in 
a public character; and if I were not persuaded the 
suspicions I entertain are well founded, no motive 
would have induced me to bring them forward. 

It is asked, in substance, what object Great Brit- 
ain can have in cultivating such connection. This 
admits of several answers. 

Great Britain cannot but see our governments are 

The Independence of Vermont 55 

feeble and distracted ; that the Union wants energy, 
the nation concert ; that our pubHc debts are unpro- 
vided for; our federal treasuries empty; our trade 
languishing. She may flatter herself that this state 
of things will be productive of discontents among 
the people, and that these discontents may lead to 
a voluntary return to her dominion. She may hope 
to see in this country a counterpart of the restoration 
of Charles the Second. However mistaken they may 
be, it is not impossible, that speculations of this kind 
may enter into the head of a British minister. 

The government lately established in Canada — 
the splendid title of Viceroy — seems to look beyond 
the dreary regions of Canada and Nova Scotia. 

In this view, she would naturally lay hold of Ver- 
mont as a link in the chain of events. It would be 
a positive acquisition of so much, and nothing could 
better answer the purpose of accelerating the pro- 
gress of discontent than the example of a country, 
part of ourselves, comparatively speaking, free from 
taxes. Nothing could have a more powerful influ- 
ence than such an example upon the inhabitants of 
the settlements bordering upon that country. How 
far and how rapidly it might extend itself is a matter 
not easy to be calculated. 

But laying aside every supposition of this nature, 
there are motives of interest which would dispose 
the British Government to cultivate Vermont. A 
connection with Vermont will hereafter conduce to 
the security of Canada, and to the preservation of 
the Western posts. That Great Britain means to 
retain these posts, may be inferred from the interest 

56 Alexander Hamilton 

she has in doing it. The ostensible reason for not 
having delivered them up heretofore, is the infrac- 
tions of the treaty on our part; but though these 
infractions in some instances cannot be denied, it 
may fairly be presumed that they are nothing more 
than the pretext for withholding the posts, while 
the true motive is the prodigious advantage which 
the monopoly of the fur trade affords to the com- 
merce of the English nation. 

If Great Britain has formed the design of finally 
retaining those posts, she must look forward sooner or 
later to a rupture with this country ; for, degraded 
as we are by our mismanagement, she can hardly 
entertain so mean an opinion of us as to expect 
we shall eventually submit to such a violation of 
our rights and interests without a struggle. And, in 
such a case, Vermont would be no despicable auxiliary. 

But would Great Britain hazard a war with the 
United States for so inconsiderable an object? 

In the first place, the object is not inconsiderable. 
In the next, our situation is not such as to render 
our resentment formidable. This situation is per- 
haps better understood by everybody else than 
ourselves; and no nation would forego a present 
advantage to our detriment, while it knew that a 
change of government must precede any inconven- 
iences from our displeasure. 

I do not suppose that the British Government 
would, in the present state of things, commit itself 
to any avowed engagements with the people of Ver- 
mont. It will, no doubt, take care to be in such a 
situation as to leave itself at liberty to act according 

The Independence of Vermont 57 

to circumstances; but it will, and I have no doubt 
does, by the intermediation of its officers, keep up a 
secret intercourse with the leaders of that people, to 
endeavor gradually to mould them to its interest, to 
be ready to convert them to its own purposes upon 
any favorable conjuncture or future emergency. 
This policy is so obvious and safe, that it would be 
presumable without any evidence of its existence. 

On the part of Vermont, while their fate in the 
American scale remains suspended, considerations of 
safety would direct them to such a connection with 
the British Government. They would not choose to 
lie at our mercy, or to depend on their strength, if 
they could find refuge and support elsewhere. 

There is a circumstance, too, mentioned with a dif- 
ferent view by the counsel for the petitioners, which 
would contribute to this connection. I mean the re- 
lative situation of Canada and Vermont. It is asked : 
"May not this situation induce Vermont to regret 
the offer of independence, and prompt the people of 
that country, for the sake of commerce, to form still 
closer connections with a foreign power?" I ask: 
Does not this situation, which it is supposed might 
have so powerful an influence, afford a strong pre- 
sumption of the existence of such a connection? 
And is it not our true policy to take away every 
additional temptation? 

I shall readily admit, that it is very doubtful 
whether Vermont will accept the proffered acknow- 
ledgment of its independence, upon the condition 
annexed. I firmly believe that she does not desire it, 
and that she would be perplexed by the dilemma to 

58 Alexander Hamilton 

which she would be reduced. But whether she ac- 
cepts it or not, the offer may be expected to have a 
good effect. It would at least serve to ascertain 
facts. Her refusal would be a conclusive evidence 
of a determined predilection to a foreign connection ; 
and it would show the United States the absolute 
necessity of combining their efforts to subvert an in- 
dependence so hostile to their safety. If they should 
find themselves unequal to the undertaking, it must 
operate as a new inducement to the several States 
to strengthen the Union. 

In every light, therefore, the measure on national 
ground appears advisable ; but it still remains to in- 
quire what will be our duty in respect to the citizens 
of this State who are owners of land in Vermont. 
How far shall we violate their rights, and how far 
are we bound to make them compensation ? 

The claim to a compensation is the thing which has 
been with most propriety urged by the counsel for the 
petitioners. Let us, however, examine its nature 
and foundation. 

But, before I enter into this examination, I shall 
repeat an observation which I made on a former 
occasion. Whatever obligations there may be on 
the part of the State, cannot be increased by acceding 
to the measure proposed. If Vermont is not irre- 
trievably lost to this State, the duty of protection 
which it owes to individuals obliges it to employ the 
common strength to reinstate them in their rights. 
If it is irretrievably lost, no rights capable of being 
rendered effective will be sacrificed; of course, no 
obligation to making a recompense will exist. 

The Independence of Vermont 59 

But the truth is, the present bill, so far from sur- 
rendering the rights of individuals, puts things in 
the only train in which they will ever have an oppor- 
tunity of giving them validity. The third clause of 
the ninth article of the Confederation expressly de- 
clares that all controversies about the right of soil 
between the citizens of different States shall be de- 
cided by a federal court. The counsel for the pe- 
titioners tells us that his clients doubt the operation 
of this clause, but as he gives us no reason for the 
doubt, I shall only say that the terms of it appear to 
me clear and explicit. 

I have no doubt that the petitioners would be en- 
titled to a federal court ; and though that court would 
not decide in such a question like the tribunals of New 
York,but upon general principles of natural and politi- 
cal rights, I should confidently expect that all equita- 
ble claims of our citizens would have their full effect. 

It is, however, further observed on this head, that 
the expense of such court would exceed the abilities 
of individuals, and could only be compassed by the 
resources of sovereign States. 

If this suggestion should be admitted to be true 
(though I think the expense is greatly overrated), 
yet surely it would be more reasonable to ask the 
State for its assistance in procuring a federal court 
to obtain justice to the petitioners, than to ask it to 
undertake a ruinous war for that purpose. The dif- 
ference in expense would not bear a comparison. 
Indeed, the first would be a trifling object to the 
State, while the last would exceed its abilities, and 
perhaps end in its disgrace. 

6o Alexander Hamilton 

But if the bill even contained no provision for ob- 
taining justice to the petitioners, I should hold that 
the State would not be under a strict obligation to 
recompense them for their losses. The distinction 
I would lay down upon the subject is this: If a 
government voluntarily bargains away the rights, or 
disposes of the property, of its citizens, in their en- 
joyment, possession, or power, it is bound to make 
compensation for the thing of which it hath de- 
prived them; but if they are actually dispossessed 
of those rights, or that property, by the casualties 
of war, or a revolution, the State, if the public good 
requires it, may abandon them to the loss without 
being obliged to make reparation. The author 
quoted by the counsel for the petitioners, has in view 
the case of a voluntary disposition of the property of 
citizens in the power of the State; and his doctrine 
is unquestionably just, but it does not apply to the 
case of an actual dispossession by any of those events 
in which nations have no choice. In wars between 
States, the sovereign is never supposed to be bound 
to make good the losses which the subject sustains 
by the captures or ravages of the enemy, though 
they should amount to the destruction of his whole 
property ; and yet nothing can be more agreeable to 
natural equity than that those who happen to be 
the unlucky victims of the war should be indemnified 
by the community. But, in practice, such a princi- 
ple would be found attended with endless difficul- 
ties and inconveniences; and therefore the reverse 
of it has been adopted as a general rule. The in- 
dividual sufferer, however, might with great color of 

The Independence of Vermont 6i 

justice, say to the government, Why did you make 
peace without stipulating a reparation for the dam- 
age done to your citizens? If it was necessary for 
the pubHc good to sacrifice my interests, I have a 
right to a pubHc compensation for my losses. 

Though this case may, upon a superficial view, 
appear dissimilar to the one under consideration, yet 
the principle upon examination will be found as ap- 
plicable to the one as to the other. The true reason 
is that the resources of nations are not adequate to 
the reparation of such extensive losses as those which 
are commonly occasioned by wars and revolutions; 
and it would therefore be contrary to the general 
good of society to establish it as a rule, that there is 
a strict obligation to repay such losses. It is better 
that there should be individual sufferers than to 
admit a rule which would fetter the operations of 
government and distress the affairs of the community. 

Generosity and policy may, in particular instances, 
dictate such compensation. Sometimes they have 
been made by nations, but much oftener omitted. 
The propriety of doing the one or the other must 
depend on circumstances in which the ability of the 
public will always be a primary consideration. 

I think, sir, I have by this time gone through all 
the arguments that have been brought against the 
bill, and I hope satisfactorily refuted them. 

I shall say a little in answer to the observations 
drawn from the examples of Roman magnanimity. 
Neither the manners nor the genius of Rome are 
suited to the republic or to the age we live in. All her 
maxims and habits were military; her government 

62 Alexander Hamilton 

was constituted for war. Ours is unfit for it; and 
our situation, still less than our Constitution, invites 
us to emulate the conduct of Rome, or to attempt a 
display of unprofitable heroism. 

One more observation will conclude what I have 
to say. The present situation of our national affairs 
appears to me peculiarly critical. I know not what 
may be the result of the disordered state of our 
government. I am, therefore, the more solicitous to 
guard against danger from abroad. Gentlemen who 
view our public affairs in the same light in which 
they present themselves to my mind, will, I trust, 
vote with me upon the present occasion. Those, on 
the contrary, who think all is well — who suppose our 
government is full of energy, our credit high, and 
trade and finances flourishing — will probably see no 
room for any anxiety about the matter, and may be 
disposed to leave Vermont in its present state. If 
the bill should fail, I hope they will never have oc- 
casion to regret the opportunity they have lost. 

As to the petitioners, I shall only say that I have 
no reason to doubt the purity of the motives with 
which they are actuated. With many of them I am 
too well acquainted to permit me to entertain any 
unfavorable impression of their conduct; but, how- 
ever their opinion of their own rights or interests 
may have misled them in estimating the merits of 
the question before the committee, I trust we shall 
be cautious how we suffer our judgment of a national 
question to be biassed or misguided by the specious- 
ness of the arguments or appearances on which their 
opposition is supported. 

Major-General Greene 63 

EULOGIUM ON MAJOR-GENERAL GREENE 

Delivered before the Society of the Cincinnati 

July 4, 1789. 

There is no duty that could have been assigned 
to me by this Society which I should execute with 
greater alacrity than the one I am now called upon 
to perform. All the motives capable of interesting 
an ingenuous and feeling mind conspire to prom.pt 
me to its execution. To commemorate the talents, 
virtues, and exploits of great and good men, is at all 
times a pleasing task to those who know how to 
esteem them. But when such men, to the title of 
superior merit, join that of having been the defenders 
and guardians of our country ; when they have been 
connected with us as companions in the same dan- 
gers, sufferings, misfortunes, and triumphs; when 
they have been allied to us in the still more endear- 
ing character of friends, we recall the ideas of their 
worth with sensations that affect us yet more nearly, 
and feel an involuntary propensity to consider their 
fame as our own. We seem to appropriate to our- 
selves the good they have done, to take a personal 
interest in the glory they have acquired, and to 
share in the very praise we bestow. 

In entering upon a subject in which your feelings 
as well as my own are so deeply concerned, however 
it might become me to follow examples of humility, 
I shall refrain from a practice perhaps not less lauda- 
ble than it is common. I cannot prevail upon my- 
self to check the current of your sensibility by the 
cold formalities of an apology for the defects of 
the speaker. These can neither be concealed nor 

64 Alexander Hamilton 

extenuated by the affectation of diffidence, nor even 
by the genuine concessions of conscious inability. 
'T is your command, and the reverence we all bear to 
the memory of him of whom I am to speak, that 
must constitute my excuse, and my claim to your in- 
dulgence. Did I even possess the powers of oratory, 
I should with reluctance attempt to employ them 
upon the present occasion. The native brilliancy 
of the diamond needs not the polish of art ; the con- 
spicuous features of pre-eminent merit need not the 
coloring pencil of imagination, nor the florid decora- 
tions of rhetoric. 

From you who knew and loved him, I fear not the 
imputation of flattery, or enthusiasm, when I in- 
dulge an expectation, that the name of Greene will 
at once awaken in your minds the images of what- 
ever is noble and estimable in human nature. The 
fidelity of the portrait I shall draw will therefore 
have nothing to apprehend from your sentence. 
But I dare not hope that it will meet with equal jus- 
tice from all others, or that it will entirely escape the 
cavils of ignorance and the shafts of envy. For high 
as this great man stood in the estimation of his 
country, the whole extent of his worth was little 
known. The situations in which he has appeared, 
though such as would have measured the faculties 
and exhausted the resources of men who might 
justly challenge the epithet of great, were yet incom- 
petent to the full display of those various, rare, and 
exalted endowments with which nature only now 
and then decorates a favorite, as if with intention to 
astonish mankind. 

Major-General Greene 65 

As a man, the virtues of Greene are admitted; as 
a patriot, he holds a place in the foremost rank; as 
a statesman, he is praised; as a soldier, he is ad- 
mired. But in the two last characters, especially in 
the last but one, his reputation falls far below his 
desert. It required a longer life, and still greater 
opportunities, to have enabled him to exhibit, in 
full day, the vast, I had almost said the enormous, 
powers of his mind. 

The termination of the American war — not too 
soon for his wishes, nor for the welfare of his country, 
but too soon for his glory — put an end to his military 
career. The sudden termination of his life cut him 
off from those scenes which the progress of a new, 
immense, and unsettled empire could not fail to 
open to the complete exertion of that universal and 
pervading genius which qualified him not less for the 
senate than for the field. 

In forming our estimate, nevertheless, of his char- 
acter, we are not left to supposition and conjecture. 
We are not left to vague indications or uncertain 
appearances, which partiality might varnish or pre- 
judice discolor. We have a succession of deeds, as 
glorious as they are unequivocal, to attest his great- 
ness and perpetuate the honors of his name. 

It is an observation, as just as it is common, that 
in those great revolutions which occasionally con- 
vulse society, human nature never fails to be brought 
forward in its brightest as well as in its blackest 
colors; and it has very properly been tanked not 
among the least of the advantages which compen- 
sate for the evils they produce that they serve to 

VOL. VIII,— 4. 

66 Alexander Hamilton 

bring to light, talents and virtues, which might 
otherwise have languished in obscurity, or only shot 
forth a few scattered and wandering rays. 

Nathaniel Greene, descended from reputable 
parents, but not placed by birth in that elevated 
rank which, under a monarchy, is the only sure road 
to those employments that give activity and scope 
to abilities, must, in all probability, have contented 
himself with the humble lot of a private citizen, or, 
at most, with the contracted sphere of an elective 
office, in a colonial and dependent government, 
scarcely conscious of the resources of his own mind, 
had not the violated rights of his country called him 
to act a part on a more splendid and more ample 
theatre. 

Happily for America, he hesitated not to obey the 
call. The vigor of his genius, corresponding with the 
importance of the prize to be contended for, over- 
came the natural moderation of his temper; and 
though not hurried on by enthusiasm, but animated 
by an enlightened sense of the value of free govern- 
ment, he cheerfully resolved to stake his fortune, his 
hopes, his life, and his honor upon an enterprise, of 
the danger of which he knew the whole magnitude; 
in a cause, which was worthy of the toils and of the 
blood of heroes. 

The sword having been appealed to, at Lexington, 
as the arbiter of the controversy between Great 
Britain and America, Greene, shortly after, marched, 
at the head of a regiment, to join the American 
forces at Cambridge; determined to abide the awftil 
decision. 

Major-General Greene 67 

He was not long there before the discerning eye of 
the American Fabius marked him out as the object 
of his confidence. 

His abilities entitled him to a pre-eminent share 
in the councils of his Chief. He gained it, and he 
preserved it, amidst all the checkered varieties of 
military vicissitude, and in defiance of all the in- 
trigues of jealous and aspiring rivals. 

As long as the measures which conducted us safely 
through the first most critical stages of the war shall 
be remembered with approbation; as long as the 
enterprises of Trenton and Princeton shall be re- 
garded as the dawnings of that bright day which 
afterwards broke forth with such resplendent lustre ; 
as long as the almost magic operations of the re- 
mainder of that memorable winter, distinguished 
not more by these events than by the extraordinary 
spectacle of a powerful army straitened within nar- 
row limits by the phantom of a military force, and 
never permitted to transgress those limits with im- 
punity, in which skill supplied the place of means, 
and disposition was the substitute for an army — as 
long, I say, as these operations shall continue to be 
the objects of curiosity and wonder, so long ought 
the name of Greene to be revered by a grateful 
country. To attribute to him a portion of the 
praise which is due, as well to the formation as to the 
execution of the plans that effected these important 
ends, can be no derogation from that wisdom and 
magnanimity which knew how to select and embrace 
counsels worthy of being pursued. 

The laurels of a Henry were never tarnished by 

68 Alexander Hamilton 

the obligations he owed and acknowledged to a 
Sully. 

It would be an unpleasing task, and therefore I 
forbear to lift the veil from off those impotent coim- 
cils, which, by a formal vote, had decreed an un- 
disturbed passage to an enemy returning from the 
fairest fruits of his victories, to seek an asylum from 
impending danger, disheartened by retreat, dispirited 
by desertion, broken by fatigue, retiring through 
woods, defiles, morasses, in which his discipline was 
useless, in the face of an army superior in numbers, 
elated by pursuit, and ardent to signalize their 
courage. 'T is enough for the honor of Greene to 
say, that he left nothing unessayed to avert and 
to frustrate so degrading a resolution. And it was 
happy for America, that the man, whose reputation 
could not be wounded without wounding the cause 
of his country, had the noble fortitude to rescue 
himself, and the army he commanded, from the dis- 
grace with which they were both menaced by the 
characteristic imbecility of a council of war. 

Unwilling to do more than merely to glance at a 
scene in which the meritorious might be involved 
with the guilty, in promiscuous censure, here let me 
drop the curtain, and invite you to accompany me 
to the Heights of Monmouth. There let me recall 
to your indignant view, the flower of the American 
infantry flying before an enemy that scarcely dared 
to pursue — vanquished without a blow — vanquished 
by their obedience to the commands of a leader who 
meditated their disgrace. Let me contrast with this 
the conduct of your Greene; the calm intrepidity 

Major-General Greene 69 

and unshaken presence of mind with which he sec- 
onded the dispositions of his General, to arrest the 
progress of the disorder and retrieve the fortune of 
the day. Let me recall to your recollection that 
well-timed and happy movement on the left of the 
enemy, by which he so materially contributed to 
deciding the dubious event of the conflict, and turn- 
ing the hesitating scale of victory. 

From the Heights of Monmouth I might lead you 
to the Plains of Springfield, there to behold the vet- 
eran Knyphausen, at the head of a veteran army, 
baffled and almost beaten by a general without an 
army — aided, or rather embarrassed, by small fugitive 
bodies of volunteer militia, the mimicry of soldiership ! 

But it would ill become me to detain you in the 
contemplation of objects diminutive in comparison 
with those that are to succeed. 

Hitherto, we have seen the illustrious Greene 
acting in a subordinate capacity, the faint glimmer- 
ings of his fame absorbed and lost in the superior 
rays of a Washington. Happy was it for him to 
have been called to a more explicit station. Had 
this never been the case, the future historian, per- 
plexed between the panegyric of friends and the 
satire of enemies, might have doubted in what colors 
to draw his true character. Accident, alone, saved 
a Greene from so equivocal a fate ; a reflection which 
might damp the noble ardor of emulation, and check 
the towering flight of conscious merit. 

The defeat of Camden, and the misfortune of 
Gates, opened the career of victory and of glory to 
Greene. Congress having resolved upon a successor 

yo Alexander Hamilton 

to the former, the choice was left to the Commander- 
in-Chief, and fell upon the latter. In this destina- 
tion, honorable in proportion as it was critical, he 
acquiesced with the mingled emotions of a great 
mind — impelled by a sense of duty — allured by the 
hope of fame — apprised of the danger and precari- 
ousness of the situation, yet confident of its own 
strength, and animated by the magnitude of the 
object for which it was to be exerted. 

Henceforth we are to view him on a more exalted 
eminence. He is no longer to figure in an ambigu- 
ous or secondary light; he is to shine forth the 
artificer of his own glory — the leader of armies and 
the deliverer of States! 

To estimate properly the value of his services, it 
is necessary to recur to the situation of the southern 
extremity of the Union at the time he entered upon 
the command in that quarter. Georgia and South 
Carolina subdued and overrun; the spirit of their 
people dejected and intimidated; the flame of re- 
sistance scarcely kept alive by the transient gleams 
of a few expiring embers ; North Carolina distracted 
by the still recent effects of internal commotion, 
dreading the hostility of a considerable part of its 
own citizens, and depending, for its exertions, on the 
tried valor and patriotism of the rest, more than on 
the energy of a feeble and ill-organized government ; 
Virginia, debilitated by the excessive efforts of its 
early zeal, and by the dissipation of its revenues and 
forces, in Indian hostilities, in domestic projects, 
encumbered by a numerous body of slaves, bound 
by all the laws of degraded humanity to hate their 

Major-General Greene 71 

masters; deficient in order and vigor in its adminis- 
tration, and relying wholly, for immediate defence 
against threatened invasion, on the resources of a 
country, extensive, populous, and fertile, to be put 
in motion by the same ardent and magnanimous 
spirit which first lighted up the opposition to Great 
Britain, and set the glorious example of resistance to 
America. In such a situation what was to be hoped ? 
What was to be hoped from a general without troops, 
without magazines, without money? A man of less 
depth of penetration or force of soul than Greene, 
would have recoiled at the prospect; but he, far 
from desponding, undertook the arduous task with 
firmness — with a firmness which was the result 
of a well-informed estimate of a situation perilous 
but not desperate. He knew how much was to be 
expected from the efforts of men contending for the 
rights of man. He knew how much was to be per- 
formed by capacity, courage, and perseverance. 

Not to be disconcerted by the most complicated 
embarrassments, nor the most discouraging pro- 
spects, he began, before he entered upon the duties 
of the field, by adjusting the outlines of the plan 
which was to regulate his future conduct; a plan 
conceived with as much wisdom, and so perfect a 
judgment of circumstances, that he never had oc- 
casion to depart from it in the progress of his sub- 
sequent operations. This alone might suffice to form 
the eulogium of his genius, and to demonstrate that 
he was an accomplished master in the science of 
military command. 

His next care was to endeavor to impress the 

72 Alexander Hamilton 

neighboring States with a proper sense of their situa- 
tion, in order to induce them, with system and 
effect, to furnish the succors of which he stood in 
need. To urge the collection and accelerate the 
arrival of these, as well as to repel any invasion to 
which the State might be exposed, he stationed, in 
Virginia, the Baron de Steuben, an officer who mer- 
ited and justified his confidence; and having made 
these preliminary arrangements, he hastened to put 
himself at the head of the inconsiderable remains of 
the southern army, which he joined at Charlotte, on 
the borders of North Carolina, destitute of every 
thing but courage, and an unconquerable attach- 
ment to the cause they had espoused. 

To enter into a particular detail of the operations 
by which the Southern States were rescued from 
conquest and desolation, and the last project of 
Britain for the subjugation of America frustrated, 
would be to assume the province of the historian. 
This, neither the occasion, nor any reasonable claim 
to your indulgence, would justify. A general sketch 
is all that can, with propriety, be attempted, and 
shall limit my endeavors. To supply a necessitous 
army by coercion, and yet maintain the confidence 
and good- will of the coerced; this was among the 
first and not the least of the difficulties to be sur- 
mounted. But delicate and difficult as was the task, 
it was, nevertheless, accomplished. Conducted with 
system, moderation, and equity, even military exac- 
tions lost their rigor, and freemen venerated the 
hand that reluctantly stripped them of their prop- 
erty for their preservation. 

Major-General Greene 73 

Having concerted the arrangements requisite to 
this end, Greene, without further delay, entered 
upon that busy, comphcated, and extraordinary 
scene, which may truly be said to form a phenome- 
non in war — a scene which almost continually pre- 
sents us, on the one hand, with victories ruinous to 
the victors ; on the other, with retreats beneficial to 
the vanquished ; which exhibits to our admiration a 
commander almost constantly obliged to relinquish 
the field to his adversary, yet as constantly making 
acquisitions upon him; beaten to-day; to-morrow, 
without a blow, compelling the conqueror to re- 
nounce the very object for which he had conquered, 
and, in a manner, to fly from the very foe he had 
subdued. Too weak, with his collected strength, to 
dispute the field with an enemy superior both in 
numbers and discipline, and urged by the necessity 
of giving activity to the natural force of the country, 
by rousing the inhabitants from the state of despon- 
dency into which they had sunk, with the prospect 
of succor and protection, Greene divided his little 
army into two parts: one of which he sent, under 
Morgan, into the western extremities of North Caro- 
lina; and, with the other, marched to Hicks' Creek. 

This movement had the desired effect. The ap- 
pearance of aid, magnified by advantages oppor- 
tunely gained (though unimportant in themselves), 
rekindled the ardor of patriotic hope in the breasts 
of many who had begun to despair, and emboldened 
them to resume their arms, and again to repair to 
the standard of liberty. 

Sensible of the importance of counteracting this 

74 Alexander Hamilton 

policy of the American general, the British com- 
mander hesitated not about the part he should act. 
Directing his first attention towards the detachment 
under Morgan, and meditating a decisive blow 
against that corps, he committed the execution of 
the enterprise to Lieutenant-Colonel Tarleton, at the 
head of a thousand veterans. Tarleton, hitherto not 
less the favorite of fortune than of his chief, hastened 
to perform the welcome duty; anticipating an easy 
triumph over foes inferior both in numbers and dis- 
cipline; and dreaming not of the reverse which was 
destined to confound his hopes, and even to sully the 
lustre of his former fame. In the very grasp of 
victory, when not to combat but to slaughter seemed 
all that remained to be done, the forward intrepidity 
of a Washington, seconded by the cool, determined 
bravery of a Howard, snatched the trophy from his 
too eager and too exulting hand. He was discom- 
fited and routed. The greater part of his followers 
were either killed or taken; and the remaining few, 
with himself, were glad to find safety in flight. 

Here first the bright dawn of prosperity began to 
dispel that gloomy cloud which had for some time 
lowered over the Southern horizon ! Thunderstruck 
at so unexpected a disaster, and ill able to spare so 
considerable a part of his force, Comwallis resolved, 
at every sacrifice, to attempt the recovery of his 
captive troops. The trial of skilful exertion between 
the generals and of patient fortitude between the 
troops, to which that attempt gave occasion, was 
such as to render it difficult to pronounce to whom 
the palm of merit ought to be decreed. Abandoning 

Major-General Greene 75 

whatever might impede the celerity of his motions, 
Cornwallis began and urged the pursuit of the 
detachment under Morgan, with a rapidity seldom 
equalled, never surpassed; while, on the other hand, 
the provident and active Greene spared no exertion 
to disappoint his enterprising adversary. 

Anxious for the security of that detachment, with 
their prisoners, and desirous of affecting a reunion of 
his forces, now rendered necessary by a change of 
circumstances, he gave instant orders for the march 
of the body under his immediate command to Guil- 
ford Court-House ; and hastened, in person, through 
the country, a hundred and fifty miles, to join 
General Morgan, whom he came up with on the 
banks of the Catawba. Thus, placed in front of the 
enemy, he was the better able to counteract their 
immediate design, and to direct the co-operation 
necessary to the intended junction. So well were 
his measures taken, that he succeeded in both ob- 
jects. The prisoners were carried off in safety ; and 
Guilford Court-House, the destined place of rendez- 
vous, received and reunited the two divisions of the 
American army. Still, however, too weak to keep 
the field in the face of his enemy, a further retreat 
became inevitable. A resolution was accordingly 
taken to retire beyond the Dan. Here a new and 
not less arduous trial of skill ensued. To get be- 
tween the American army and Virginia, intercept 
their supplies and reinforcements, and oblige them 
to fight on disadvantageous terms — this now became 
the object of Cornwallis. With this view he directed 
his march into the upper country, where the rivers 

7^ Alexander Hamilton 

were fordable with facility; flattering himself that 
the depth of the waters below, and the want of boats, 
would oppose insuperable obstacles to the expedi- 
tious passage of the American troops. To retard the 
progress of the British army was, of course, an in- 
dispensable policy on the part of Greene. For this 
purpose, he practised every expedient which a mind, 
fertile in resource, could devise. And so efficacious 
were the expedients he adopted, that, surmounting 
all the impediments in his way, he completed his 
retreat across the Dan, without loss of men, baggage, 
or stores. 

Such, nevertheless, was the energy of the pursuit, 
that in crossing the three principal rivers, the Ca- 
tawba, the Yadkin, and the Dan, the British troops, 
in a manner, trod upon the heels of the American. 
In the passage of the last of the three, the van of the 
enemy's army reached one shore, almost at the very 
moment that the rear of ours landed on the opposite. 

Comwallis, upon this occasion, imitating Charles 
the Twelfth of Sweden, when the celebrated Schulen- 
burgh made good his retreat across the Oder, in 
spite of the utmost efforts of that vigorous and en- 
terprising monarch, might, with propriety, have ex- 
claimed. This day, at least, Greene has conquered 
me! The art of retreating is perhaps the most diffi- 
cult in the art of war. To have effected a retreat in 
the face of so ardent a pursuit, through so great an 
extent of country; through a country offering every 
obstacle, affording scarcely any resource ; with troops 
destitute of every thing, who a great part of the way 
left the vestiges of their march in their own blood; 

Major-General Greene T] 

— to have done all this, I say, without loss of any 
kind may, without exaggeration, be denominated a 
masterpiece of military skill and exertion. Disap- 
pointed at his first aim, Comwallis now retired from 
the Dan to Guilford Court- House. Having driven 
the American army out of North Carolina, he flat- 
tered himself that his efforts would at least be pro- 
ductive of the advantage of an accession of force, by 
encouraging the numerous royalists of that State 
to repair to his standard. Greene, not without ap- 
prehensions that the hopes of his competitor, in this 
respect, might be realized, lost not a moment, after 
receiving a small reinforcement from Virginia, in 
recrossing the Dan, to take post in the vicinity of 
the British army, and interrupt their communica- 
tion with the country. Three weeks passed in a 
constant scene of military manoeuvre: Comwallis, 
equally striving to bring his antagonist to an action ; 
and Greene, adroitly endeavoring to elude it, yet 
without renouncing such a position as would enable 
him to prevent both supplies and reinforcements. 
On this occasion he played the part of Turenne ; and 
he played it with complete success. The relative 
position which he took and maintained, and the 
tragical fate of a body of royalists, intercepted in 
their way to the British army, destroyed every pro- 
spect of that aid which they, not without reason, had 
promised themselves from their adherents in North 
Carolina. 

Virginia, in the meantime, awakened by the pre- 
sence of danger, exerted herself to reinforce the Amer- 
ican army, Greene, speedily finding himself in a 


condition to outnumber his adversary, resolved to 
offer that battle which he had hitherto declined. He 
considered that, in the existing circumstances, a de- 
feat must be, to the enemy, absolute ruin; while to 
him, from his superiority in cavalry, united with 
other advantages, it could be nothing more than a 
partial misfortune, and must be compensated at a 
price which the enemy could not afford to pay for it. 

The two armies, now equally willing to try the 
fortime of a battle, met and engaged near Guilford 
Court-House. All that could be expected from able 
disposition towards insuring success, promised a 
favorable issue to the American arms. But superior 
discipline carried it against superior numbers and 
superior skill. Victory decreed the glory of the 
combat to the Britons; but Heaven, confirming 
the hopes of Greene, decreed the advantage of it 
to the Americans. Greene retired; Comwallis kept 
the field. But Greene retired only three miles ; and 
Comwallis, in three days, abandoning the place where 
the laurels he had gained were a slender compensa- 
tion for the loss he had suffered, withdrew to Wil- 
mington on the sea-coast. 

This victory cost him a large proportion of the 
flower of his army; and it cost him a Webster. 

Here occurred the problem, on the right solution 
of which depended the fame of Greene and the fate 
of the Southern States. There was every proba- 
bility that the next movement of Comwallis would 
be towards a junction with Arnold for the invasion 
of Virginia. Was the American general to keep 
pace with his adversary in his northern career, in 

Major-General Greene 79 

order to resist his future enterprises ? Or, was he to 
return into the field he had lately left, to endeavor 
to regain what had been there lost? The first, as 
the most obvious, and, in a personal light, the least 
perilous course, would have been thought the most 
eligible by an ordinary mind. But the last, as the 
wisest, though, to his own reputation, the most 
hazardous, appeared preferable to the comprehensive 
eye and adventurous spirit of a Greene. 

On the one hand, he concluded, justly, that Vir- 
ginia might safely be trusted to her own strength 
and resources, and to the aid which, if necessary, she 
might derive from the North, against all the force 
which the enemy were then able to employ in that 
quarter. On the other hand, he foresaw, that if 
South Carolina and Georgia should be abandoned 
to the situation in which they then were, they would 
quickly have abandoned themselves to despair; 
would have lost even the spirit of opposition; and 
might have been rendered, in several respects, sub- 
servient to the future progress of their conqueror. 
Under these impressions, he determined to return 
into South Carolina, to attempt the recovery of that 
and its neighboring State. 

This was one of those strokes that denote superior 
genius, and constitute the sublime of war. T was 
Scipio leaving Hannibal in Italy, to overcome him at 
Carthage ! 

The success was answerable to the judicious bold- 
ness of the design. The enemy were divested of 
their acquisitions in South Carolina and Georgia, 
with a rapidity which, if not ascertained, would 

8o Alexander Hamilton 

scarcely be credible. In the short space of two 
months, all their posts in the interior of the country 
were reduced. The perseverance, courage, enter- 
prise, and resource, displayed by the American gen- 
eral in the course of these events, commanded the 
admiration even of his enemies. In vain was he de- 
feated in one mode of obtaining his object: another 
was instantly substituted that answered the end. 
In vain was he repulsed from before a besieged fort- 
ress: he immediately found other means of com- 
pelling its defenders to relinquish their stronghold. 
Where force failed, address and stratagem still won 
the prize. 

Having deprived the enemy of all their posts in 
the interior of the country, and having wasted their 
forces in a variety of ways, Greene now thought him- 
self in a condition to aim a decisive blow at the muti- 
lated remains of the British army, and, at least, to 
oblige them to take refuge within the lines of Charles- 
ton. With this view he collected his forces into one 
body, and marched to give battle to the enemy, then 
stationed at the Springs of the Eutaw. 

A general action took place. Animated, obstinate, 
and bloody was the contest. The front line of the 
American army, consisting of militia, after begin- 
ning a brisk attack, began to give way. At this 
critical and inauspicious juncture, Greene, with that 
collected intrepidity which never forsook him, gave 
orders to the second line, composed of Continentals, 
to advance to the charge with trailed arms. This 
order, enforced by example and executed with 
matchless composure and constancy, could not fail 

I 

Major-General Greene 8i 

of success. The British veterans shrunk from the 
American bayonet. They were routed and pursued 
a considerable distance. Numbers of them fell into 
the hands of their pursuers, and the remainder were 
threatened with a similar fate; when, arriving at a 
position which, with peculiar advantages, invited to 
a fresh stand, they rallied and renewed the action. 
In vain did the intrepid Washington, at the head of 
the pursuing detachment, redouble the efforts of his 
valor, to dislodge them from this new station. He 
was himself wounded and made a prisoner, and his 
followers, in their turn, compelled to retire. 

But though the enemy, by an exertion of bravery 
which demands our esteem, saved themselves from 
the total ruin which was ready to overwhelm them, 
they had, nevertheless, received too severe a blow to 
attempt any longer to maintain a footing in the open 
country. They, accordingly, the day following, re- 
treated towards Charleston, leaving behind them 
their wounded and a considerable quantity of arms. 
Here ended all serious offensive operations in the 
South! The predatory excursions which intervened 
between the battle of the Eutaw and the evacuation 
of Charleston and Savannah, deserve not a place 
in the catalogue of military achievements. But be- 
fore we take leave of a scene as honorable as it was 
advantageous to the American arms, it behooves us 
to stop for a moment, to pay the tribute of merited 
applause to the memory of that gallant officer, who, 
at the head of the Virginia line, fell in this memorable 
conflict. More anxious, to the last, about his coun- 
try than himself, in the very agonies of departing 

VOL. VIII.— 5. 

r 

82 Alexander Hamilton 

life, he eagerly inquired which of the contending 
parties prevailed; and having learned that his 
countrymen were victorious, he, like another Epami- 
nondas, yielded up his last breath in this noble 
exclamation: ''Then do I die contented.''' Heroic 
Campbell ! How enviable was such a death ! 

The evacuation of the two capitals of South Caro- 
lina and Georgia entirely restored those States to 
their own governments and laws. They now hailed 
the illustrious Greene as their defender and deliverer. 
Their gratitude was proportioned to the extent of 
the benefits resulting from his services; nor did it 
show itself in words only, but was manifested by 
acts that did honor to their generosity. Conse- 
crated in the affections of their citizens to the re- 
motest posterity, the fame of Greene will ever find 
in them a more durable, as well as a more flattering, 
memorial, than in the proudest monuments of mar- 
ble or brass. 

But where, alas, is now this consummate General; 
this brave Soldier; this discerning Statesman; this 
steady Patriot; this virtuous Citizen; this amiable 
Man? Why could not so many talents, so many 
virtues, so many bright and useful qualities, shield 
him from a premature grave? Why was he not 
longer spared to a country he so dearly loved ; which 
he was so well able to serve; which still seems so 
much to stand in need of his services ? Why was he 
only allowed to assist in laying the foundation, and 
not permitted to aid in rearing the superstructure, 
of American greatness? Such are the inquiries 
which our friendly, yet short-sighted, regrets would 

Presidential Etiquette 83 

naturally suggest. But inquiries like these are to 
be discarded as presumptuous. 'T is not for us to 
scan, but to submit, to the dispensations of Heaven. 
Let us content ourselves with revering the memory, 
imitating the virtues, and, as far as we dare, emu- 
lating the glory of the man, whom neither our warm- 
est admiration, nor our fondest predilection, could 
protect from the fatal shaft. And as often as we 
indulge our sorrow for his loss, let us not fail to 
mingle the reflection, that he has left behind him, 
offspring who are the heirs to the friendship which 
we bore to the father, and who have a claim from 
many, if not from all of us, to cares not less than 
parental. 

PRESIDENTIAL ETIQUETTE 

HAMILTON TO WASHINGTON 

New York, May s, 1789. 

Sir: 

In conformity to the intimation you were pleased 
to honor me with on * * * evening last, I have 
reflected upon the etiquette proper to be observed 
by the President, and now submit the ideas which 
have occurred to me on the subject. 

The public good requires as a primary object, that 
the dignity of the office should be supported. 

Whatever is essential to this ought to be pursued, 
though at the risk of partial or momentary dis- 
satisfaction. But care will be necessary to avoid 
extensive disgust or discontent. Men's minds are 

84 Alexander Hamilton 

prepared for a pretty high tone in the demeanor of the 
Executive, but I doubt whether for so high a one as 
in the abstract might be desirable. The notions of 
equality are yet, in my opinion, too general and too 
strong to admit of such a distance being placed 
between the President and other branches of the 
government as might even be consistent with a due 
proportion. The following plan will, I think, steer 
clear of extremes, and involve no very material in- 
conveniences. 

I. The President to have a levee day once a week 
for receiving visits; an hour to be fixed at which it 
shall be understood that he will appear, and conse- 
quently that the visitors are to be previously assem- 
bled. 

The President to remain half an hour, in which 
time he may converse cursorily on indifferent sub- 
jects, with such persons as shall invite his attention, 
and at the end of that half hour disappear. Some 
regulation will be hereafter necessary to designate 
those who may visit. 

A mode of introduction through particular officers 
will be indispensable. No visits to be returned. 

II. The President to accept no invitations, and to 
give formal entertainments only twice or four times 
a year, the anniversaries of important events in the 
Revolution. If twice, the day of the declaration of 
independence, and that of the inauguration of the 
President, which completed the organization of the 
Constitution, to be preferred; if four times, the day 
of the treaty of alliance with France, and that of the 
definitive treaty with Britain to be added. The 

Presidential Etiquette 85 

members of the two Houses of the Legislature, prin- 
cipal officers of the government, foreign ministers 
and other distinguished strangers only to be in- 
vited. The numbers form in my mind an objection ; 
but there may be separate tables in separate rooms. 
This is practised in some European courts. I see no 
other method in which foreign ministers can, with 
propriety, be included in any attentions of the table 
which the President may think fit to pay. 

III. The President, on the levee days, either by 
himself or some gentleman of his household, to give 
informal invitations to family dinners on the days of 
invitation. Not more than six or eight to be in- 
vited at a time, and the matter to be confined es- 
sentially to members of the Legislature and other 
official characters. The President never to remain 
long at table. 

I think it probable that the last article will not 
correspond with the ideas of most of those with 
whom your Excellency may converse ; but on pretty 
mature reflection, I believe it will be necessary to 
remove the idea of too immense an inequality, 
which I fear would excite dissatisfaction and cabal. 
The thing may be so managed as neither to occasion 
much waste of time nor to infringe on dignity. 

It is an important point -to consider what persons 
may have access to your Excellency on business. 
The heads of departments will, of course, have this 
privilege. Foreign ministers of some descriptions 
will also be entitled to it. In Europe, I am informed, 
ambassadors only have direct access to the chief 
magistrate. Something very near what prevails 

86 Alexander Hamilton 

there would, in my opinion, be right. The distinc- 
tion of rank between diplomatic characters requires 
attention, and the door of access ought not to be too 
wide to that class of persons. I have thought that 
the members of the Senate should also have a right 
of individual access on matters relative to the public 
administration. In England and France, peers of 
the realm have this right. We have none such in 
this country, but I believe that it will be satisfactory 
to the people to know that there is some body of 
men in the state who have a right of continual com- 
munication with the President. It will be con- 
sidered a safeguard against secret combinations to 
deceive him. 

I have also asked myself. Will not the Representa- 
tives expect the same privilege, and be offended if 
they are not allowed to participate with the Senate ? 
There is sufficient danger of this to merit considera- 
tion. But there is reason for the distinction in the 
Constitution. The Senate are coupled with the 
President in certain executive functions, treaties, 
and appointments. This makes them in a degree 
his constitutional counsellors, and gives them a 
peculiar claim to the right of access. On the whole, 
I think the discrimination will be proper and may 
be hazarded. 

I have chosen this method of communication be- 
cause I understood your Excellency that it would be 
most convenient to you. The unstudied and un- 
ceremonious manner of it will, I hope, not render it 
the less acceptable. And if, in the execution of your 
commands, at any time I consult frankness and 

Public Lands 2>y 

simplicity more than ceremony or profession, I 
flatter myself you will not on that account distrust 
the sincerity of my cordial wishes for your personal 
happiness, and the success of your administration. 

I have the honor to be, with the highest respect, 
Your Excellency's most obedient and humble ser- 
vant. 

WASHINGTON TO HAMILTON 

New York, May 5, 1789. 

Dear Sir: 

I beg you to accept my unfeigned thanks for your 
friendly communication of this date, and that you 
will permit me to entreat a continuation of them as 
occasion may arise. 

The manner chosen for doing it is most agreeable 
to me. It is my wish to act right; if I err, the head 
and not the heart shall, with justice, be chargeable. 

With sentiments of sincere esteem and regard, 
I am, dear sir, your obed't serv't, 

Geo. Washington. 

PUBLIC LANDS 

REPORT OF A UNIFORM SYSTEM FOR THE DISPOSITION 
OF THE LANDS, THE PROPERTY OF THE UNITED 
STATES 

Communicated to the House of Representatives, July 22, 1790. 

That on the formation of a plan for the disposition 
of the vacant lands of the United States, there ap- 
pear to be two leading objects of consideration : one, 

SS Alexander Hamilton 

the facility of advantageous sale according to the 
probable course of purchases ; the other, the accom- 
modation of individuals now inhabiting the western 
country, or who may hereafter emigrate thither. 

The former, as an operation of finance, claims pri- 
mary attention ; the latter is important, as it relates 
to the satisfaction of the inhabitants of the western 
country. It is desirable, and it does not appear im- 
practicable, to conciliate both. 

Purchasers may be contemplated in three classes: 
moneyed individuals and companies, who will buy 
to sell again; associations of persons who intend 
to make settlements themselves ; single persons or 
families now resident in the western country, or who 
may emigrate thither hereafter. The two first will 
be frequently blended, and will always want con- 
siderable tracts. The last will generally purchase 
small quantities. Hence a plan for the sale of the 
western lands, while it may have due regard for the 
last, should be calculated to obtain all the advan- 
tages which may be derived from the two first 
classes. For this reason it seems requisite that the 
general land-office should be established at the seat 
of government. 'T is there that the principal pur- 
chasers, whether citizens or foreigners, can most 
easily find proper agents, and that contracts for 
large purchases can be best adjusted. 

But the accommodation of the present inhabitants 
of the western territory, and of tmassociated persons 
and families who may emigrate thither, seems to 
require that one office, subordinate to that at the 
seat of Congress, should be opened in the north- 

Public Lands 89 

western, and another in the southwestern govern- 
ment. 

Each of these offices, as well the general one as 
the subordinate ones, it is conceived, may be placed 
with convenience under the superintendence of three 
commissioners, who may either be pre-established 
officers of government, to whom the duty may be 
assigned by law, or persons specially appointed for 
the purpose. The former is recommended by con- 
siderations of economy, and it is probable would 
embrace every advantage which could be derived 
from a special appointment. 

To obviate those inconveniences, and to facilitate 
and insure the attainment of those advantages, 
which may arise from new and casual circumstances, 
springing up from foreign and domestic causes, ap- 
pear to be objects for which adequate provisions 
should be made in any plan that may be adopted. 
For this reason, and from the intrinsic difficulty of 
regulating the details of a specific provision for the 
various objects which require to be consulted, so as 
neither to do too much nor too little for either, it 
is respectfully submitted, whether it would not be 
advisable to vest a considerable latitude of discre- 
tion in the commissioners of the general land-office, 
subject to some such regulations and limitations as 
follows, viz.: 

That no land shall be sold, except such in respect 
to which the titles of the Indian tribes shall have 
been previously extinguished. 

That a sufficient tract or tracts shall be reserved 
and set apart for satisfying the subscribers to the 

90 Alexander Hamilton 

proposed loan in the public debt; but that no loca- 
tion shall be for less than five hundred acres. 

That convenient tracts shall from time to time be 
set apart for the purpose of locations by actual set- 
tlers, in quantities not exceeding to one person one 
hundred acres. 

That other tracts shall from time to time be set 
apart for sales in townships of ten miles square, ex- 
cept where they shall adjoin upon a boundary of 
some prior grant, or of a tract so set apart, in which 
cases there shall be no greater departure from such 
form of location than may be absolutely necessary. 

That any quantities may nevertheless be sold 
by special contract, comprehended either within 
natural boundaries or lines, or both. 

That the price shall be thirty cents per acre, to be 
paid either in gold or silver, or in public securities, 
computing those which shall bear an immediate in- 
terest of six per cent, as at par with gold and silver; 
and those which shall bear a future or less interest, 
if any there shall be, at a proportional value. 

The certificates issued for land upon the proposed 
loan shall operate as warrants within the tract or 
tracts which shall be specially set apart for satisfying 
the subscribers thereto, and shall also be receivable 
in all payments whatsoever for land, by way of dis- 
count, acre for acre. 

That no credit shall be given for any quantity less 
than a township of ten miles square, nor more than 
two years' credit for any greater quantity. 

That in every instance of credit, at least one 
quarter part of the consideration shall be paid down, 

Public Lands 91 

and security, other than the land itself, shall be re- 
quired for the residue. And that no title shall be given 
for any tract, or part of a purchase, beyond the quanti- 
ty for which the consideration shall be actually paid. 

That the residue of the tract or tracts, set apart 
for the subscribers to the proposed loan, which shall 
not have been located within two years after the 
same shall have been set apart, may then be sold on 
the same terms as any other land. 

That the commissioners of each subordinate office 
shall have the management of all sales, and the issu- 
ing of warrants for all locations, in the tracts to be 
set apart for the accommodation of individual set- 
tlers, subject to the superintendency of the com- 
missioners of the general land-office, who may also 
commit to them the management of any other sales 
or locations which it may be found expedient to 
place under their direction. 

That there shall be a surveyor-general, who shall 
have power to appoint a deputy surveyor-general in 
each of the western governments, and a competent 
number of deputy surveyors to execute in person all 
warrants to them directed by the surveyor-general, 
or deputy surveyor-generals, within certain districts 
to be assigned to them respectively. That the sur- 
veyor-general shall also have in charge all the duties 
committed to the geographer-general by the several 
resolutions and ordinances of Congress. 

That all warrants issued at the general land-office 
shall be signed by the commissioners, or such one of 
them as they may nominate for that purpose, and 
shall be directed to the surveyor-general. That all 

92 Alexander Hamilton 

warrants issued at a subordinate office, shall be 
signed by the commissioners of such office, or by 
such one of them as they may nominate for that 
purpose, and shall be directed to the deputy sur- 
veyor-general within the government. That the 
priority of locations upon warrants shall be deter- 
mined by the times of the applications to the deputy 
surveyors ; and, in case of two applications for the 
same land at one time, the priority may be deter- 
mined by lot. 

That the treasurer of the United States shall be 
the receiver of all payments for sales at the general 
land-office, and may also receive deposits of money, 
or securities for purchases intended to be made at 
the subordinate offices, his receipts, or certificates for 
which, shall be received in payment at those offices. 

That the secretary of each of the western govern- 
ments shall be the receiver of all payments arising 
from sales at the office of such government. 

That controversies concerning rights to patents, 
or grants of land, shall be determined by the com- 
missioners of that office under whose immediate 
direction, or jurisdiction, the locations in respect 
to which they may arise shall have been made. 

That the completion of all contracts, and sales 
heretofore made, shall be under the direction of the 
commissioners of the general land-office. 

That the commissioners of the general land-office, 
surveyor-general, deputy surveyors-general, and the 
commissioners of the land-office in each of the west- 
ern governments, shall not purchase, nor shall others 
purchase for them, in trust, any public lands. 

Public Lands 93 

That the secretaries of the western governments 
shall give security for the faithful execution of their 
duties as receivers of the land-office. 

That all patents shall be signed by the President 
of the United States, or by the Vice-President, or 
other officer of government acting as President, and 
shall be recorded in the office either of the surveyor- 
general, or of the clerk of the Supreme Court of the 
United States. 

That all surveys of land shall be at the expense of 
the purchasers or grantees. 

That the fees shall not exceed certain rates, to be 
specified in the law, affording equitable compensa- 
tions for the services of the surveyors, and estab- 
lishing reasonable and customary charges for patents 
and other office papers, for the benefit of the United 
States. 

That the commissioners of the general land-office 
shall, as soon as may be, from time to time, cause all 
the rules and regulations which they may establish to 
be published, in one gazette at least, in each State, 
and in each of the western governments where there 
is a gazette, for the information of the citizens of the 

Regulations like these will define and fix the most 
essential particulars which can regard the disposal 
of the western lands, and where they leave any thing 
to discretion, will indicate the general principles or 
policy intended by the Legislature to be observed, 
for a conformity to which the commissioners will of 
course be responsible. They will, at the same time, 
leave room for accommodating to circumstances 

94 Alexander Hamilton 

which cannot beforehand be accurately appreciated, 
and for varying the course of proceeding as experi- 
ence shall suggest to be proper, and will avoid the 
danger of those obstructions and embarrassments 
in the execution, which would be to be apprehended 
from an endeavor at greater precision and more 
exact detail. 

All which is humbly submitted. 

Alexander Hamilton, 
Secretary of the Treasury. 

HEADS of topics FOR PRESIDENT'S SPEECH OF 

DECEMBER 8, I790' 

Draft by Hamilton, December i, 1790, 

I. — Confidence that measures for the further sup- 
port of public credit, and for the payment of the in- 
terest and gradual extinguishment of the principal 
of the public debt, will be pursued with zeal and 
vigor ; and that, as one means to this, a plan for the 
sale of the western lands will be adopted, which will 
give them the effect intended, appropriating them 
to the sinking fund, and which will extend the agri- 
culture of the United States. 

II. — Felicitation on the success of the measures 
hitherto adopted for the support of public credit, 
as witnessed by the rise of American stock, not only 
in the United States, but in Europe. The public 
credit cannot but acquire additional energy when 
it is known that the resources hitherto in activity 
have been more productive than was calculated 
upon. As proof not only of the resources of the 

^ Compare Writings of Washington, xii., p. 12. 

President's Speech 95 

country, but of the patriotism and honor of the 
mercantile and marine citizens of the United States, 
the punctuaHty of the former in discharging their 
obligations has been exemplary. 

III. — Information that a loan of 300,000 florins 
has been effected in Holland, the terms and disposi- 
tion of which (as far as any has been made) the Secre- 
tary of the Treasury has been directed to explain. 

IV. — Growing conviction in the minds of the 
great body of the people of the utility and benefits 
of a National Government. It is not to be doubted 
that any symptoms of discontent which may have 
appeared in particular places, respecting particular 
measures, will be obviated by a removal of the mis- 
apprehensions which may have occasioned them. 

V. — Communication of the expedition against the 
Indians, and of the motives to it. 

VI. — Disturbed situation of Europe, particularly 
of the great maritime powers. The precautions of a 
prudent circumspection on the part of the United 
States ought not to be neglected. 

VII. — Almost total interruption of our Mediter- 
ranean trade, from the dread of piratical depreda- 
tions. Great importance of opening that trade, and 
expediency of considering whether protection cannot 
be afforded to it. 

IX. — Symptoms of greater population than was 
supposed — a further proof of progressive strength 
and resource. 

X. — Remarks on the abundance of the harvests, 
affording an assurance of internal plenty, and the 
means of easy payment for foreign supplies. 

96 Alexander Hamilton 

APPORTIONMENT OF REPRESENTATIVES 

HAMILTON TO WASHINGTON ' 

Philadelphia, April 4, 1792, 

The Secretary of the Treasury presents his respects 
to the President of the United States. He was in- 
formed yesterday, by the Attorney- General, that his 
opinion concerning the constitutionality of the Re- 
presentation Bill was desired this morning. He now 
sends it with his reasons, but more imperfectly 
stated than he could have wished, through want of 
time. He has never seen the bill, but from the 
accoimts he has had of it, he takes it for granted 
that he cannot have misconceived its contents, so 
as to cause any material error in the process of his 
reasoning. 

The President desires an opinion, whether the act 
entitled '* An act for an apportionment of representa- 
tives among the several States, according to the first 
enumeration," be constitutional or not. 

It is to be inferred, from the provisions of the act, 
that the following process has been pursued: 

I. The aggregate nimibers of the United States 

^ The first attempt to apportion representatives produced a long 
wrangle in Congress. Finally the Senate bill, fixing the number of 
representatives at one hundred and twenty, and giving representation 
to the larger fractions, passed. Washington before deciding asked for 
the written opinion of each member of his cabinet, which was divided. 
Jefferson and Randolph thought it clearly unconstitutional. Hamil- 
ton and Knox considered it constitutional. Washington vetoed the 
bill. Another act was then passed fixing simply the ratio of repre- 
sentation, and every ten years thereafter there was a wrangle. In 1850 
we reverted to the Senate plan of fixing the number of representatives 
first, and that system has prevailed. 

Apportionment of Representatives 97 

are divided by 30,000, which gives the total number 
of representatives, or 120. 

2. This number is apportioned among the several 
States by the following rule: As the aggregate num- 
bers of the United States are to the total number of 
representatives found as above, so are the particular 
numbers of each State to the number of represent- 
atives of such State. But, 

3. As this second process leaves a residue of eight 
out of the 120 members unapportioned, these are 
distributed among those States which, upon that 
second process, have the largest fractions or re- 
mainders. 

As a ratio of 30,000 appears to have been adopted 
as a guide, the question is, whether this ratio ought 
to have been applied, in the first instance, to the 
aggregate mmibers of the United States, or to the 
particular numbers of each State ? 

I am of opinion that either of these courses might 
have been constitutionally pursued; or, in other 
words, that there is no criterion by which it can be 
pronounced decisively that the one or the other is 
the true construction. Cases so situated often arise 
on constitutions and laws. 

The part of the Constitution in question is thus 
expressed: ''Representatives and direct taxes shall be 
apportioned among the several States according to 
their respective numbers.'" 

'T is plain that the same rule is to be pursued 
with regard to direct taxes as with regard to repre- 
sentatives. 

What is the process which would naturally be 

VOL. VIII.— 7. 

98 Alexander Hamilton 

followed in relation to the apportionment of direct 
taxes ? 

Clearly this — the total sum necessary would be first 
ascertained. 

This total sum would then be apportioned among 
the several States by the following rule, viz. : 

As the aggregate numbers of the United States are 
to the whole sum required, so are the particular 
numbers of a particular State to the proportion of 
such State; which is, so far, the exact process that 
has been followed by the bill in the apportionment 
of representatives. 

And hence results a strong argument for its con- 
stitutionality. 

If there had been no ratio mentioned in the Con- 
stitution, 't is evident that no other course could 
have been well pursued. No doubt, at least, of the 
propriety of that which has been pursued, could have 
been then entertained. 

Does the mention of a ratio necessarily alter it? 

The words of the Constitution, in respect to the 
ratio, are these: ''The number of representatives 
shall not exceed one for every 30,000, but each State 
shall have at least one representative." 

This provision may naturally be read and under- 
stood thus: ''The whole number of the represent- 
atives of the United States shall not exceed one to 
every 30,000 of the aggregate numbers of the United 
States; but if it should happen that the proportion 
of the numbers of any State to the aggregate num- 
bers of the United States should not give to such 
State one representative, such State shall, never- 

Apportionment of Representatives 99 

theless, have one. No State shall be without a 
representative. " 

There is nothing in the form of expression to con- 
fine the application of the ratio to the several num- 
bers of the States. The mode of expression equally 
permits its application to their joint or aggregate 
numbers. The intent of inserting it is merely to 
determine a proportional limit, which the number 
of the House of Representatives shall not exceed. 
This is as well satisfied by resorting to the collect- 
ive, as to the separate, population of the respective 
States. 

There is, therefore, nothing in the last recited 
clause to control or direct the sense of the first. 

If it be said that the further process which appor- 
tions the residue among the States having the great- 
est remainders is the circumstance that renders the 
bill unconstitutional, because it renders the repre- 
sentation not strictly according to the respective num- 
bers of the States, it may be answered that this is 
but a necessary consequence of the first principle. 

As there would commonly be left, by the first pro- 
cess, an unapportioned residue of the total number 
to be apportioned, it is of necessity that that residue 
should be distributed among the several States by 
some rule, and none more equal or defensible can be 
found than that of giving a preference to the greatest 
remainders. 

If this makes the apportionment not mathemat- 
ically '' according to the respective numbers of the sev- 
eral States," so neither would the opposite principle 
of construction. 

loo Alexander Hamilton 

Fractions, more or less great, would, in this case 
also, and in a greater degree, prevent a conformity of 
the proportion of representatives to numbers. The 
same objection would lie, in this respect, against 
both principles of construction, against that in the 
bill at least. 

Upon the whole, then, the bill apportions the re- 
presentatives among the several States, according to 
their respective numbers; so that the number of re- 
presentatives does not exceed one for every 30,000 
persons, each State having at least one member. It 
therefore performs every requisition of the Con- 
stitution ; and it will not be denied that it performs 
this in the manner most consistent with equality. 

There appears, therefore, no room to say that the 
bill is unconstitutional, though there may be an- 
other construction of which the Constitution is 
capable. In cases where two constructions may 
reasonably be adopted, and neither can be pro- 
nounced inconsistent with the public good, it seems 
proper that the legislative sense should prevail. The 
present appears to the Secretary clearly to be such 
a case. 

INDIAN AFFAIRS 

For the Federal Gazette. 

Russell, under an affected moderation, veils the 
most insidious and malignant designs, and slyly 
propagates the basest slanders. This is evident 
from the following passage of his second paper. 

Indian Affairs loi 

After stating a visionary and impracticable scheme 
for avoiding a war with the Indians, he proceeds 
thus : " But, then, how many officers had been want- 
ing, how many lucrative contracts would have been 
lost, and how great a waste of money would have 
been prevented from flowing into the coffers of those 
concerned in this business ? ' ' 

The plain inference from this is, that the public 
officer who has an agency in making those contracts 
shares in the profit of them, and that a part of the 
money which is expended flows into his coffers. If 
this is not his meaning, then Russell owes it to him- 
self, and to justice, to disavow the inference. If it is 
his meaning, then he owes it to the public to answer 
the following questions: Does he know by what 
public officer the contracts for supplying the army 
are made ? Has he any ground to believe that that 
officer ever advised a single step which has led to the 
present Indian war ? Does he know what his official 
conduct has been with regard to it? Does he know 
what his private character has been as to pecuniary 
affairs? Is he acquainted with a single fact or even 
circumstance which can justify a suspicion that he 
has ever been directly or indirectly interested in any 
contract in which he has had an agency ? 

Let him answer these questions, or otherwise as- 
sign the grounds of his insinuation, or let him be 
despised as a wanton calumniator. 

Anti-Defamer. 

I02 Alexander Hamilton 

PRESIDENT'S SPEECH^ 

Draft by Hamilton. 

November 6, 1793. 

It is an abatement of the satisfaction with which I 
meet you, on the present occasion, that in felicitating 
you on the continuance of the national prosperity 
generally, I am not able to add to it information that 
the Indian hostilities, which have for some time dis- 
tressed our northwestern frontier, have terminated. 

You will doubtless learn with as much concern as 
I communicate it, that reiterated endeavors to effect 
a pacification have hitherto issued only in new and 
outrageous proofs of persevering hostility on the 
part of the tribes with whom we are in contest. An 
earnest desire to procure tranquillity to the frontier, 
to stop the further effusion of blood, to arrest the 
progress of expense, to promote the prevalent wish 
of the country for peace, have led to strenuous 
efforts, through various channels, to effect that de- 
sirable end, in which neither my own calculations of 
the event, nor my scruples which may have occurred 
concerning the dignity of government, have been 
permitted to outweigh the important considerations 
that have been mentioned. 

A detail of the measures which have been adopted, 
will be laid before you, from which I persuade my- 
self it will appear to you, that means as proper and 
as efficacious as could have been devised, have been 
employed. The issue indeed of some of them is yet 
depending, but while a favorable one is not to be 

' Writings of Washington, xii., 27. 

President's Speech 103 

despaired of, every antecedent and collateral cir- 
cumstance discourages an expectation of it. 

In the course of these attempts, some valuable citi- 
zens have fallen victims to their zeal for the public 
service. A sanction hitherto respected even among 
savages has not been sufficient to protect from 
slaughter the messengers of peace. It will, I pre- 
sume, be duly considered whether the occasion does 
not call for an exercise of liberality towards the 
families of the deceased. 

It must add to your concern to know that in addi- 
tion to the continuation of hostile appearances 
among the tribes north of the Ohio, some threaten- 
ing symptoms have lately been revived among some 
of those south of it. According to the last accounts, 
an attack upon the settlements within the territory 
of the United States, was meditated on the part of 
the Chickamagas who form a portion of the nation 
of the Cherokees. 

Further evidence, however, is necessary to ascer- 
tain the reality and extent of the evils; and in 
the meantime defensive precautions only have been 
permitted. 

It is not understood that any breach of treaty or 
aggression on the part of the United States or citi- 
zens is even alleged, as a pretext for the spirit of 
hostility in this quarter. Other causes for it are in- 
dicated, which it would be premature to particularize. 

I have reason to believe that every practicable 
exertion has been made to be prepared for the alter- 
native of a continuance of the war in pursuance of the 
provisions made by law. A large proportion of the 

I04 Alexander Hamilton 

troops authorized to be raised have been recruited, 
but the number is still incomplete. A particular 
statement from the proper department on this sub- 
ject, and in relation to some other points which have 
been suggested, will afford more precise information 
as a guide to the legislative deliberations, and among 
other things will enable Congress to judge whether 
some additional stimulus to the recruiting service 
may not be advisable. 

In looking forward to the future expense of the 
operations which may be necessary, I derive con- 
solation from the information I receive, that, as far 
as the product of the revenues for the present year 
is known at the Treasury, there is a strong prospect 
that no additional burdens on the community will 
be requisite for the supplies of the ensuing year. 
This, however, will be better ascertained in the 
course of the present session ; and it is proper to add, 
that the information proceeds upon the supposition 
of no material extension of the spirit of hostility. 

I cannot dismiss the subject of Indian affairs with- 
out recalling to your attention the necessity of more 
adequate provision for giving energy to the laws 
throughout our interior frontiers, so as effectually 
to restrain depredations upon the Indians, without 
which every pacific system must prove abortive; 
and also for enabling the employment of qualified 
persons to reside as agents among the Indians, an 
expedient of material importance in the successful 
management of Indian affairs. 

If some efficacious plan could be devised for carry- 
ing on trade with the Indians, upon a scale adequate 

President's Speech 105 

to their wants, and under regulations calculated 
to protect them from extortion and imposition, it 
would prove hereafter a powerful means of preserv- 
ing peace and a good understanding with them. 

The prosperous state of our revenue has been in- 
timated. This would be still more the case, were 
it not for the impediments which in some places 
continue to embarrass the collection of the duties 
on home-made spirits. These impediments have 
lessened, and are lessening, as to local extent; and 
as applied to the community at large, the spirit of 
acquiescence in the law appears to be progressive. 

But symptoms of an increasing opposition having 
recently manifested themselves in certain quarters, 
particularly in one where the enjoyment of im- 
mediate benefits from the common contributions of 
the country was to have been expected to fortify the 
general sense of respect and duty towards the gov- 
ernment and its laws, and the disposition to share in 
the public burdens, I thought a special interposition 
on my part had become proper and advisable; and 
under this impression I have issued a proclamation. 

Measures have also been begun for the prosecution 
of offenders; and Congress may be assured that 
nothing within constitutional and legal limits which 
may depend on me, shall be, wanting to assert and 
maintain the just authority of the laws. In fulfill- 
ing this trust, I shall count entirely upon the full co- 
operation of the other departments of government, 
and upon the zealous support of all good citizens. 

I cannot forbear to bring again into the view of 
the Legislature the expediency of a revision of the 

io6 Alexander Hamilton 

judiciary system. A representation from the judges 
of the Supreme Court, which will be laid before you, 
points out some of the inconveniences that are ex- 
perienced. In the course of the administration of 
the laws, considerations arise out of the structure of 
that system which tend to impede their execution. 
As connected with this subject, some provisions re- 
specting the taking of bail upon processes out of the 
courts of the United States, and a supplementary 
definition of offences against the Constitution and 
laws, and of punishment for such offences, are pre- 
sumed to merit particular attention. 

The interests of the nation, when well understood, 
will be found to coincide with their moral duties. 
Among these, it is an important one to cultivate 
peace and friendship with our neighbors. To do 
this, we should make provision for rendering the 
justice we must sometimes require from them. I 
recommend therefore to your consideration, whether 
the laws of the Union should not be extended to 
restrain our citizens from committing acts of violence 
within the territories of other nations, which would 
be punished were they committed within our own. 
And in general, the maintenance of a friendly inter- 
course with foreign nations will be presented to your 
attention by the expiration of the laws for that pur- 
pose, which takes place, if not renewed, at the close 
of the present session. 

In execution of the authority given by the Legis- 
lature, measures have been taken for engaging some 
artists from abroad to aid in the establishment of our 
mint; others have been employed at home. Pro- 

President's Speech 107 

vision has been made of the requisite buildings, and 
these are now putting into proper condition for the 
purposes of the estabhshment. There has been also 
a small beginning in the coinage of half dollars and 
cents; the want of small coins in circulation calling 
the first attention to them. 

The regulation of foreign coins, in correspondency 
with the principles of our national coinage, will, I 
doubt not, be resumed and completed, being a mat- 
ter essential to the due operation of the system, and 
to order in our pecuniary concerns. 

It is represented that the regulations contained in 
the law which establishes the post-office, operate in 
experiment against the transmission of newspapers 
to different parts of the country. Should this, upon 
due inquiry, be found to be the fact, the legislative 
wisdom will, doubtless, apply a remedy, under a full 
conviction of the great importance of facilitating the 
circulation of political intelligence and information. 

Information has been received of the adoption of 
a constitution for the State of Kentucky. An event 
so interesting to the happiness of the part of the 
nation to which it relates, cannot but make a cor- 
respondent impression. The communications con- 
cerning it will be laid before you. 

It is proper likewise to inform you that, since my 
last communication on the subject, in further execu- 
tion of the acts severally making provision for the 
public debt, and for the reduction thereof, three new 
loans have been effected, one for 3,000,000 of florins 
at Antwerp, at four and a half per cent., and four 
per cent, charges, and two others, each for 3,000,000 

io8 Alexander Hamilton 

of florins, at Amsterdam, at four per cent., and five 
and five and a half per cent, charges. Among the 
objects to which these funds have been directed to 
be applied, the payment of the debts due to certain 
foreign officers, according to the provision made for 
that purpose during the last session, is included. 

House of Representatives: 

I entertain a strong hope that the state of the 
national finances is now sufficiently matured to en- 
able you to enter upon systematic and effectual ar- 
rangements for the regular redemption and discharge 
of the public debt, according to the right which has 
been reserved to the government. No measure can 
be regarded as more desirable, whether viewed with 
an eye to its intrinsic importance, or to the general 
sentiment and wish of the nation. 

Provision likewise is requisite for the reimburse- 
ment of the loan which has been made of the Bank 
of the United States, pursuant to eleventh section 
of the act by which it is incorporated. In fulfilling 
the public stipulations in this particular, a valuable 
saving may, it is expected, be made. 

Appropriations for the service of the ensuing year, 
and for such extraordinaries as may have occurred, 
will demand and, I doubt not, will engage your early 
attention. 

Senate and House of Representatives : 

I content myself with recalling your attention 
generally, to such objects suggested in my former 

Indian Affairs 109 

communications as have not yet been finally acted 
upon, and as are not previously particularized. 

The results of your joint deliberations hitherto 
will, I trust, be productive of solid and durable ad- 
vantages to our constituents, and which, by con- 
ciliating more and more their approbation, may 
tend to strengthen their attachment to that con- 
stitution of the government upon which depend, 
under Divine Providence, their union, safety, and 
prosperity. 

Still further to secure these inestimable ends, 
there is nothing which can have so powerful a ten- 
dency as the careful cultivation of harmony, com- 
bined with a due regard to stability in the public 
councils. 

INDIAN AFFAIRS 

Cabinet Opinion. 

June I, 1793. 

My judgment balanced a considerable time on 
the proposed measure ; but it has at length decided 
against it, and very materially, on the ground, that 
I do not think the United States can honorably or 
morally, or with good policy, embark the Choc taws 
in the war, without a determination to extricate 
them from the consequences, even by force. Ac- 
cordingly it is proposed that, in settling our differ- 
ences with the Creeks, ''we mediate effectually the 
peace of the Chickasaws and Choctaws"; which I 
understand to mean, that we are to insist with the 
Creeks on such terms of peace for them as shall 

I lo Alexander Hamilton 

appear to us equitable; and if refused, will exert 
ourselves to procure them by arms. I am unwilling, 
all circumstances foreign and domestic considered, to 
embarrass the government with such an obligation. 

Alexander Hamilton. 

CONVENING CONGRESS 

HAMILTON TO WASHINGTON ' 

2 J Miles from Philadelphia, October 24, 1793. 

Sir: — I arrived at my house yesterday evening, 
where I found your letter of the 14th instant ; having 
previously received that of the 25th of September, by 
the circuitous route of Albany, the evening before 
my departure from New York. 

As to the right of the President to convene Con- 
gress out of the ordinary course, I think it stands as 
follows — ''he may on extraordinary occasions con- 
vene both houses of Congress or either of them." 
These are the words of the Constitution. Nothing 
is said as to time or place — nothing restrictive as 
to either; I therefore think they both stand on the 
same footing. The discretion of the President ex- 
tends to place as well as time. The reason of the 
thing as well as the words of the Constitution would 
extend it to both. The usual seat of the govern- 
ment may be in possession of an enemy, it may be 
swallowed up by an earthquake. 

' This is an opinion as to the power of the President to convene 
Congress at some place other than that to which they had adjourned. 
The cause of the inquiry was the presence of yellow fever in Philadel- 
phia. 

Convening Congress iii 

I know of no law that abridges in this respect the 
discretion of the President — if a law could abridge a 
constitutional discretion of either branch. 

But the doubt with me is whether the '' extraor- 
dinary occasion" mentioned in the Constitution be 
not some unforeseen occurrence in the public affairs, 
which renders it advisable for the public service to 
convene Congress at some time different from that 
which the Constitution or some law has established; 
in other words, to anticipate their ordinary meeting, 
to have a special session for a special object of public 
business out of the pre-established course. 

I doubt, therefore, whether the circumstance of a 
contagious disease existing at the seat of govern- 
ment be a constitutional ground for convening Con- 
gress at another place, but at the same time they had 
premeditated. 

And I know that there are respectable opinions 
against the power of the President to change the 
place of meeting in such a case, so as I think to ren- 
der it inexpedient to take the step. 

But the President may recommend a meeting at 
some other place, as a place of preliminary rendez- 
vous for the members of the two houses, that they 
may informally concert what further the exigency 
may require, and my present opinion inclines in 
favor of such a measure. 

The question then would be, what place is the 
most eligible. Obvious reasons render it desirable 
that it should be as near Philadelphia as may con- 
sist with the motive for naming such a place — to 
wit, the safety of the members, i. Innovation upon 

112 Alexander Hamilton 

the existing arrangement with regard to the seat of 
government ought to be avoided as much as possible. 
2. Congress may think it necessary for regularity to 
go within the limits of the city (though but for an 
hour), to give legality by some summary act to an- 
other place of meeting ; and with this view it will be 
convenient to meet at no great distance from the 
city. 3. The place recommended may influence the 
place of session. The President and heads of de- 
partments ought to be near Congress, but they can- 
not be long remote from their offices, and a removal 
of the public offices for one session would be in many 
ways an evil. Lastly, the less the President in such 
cases departs from the pre-established course, the 
less room there will be for cavil. 

All these reasons would operate in favor of Ger- 
mantown, if competent only to the momentary 
accommodation of Congress. Mr. Peters and some 
other gentlemen affirm that it is. I have myself 
great doubt on the point, and I have not had time to 
examine, but I cannot help paying deference to the 
opinion of those who assert its competency. 

There is, however, another consideration not un- 
worthy of attention. Experience seems to decide 
satisfactorily that there would be due safety at Ger- 
mantown; but it is very probable this would not 
appear to be the case to the members generally. 
The alarm appears to be greatest in proportion as 
you go furthest from the seat of the disease. Yet I 
should hope the President's recommendation, stating 
the fact as evidenced by experience, would appease 
the apprehensions of the parties concerned. 

Convening Congress 113 

If German town should not be found adequate, on 
the score of accommodation, Trenton, Reading, Lan- 
caster, and Wilmington are the places which present 
themselves to choice as most eligible ; nothing more 
northerly or southerly ought to be thought of. A 
place in Pennsylvania will best please the Pennsyl- 
vanians. They would be very jealous of Trenton, 
and they would have some, though less, jealousy of 
Wilmington; Lancaster would afford better accom- 
modation than Reading. Wilmington would, I ap- 
prehend, be the most agreeable of these places to 
Congress. 

But I am, upon the whole, of opinion that it will 
be best to make Germantown do, if possible. It 
will be time enough to decide when you arrive, and 
the interval will be employed to examine the ground. 

Mrs. Hamilton and myself are very sensible to the 
obliging interest you have manifested on our re- 
covery. Exercise and northern air have restored us 
beyond expectation. We are very happy that Mrs. 
Washington and yourself escaped. 

I have the honor to remain, etc. 

HAMILTON TO WASHINGTON 

Fair Hill, November 3, 1793. 

Sir: — Not having been in condition to attend you 
yesterday, and (though free from fever) yet not 
being well enough to go abroad immediately, I have 
concluded to submit to you by a line the result of my 
further reflections on the subject of my last letter. 

I believe it will be altogether safe for the ensuing 

VOL. VIII.— 8. 

114 Alexander Hamilton 

session of Congress to be held at Philadelphia, and 
that the good of the public service requires it, if pos- 
sible. Under the existing prospect, I do not think 
it would be advisable for the President to give the 
business a different direction by any preliminary 
step. But as the apprehensions of distant mem- 
bers will probably be too much alive, it is desirable 
they should, if possible, be brought in the vicinity of 
Philadelphia some days beforehand, to examine and 
judge for themselves. It is likely they will then be 
satisfied that they can safely sit in the city. If 
otherwise, their sentiments concerning another place 
can be collected, as a guide to the President. To 
effect this end, I would advise that circular-letters 
be written (say by the Attorney-General, the Sec- 
retary of State not being here) to the respective 
members, informally recommending to them, as on 
the part of the President, to repair to Germantown 
and its vicinity some days, not more than a week, 
prior to the day for the meeting of Congress, giving 
the reasons for this recommendation. 

I prefer this to any public act, because there is an 
inconvenience in giving any sort of formality to an 
unauthoritative proceeding. 

An objection to the proceeding is, that the remote 
Southern members cannot be reached in time. But 
the answer to this is, that they will probably come 
forward, of course, to some neighboring State — 
New York, Delaware, or Maryland, — and letters for 
them may be lodged in each. 

With true respect and attachment, I have the 
honor to be, etc. 

Objects to be Communicated 115 

OBJECTS TO BE COMMUNICATED IN 
SPEECH AND MESSAGES 

(By Hamilton.) 

1793- 

I. — Proclamation. 

II. — Embarrassments in carrying into execution 
the principles of neutrality; necessity of some aux- 
iliary provisions by law. * * * 

III. — Expectation of indemnification given in re- 
lation to illegal captures. 

IV. — State of our affairs with regard to Great 
Britain, Spain, and France — claim of Guarantee — 
propositions respecting Trade. 

V. — Indian affairs — failure of Treaty — state of 
expedition under Wayne — prospects with regard to 
Southern Indians. 

VI. — Prudence of additional precautions for de- 
fence, as the best security for the peace of the 
country. 

1 . Fortification of principal seaports. 

2. Corps of efficient militia. 

VII. — Completion of settlement of Accounts be- 
tween the United and Individual States; Provision 
for balances. 

VIII. — Provision for a sinking fund. 

IX. — Our revenues in the aggregate have con- 
tinued to answer expectation as to productiveness, 
but if the various objects pointed out, and which ap- 
pear to be necessary to the public interest, are to be 
accomplished, it can hardly be hoped that there will 
not be a necessity for some moderate addition to 
them. 

ii6 Alexander Hamilton 

X. — Prolongation of the Dutch instalment by way 
of loan terms. 

XL — Provision for the second instalment due to 
the Bank of the United States. 

XII. — For interest in the unsubscribed debt dur- 
ing the present year. Quere. 

XIII. — Communication of the state of cessions of 
Light-houses. The cession in various instances has 
not been entire; it has reserved a partial right of 
jurisdiction for process; consequently is not strictly 
conformable to law. 

XIV. — Commissary to receive, issue, and account 
for all public stores would conduce much to order 
and economy. 

PRESIDENT'S SPEECH ' 

Draft by Hamilton. 

December 3, 1793. 

It is greatly to be lamented, for the sake of hu- 
manity, that the flame of war, which had before 
spread over a considerable part of Europe, has, 
within the present year, extended itself much fur- 
ther; implicating all those powers with whom the 
United States have the most extensive relations. 
When it was seen here, that almost all the maritime 
nations either were, or were likely soon to become, 
parties to the war, it was natural that it should 
excite serious reflections about the possible conse- 
quences to this country. On the one hand, it ap- 

' Writings of Washington, xii., 36. 

President's Speech 1 1 7 

peared desirable that no impressions in reference to 
it should exist with any of the powers engaged, of a 
nature to precipitate arrangements or measures tend- 
ing to interrupt or endanger our peace. On the 
other, it was probable that designing or inconsiderate 
persons among ourselves might, from different mo- 
tives, embark in enterprises contrary to the duties 
of a nation at peace with nations at war with each 
other; * * * and, of course, calculated to in- 
vite and to produce reprisals and hostilities. Ad- 
verting to these considerations, in a situation both 
new and delicate, I judged it advisable to issue a 
proclamation (here insert the substance of the pro- 
clamation). The effects of this measure have, I 
trust, neither disappointed the views which dic- 
tated it, nor disserved the true interests of our 
country. 

The Commissioners charged with the settlement of 
Accounts between the United and the Individual 
States, completed that important business within 
the time limited by law; and the balances which 
they have reported have been placed upon the 
Books of the Treasury. A copy of their Report, 

bearing date the day of last, will be laid 

before Congress for their information. 

The importance of the object will justify me in 
recalling to your consideration the expediency of a 
regular and adequate provision for the redemption 
and discharge of the Public Debt. Several obvious 
considerations render the economy of time, in re- 
lation to this measure, peculiarly interesting and 
desirable. 

ii8 Alexander Hamilton 

It is necessary that provision should be also made 
for paying the second instalment of the loan of 
$2,000,000 from the Bank of the United States, 
agreeably to the terms of that loan ; the first having 
been paid pursuant to the propositions for that pur- 
pose made during the last session. 

On the first day of June last an instalment of 
1,000,000 florins became payable on the loans of the 
United States in Holland. This was adjusted by a 
prolongation of the period of reimbursement, in na- 
ture of a new loan, at an interest of five per cent., 
for a term of ten years. The charges upon this 
operation were a commission of three per cent. It 
will readily be perceived that the posture of Euro- 
pean affairs is calculated to affect unfavorably the 
measures of the United States for borrowing abroad. 

The productiveness of the public revenues hitherto 
has continued to equal the anticipations that were 
formed of it ; but it is not expected that it will prove 
commensurate with all the objects that have been 
suggested. Some auxiliary provisions will, there- 
fore, it is presumed, be requisite; but these, it is 
hoped, can be made consistently with a due regard 
to the convenience of our citizens, who cannot but 
be sensible of the true wisdom of encountering a 
small present addition to their contributions for the 
public service, to avoid a future accumulation of 
burdens. 

President's Message 119 

PRESIDENT'S MESSAGE ■ 

Draft by Hamilton. 

December, 1793. 

Since the application which was made to the Gov- 
ernment of France for the recall of its present min- 
ister, that minister has furnished new and material 
causes of dissatisfaction with his conduct. But 
these occasions of offence have hitherto passed with- 
out particular notice, in the hope that it would not 
be long before the arrival of an order of recall would 
terminate the embarrassment, and in the desire, in- 
spired by sentiments of respect and friendship for 
his nation, to avoid as long as possible an act of ex- 
tremity toward its agent. But a case has occurred 
which is conceived to render further forbearance in- 
consistent with the dignity and perhaps the safety 
of the United States. It is proved, as will be seen by 
papers now transmitted for the information of Con- 
gress, that this foreign agent has proceeded to the 
extraordinary lengths of issuing commissions in the 
name of the French Republic to several of our citi- 
zens, for the purpose of raising within the two Caro- 
linas and Georgia a large military force, with the 
declared design of employing them, in concert with 
such Indians as could be engaged in the enterprise, 
in an expedition against the colonies, in our neigh- 
borhood, of a nation with which the United States 
are at peace. 

^ Writings of Washington, xii., 96. J. C. Hamilton dates this draft 
January, 1794, but a comparison with Washington's writings seems to 
show that it was prepared as an assistance in composing the message 
of Dec. 5,1793. It may, however, have been made for a message which 
was never sent. 

I20 Alexander Hamilton 

It would seem, likewise, from information con- 
tained in other papers, herewith also communicated, 
that a similar attempt has been going on in another 
quarter, namely, the State of Kentucky; though 
the fact is not yet ascertained with the requisite 
authenticity. 

Proceedings so unwarrantable, so derogatory to 
the sovereignty of the United States, so dangerous 
in precedent and tendency, appear to render it im- 
proper that the person chargeable with them should 
longer continue to exercise the functions and enjoy 
the privileges of a diplomatic character. 

The supersedence of the exercise of those functions, 
nevertheless, being a measure of great delicacy and 
magnitude, I have concluded not to come to an ulti- 
mate determination, without first placing the subject 
under the eye of Congress. 

But unless the one or the other House shall, in the 
meantime, signify to me an opinion that it is not ad- 
visable so to do, I shall consider it my duty to adopt 

that measure after the expiration of days 

from this communication. 

PROCLAMATION FOR A NATIONAL 
THANKSGIVING^ 


United States, January i, 1795. 

By George Washington, President of the United States 

When we review the calamities which afflict so 

many other nations, and trouble the sources of indi- 

^ Writings of Washington , xii . , 1 3 2 . Washington adopted Hamilton 's 
draft verbatim. 

Proclamation 1 2 1 

vidual quiet, security, and happiness, the present 
condition of the United States affords much matter 
of consolation and satisfaction. 

Our exemption hitherto from the evils of foreign 
war, an increasing prospect of the continuance of 
that precious exemption, the great degree of internal 
tranquillity we have enjoyed, the recent confirma- 
tion of that tranquillity by the suppression of an 
insurrection which so wantonly threatened it; the 
happy course of our public affairs in general; the 
unexampled prosperity of all classes of our citizens; 
are circumstances which mark our situation with pe- 
culiar indications of the Divine beneficence toward us. 

In such a state of things, it is in an especial man- 
ner our duty as a people, with devout reverence and 
affectionate gratitude, to acknowledge our many 
and great obligations to Almighty God, and to im- 
plore Him to continue and confirm the blessings we 
experience. 

Deeply penetrated with this sentiment, I, George 
Washington, President of the United States, do re- 
commend to all religious societies and denominations, 
and to all persons whomsoever in the United States, 
to set apart and observe Thursday, the 19th day of 
February next, as a day of public thanksgiving and 
prayer, and on that day to meet together and render 
their sincere and hearty thanks to the great Ruler of 
nations, for the manifold and signal mercies which 
distinguish our lot as a nation, particularly for the 
constitutions of government which unite, and by 
their union establish, liberty with order, for the pre- 
servation of our peace, foreign and domestic, for 

122 Alexander Hamilton 

the seasonable check which has been given to a 
spirit of disorder, in the suppression of the late in- 
surrection, and generally, for the prosperous course 
of our affairs, public and private; and at the same 
time humbly and fervently to beseech the kind 
Author of these blessings graciously to prolong them 
to us; to imprint in our hearts a deep and solemn 
sense of our obligations for them; to teach us 
rightly to estimate their immense value ; to preserve 
us from the wantonness of prosperity from jeopard- 
izing the advantages we enjoy, by culpable or delu- 
sive projects ; to dispose us to merit the continuance 
of His favors by not abusing them, by our gratitude 
for them, and by a correspondent conduct as citizens 
and as men to render this country more and more a 
safe and propitious asylum for the unfortunate of 
other countries; to extend among them true and 
useful knowledge; to diffuse and establish habits of 
sobriety, order, morality, and piety; and, finally, to 
impart all the blessings we possess or ask for our- 
selves to the whole family of mankind, that so men 
may be happy and God glorified throughout the 
earth. Done, etc. 

EXPLANATION ' 

November ii, 1795. 

A very virulent attack has recently been made 
upon the President of the United States, the present 

* This personal explanation appeared in the newspapers, and the 
attacks which made such a defence necessary give a vivid idea of the 
bitterness ot party politics at that time. The Democrats did not 
hesitate to accuse Washington of abusing his high trust for pecuniary 
advantage. 

Explanation 123 

Secretary of the Treasury, and myself, as his prede- 
cessor in office, on the ground of extra payments to 
the President on account of his salary. 

The charges against all the three are no less heinous 
than those of intentional violation of the Constitu- 
tion, of the law, and of their oaths of office. I use 
the epithet intentional, because though not expressly 
used in the terms of the attack, it is implied in every 
line of it, since an involuntary error of construction, 
if that could ever be made out, would not warrant 
the imputation ''of contemning and despising every 
principle which the people have established for the 
security of their rights, of setting at defiance all law 
and authority, and of servile submission and com- 
pliance with the lawless will and pleasure of a 
President." 

Were considerations personal to myself alone to 
be considered, the present attempt would be treated 
with no greater attention than has been shown to all 
the anonymous slanders by which I. have been so 
long and so implacably persecuted. But convinced 
by a course of observation for more than four years, 
that there exists in this country an unprincipled and 
daring combination, to obstruct by any means, 
which shall he necessary and can he commanded, not 
short even of force, the due and efficient administra- 
tion of the present government, to make our most 
important national interests subservient to those of 
a foreign power, and as means to these ends to de- 
stroy, by calumny and misrepresentation, the con- 
fidence of the people in the truly virtuous men of our 
country, and to transfer it, with the power of the 

124 Alexander Hamilton 

state, to ambitious hypocrites and intriguing dema- 
gogues, perhaps corrupted partisans; perceiving 
likewise, that this infatuated corabination, in the 
belief that the well-earned esteem and attachment 
of his fellow-citizens towards the Chief Magistrate 

'^ of the United States, is the principal remaining 
actual obstacle to the execution of their plan, are 
making the most systematic efforts to extinguish 
those sentiments in the breasts of the people, I think 
it a duty to depart from my general rule of conduct, 
and to submit to the public with my name, an ex- 
planation of the principles which have governed the 
Treasury Department on the point in question. 

I shall state in the first place, that the rule with 
regard to expenditures and appropriations which has 
uniformly regulated the practice of the department 
is this, viz.: to issue no money from the Treasury, 
hut for an object for which there was a law previously 
passed making an appropriation, and designating the 
fund from which the money was to arise; hut there 
heing such a law, and an adequate fund to support the 
expenditure, it was deemed justifiable, as well before 

' as after the service was performed, or the supply ob- 
tained, for which the appropriation was designed, to 
make disbursements from the Treasury for the object, 
if it appeared safe and expedient so to do. If made 

. before, it was an advance or anticipation, for which 
the party was charged, and held accountable till 
exonerated by the performance of the service, or the 
furnishing of the supply. If afterwards, it was a 
payment, and went to some general head of account 
as such. 

Explanation 125 

Thus, if a sum was appropriated for provisions for 
the army for a particular year, it was common to 
make advances on account to the contractors, long 
before the supplies were furnished. If the law was 
passed in one year for the next, there would be no 
hesitation to make the advance immediately after 
the passing of the law, and before the year to which 
the appropriation was applicable had commenced. 
So also sums would be furnished to the Department 
of War, in anticipation of the monthly pay of the 
officers and soldiers, and advances on account of pay, 
in particular circumstances, and for good reasons, 
would be actually made by that department to the 
officers and soldiers. And so likewise advances have 
been made for the use of the President and the mem- 
bers of both houses of Congress, in anticipation of 
their respective compensations. 

It will without difficulty be comprehended, that 
this practice of the Treasury has in some cases been 
essential to the due course of the public service. 

Every good judge will be sensible that from the 
insufficiency of individual capitals to such large ad- 
vances as the supplies of an army require, it was 
indispensable to the obtaining of them, that anticipa- 
tions from the Treasurv would enable the contract- 
ors to do, what otherwise they would have been 
unable to do ; and that these anticipations must also 
have had the effect of procuring the supplies on 
cheaper terms to the United States. 

When it is answered to us, that the army has 
operated for several years past at several hundred 
miles' distance from the seat of government; and a 

126 Alexander Hamilton 

considerable part of the year, from the rudeness of 
the country, and obstructions of the waters, it is im- 
practicable to transmit moneys to the scenes of pay- 
ment, it will be perceived that without advances 
from the Treasury in anticipation of the pay, not 
only a compliance with the engagement of the gov- 
ernment would have been impossible, but the troops 
must have been always left most unseasonably in 
arrear. In June, 1794, Congress passed a law, de- 
claring that the army should in future be paid in 
such a manner as that the arrears should not exceed 
two months. Compliance with this regulation ren- 
ders anticipations a matter of physical necessity, yet 
that law gave no special authority for the purpose. 

A particular case, by way of example, in which, 
different from general rules, advances or anticipa- 
tions in the War Department are necessary, respects 
the recruiting service. The officers, who are for a 
long time distant from their corps, require the ac- 
commodation of an advance of pay to be able to 
discharge their duty. Toward the possibility of en- 
listing men, it is indispensable they should carry with 
them the bounty money. Another, upon conjec- 
ture of what may be done, and with the possibility 
that from not being able to obtain the men the ul- 
timate expenditure may not take place. This in- 
stance will suggest to reflection an infinite number 
of cases in the course of service in which a disburse- 
ment from the Treasury must precede the execution 
of the object, and may exceed the sum finally requi- 
site for it. 

These cases indicate the expediency and even 

Explanation 127 

necessity of the construction which has regulated the 
practice of the Treasury. And it might be shown, if 
necessary, that it is analogous to the practice under 
the other government of the United States, and 
under other governments; and this too when the 
theory of expenditure equally is, as expressed in our 
Constitution, that no money shall be expended, but 
in consequence of an appropriation by law. 

It remains to see whether this rule of conduct, so 
indispensable in the practice of the department, be 
permitted by a fair interpretation of the Constitu- 
tion and the laws. 

The general injunction of the Constitution (article 
i., § ix.) is, that *'no money shall be drawn from the 
Treasury but in consequence of appropriations made 
bylaw." 

That clause appears to me to be exactly equivalent 
to this other clause: ''No money shall be drawn 
from the Treasury, but for which there is an appro- 
priation made by law"; in other words, before 
money can legally issue from the Treasury for any 
purpose, there must be a law authorizing an expendi- 
ture, and designating the object and the fund. 
Then such a law is passed. This being done, the 
disbursement may be made consistently with the 
Constitution, either by way of advance, or anticipa- 
tion, or by way of payment. It may precede or 
follow the service, supply, or other object of ex- 
penditure. Either will equally satisfy the words 
"in consequence of," which are not words of strict 
import, but may be taken in several senses — in one 
sense, that is ''in consequence of a thing which 

128 Alexander Hamilton 

being followed upon it, follows it in order of time. A 
disbursement must be either an advance, or anticipa- 
tion, or a payment. 'T is not presumable that the 
Constitution meant to distinguish between these two 
modes of disbursement. It must have intended to 
leave this matter wholly to convenience. 

The design of the Constitution in this provision 
was, as I conceive, to secure these important ends, 
— that the purpose, the limit, and the fund of every 
expenditure should be ascertained by a previous 
law. The public security is complete in this par- 
ticular, if no money can be expended, but for an 
object, to an extent, and out of a fund, which the laws 
have prescribed. 

Even in cases which affect only individual inter- 
ests, if the terms of a law will bear several meanings, 
that is to be preferred which will best accord with 
convenience. In cases that concern the public, this 
rule is applicable with still greater latitude. Public 
convenience is to be promoted ; public inconveniences 
to be avoided. The business of administration 
requires accommodation to so great a variety of 
circumstances, that a rigid construction would in 
countless instances arrest the wheels of government. 
It has been shown that the construction that has 
been adopted at the Treasury is in many cases es- 
sential in practice. This inclines the scale in favor 
of it, — the words *'in consequence of," admitting 
of various significations. 

The practice of the Legislature as to appropriation 
laws favors this construction. 

These laws are generally distinct from those which 

Explanation 129 

create the cause of expenditure. Thus the act which 
declares that the President shall be allowed twenty- 
five thousand dollars per annum; that which de- 
clares that each senator and representative shall be 
entitled to so much per day ; that which determines 
that each officer and soldier shall have so much per 
month, etc., — neither of these acts is an act of ap- 
propriation. The Treasury has not considered itself 
authorized to expend a single cent upon the basis of 
any such act; regarding it merely as constituting a 
claim upon the government for a certain compensa- 
tion, but requiring, prior to an actual disbursement 
for such claim, that a law be passed, authorizing the 
disbursement out of a specified fund. This is what 
is considered as the law by which the appropriation 
is made, from which results to the public a double 
security. 

Hence every year a particular act (sometimes 
more than one) is passed, appropriating certain 
sums for the various branches of the public service, 
and indicating the funds from which the moneys are 
to be drawn. The object, the sum, and the fund 
are all that are to be found in these acts. They are 
commonly, if not universally, silent as to any thing 
further. 

This I regard as constructive of the clause in the 
Constitution. The appropriation laws are in execu- 
tion of that provision, and fulfilall its purposes, and 
they are silent as to the distinction between anticipa- 
tion and payment ; in other words, as to the manner 
of disbursement. 

Hence I conclude, that if there exist a law appro- 

voL. vni. — 9. 

130 Alexander Hamilton 

priating a certain sum for the salary of the President, 
an advance upon that sum in anticipation of the ser- 
vice is as constitutional as a payment after the ser- 
vice has been performed. In other words, that the 
advance of a quarter's salary at the beginning of a 
quarter is as much warranted by the Constitution 
as the payment of it at the end of a quarter. 

It is in this sense that the present Secretary of the 
Treasury has affirmed, that ''not one dollar has at 
any time been advanced for the use of the President 
for which there was not an existing appropriation." 
He did not mean to say that no money had been ad- 
vanced in anticipation of the service, for the fact is 
otherwise; but nothing is more true than that the 
sums disbursed were within the limits of the sums 
appropriated. If there was an excess at the end of 
one year, there had been a previous appropriation 
for a succeeding year, upon which that excess was an 
advance. 

It is objected to this practice, that the death of the 
party between the advance to him and the expira- 
tion of an equivalent term of service, by superseding 
the object of the advance, would render it a mis- 
expenditure of so much money, and therefore a viola- 
tion of the Constitution. 

I answer, that the same casualty might have the 
same effect in other cases, in which it would be 
against common-sense to suppose that an advance 
might not be made with legality and propriety. 
Suppose, for example, a law was to be passed direct- 
ing a given quantity of powder to be purchased for 
public use, and appropriating a definite sum for the 

Explanation 13^ 

purchase; and suppose intelligence brought to the 
Secretary of the Treasury that the quantity re- 
quired could be procured for prompt payment at 
Boston. It cannot in such case be doubted that the 
sum appropriated might legally be advanced to an 
agent to proceed to Boston to make the purchases. 
Yet, that agent might die, and the money never be 
applied according to its destination, or the desired 
quantity might be procured for a less sum, and a 
balance remain in his hands. In either case, this 
would be money disbursed which was not applied 
to the object of the law. In the last case, there is 
no final object for the disbursement, because the 
balance is a surplus. This proves that the possi- 
bility of a failure, or falling short of the object for 
which an advance is made, is not an objection to its 
legality. Indeed, the consequence is a possible one 
in every case of an anticipation, whether to con- 
tractors or to other public agents, for a determinate 
or an indeterminate purpose. 

The only consequence is, that the sums unapplied 
must be accounted for and refunded. The distinc- 
tion here again is between an advance and a payment. 
More cannot certainly be finally paid than is equal 
to the object of an appropriation, though the sum 
appropriated exceed the sum necessary. But more 
may be advanced, to the full extent of the appro- 
priation, than may be ultimately exhausted by the 
object of the expenditure, on the condition, which 
always attends an advance, of accounting for the 
application, and refunding an excess. This is a direct 
answer to the question, whether more can be paid 

132 Alexander Hamilton 

than is necessary to satisfy the object of an appro- 
priation. More cannot be paid, but more may be 
advanced on the accountability of the person to 
whom it is advanced. 

But risk of loss to the public may attend this prin- 
ciple? This is true, but it is as true in all the cases 
of advances to contractors, etc., as in those of ad- 
vances upon salaries and compensations. Nor does 
this point of risk affect the question of legality. It 
touches merely that of a prudent exercise of discre- 
tion. When large sums are advanced, it is usual to 
obtain security for their due application, or for in- 
demnification. This security is greater or less ac- 
cording to the circumstances of the parties to whom 
the advances are made. When small sums are ad- 
vanced, especially, if for the purposes quickly ful- 
filled, and to persons who are themselves adequate 
sureties, no collateral securit}^ is demanded. The 
head of the department ''is responsible to the gov- 
ernment for observing proper measures and taking 
proper precautions." If he acts so as to incur 
justly the charge of improvidence or profusion, he 
may be dismissed, or punished, according to the 
nature of his misconduct. 

But the principle which is set up would (it is said) 
be productive of confusion, distress, and bankruptcy 
at the Treasury, since the appropriation for the sup- 
port of government is made payable out of the ac- 
cruing duties of each year; and an established right 
in the officers of government to claim their com- 
pensations, which amount to several hundred thou- 
sand dollars per annum, either on the first day of the 

Explanation 133 

year, or on the first day of a quarter, before the 
services were rendered, would create a demand at a 
time when there might not, and possibly would not, 
be a single shilling in the Treasury, arising out of 
that appropriation, to satisfy it. These ideas with 
regard to the administration of the fund are very 
crude and incorrect, but it would complicate the 
subject to go into the development. 

It is not pretended that there is an established right 
in the officers to claim their salaries by anticipation, 
at the beginning of a year, or at the beginning of a 
quarter. No such right exists. The performance of 
the service must precede the right to demand pay- 
ment. But it does not follow that because there is 
no right in the officer to demand payment, it may 
not be allowable for the Treasury to advance upon 
account for good reasons. A discretion of this sort 
in the head of the department can, at least, involve 
no embarrassments to the Treasury, nor the formida- 
ble evils indicated; for the officer who makes the 
advance, being himself the judge, whether there is a 
competent fund, and whether it can be made with 
convenience to the Treasury, he will only make it 
when he perceives that no evil will ensue. 

Let me recur to the example of advances to con- 
tractors for supplying the army. Suppose that in the 
terms of the contract certain advances were stipu- 
lated and made, but it turned out, nevertheless, that 
the contractor, disappointed in the funds on which 
he had relied, could not execute his contract without 
further advances. Here there would be no right on 
his part to demand such further advances ; but there 

134 Alexander Hamilton 

would be a discretion in the Treasury to make them. 
This is the example of a discretion to do what there 
is not a right to demand. The existence of this dis- 
cretion can do no harm, because the head of the 
Treasury will judge whether the state of it permits 
^' the required advances. But it is essential that the 
discretion should exist, because, otherwise, there 
might be a failure of supplies which no plan that 
could be substituted might be able to avert. 

Yet the discretion is in neither case an arbitrary 
one; it is one which the head of the department is 
responsible to exercise with a careful eye to the pub- 
lic interest and safety. The abuse of it — in other 
words, the careless or wanton exercise of it, would 
be a cause of dismission for incapacity, or of pun- 
ishment for malconduct. 

Thus, advances on account of salaries, or to con- 
tractors for procuring public supplies, might be 
carried so far, and so improvidently managed, as to 
be highly culpable and justly punishable; but this 
is a different question from the violation of Con- 
stitution or law. 

In all the cases it is a complete answer to the ob- 
jection of embarrassment to the Treasury, that not 
; the will of the parties, but the judgment of the head 
of the department is the rule and measure of the 
. advances which he may make, within the bounds of 
the sums appropriated by law. 

I consider the law which has been cited with re- 
gard to the pay of the army, as a legislative recogni- 
tion of the rule of practice at the Treasury. The 
Legislature could not have been ignorant that it was 

Explanation 135 

impracticable at certain seasons of the year to con- 
vey the money to the army to fulfil their injunction, 
without an advance from the Treasury before the 
pay became due. They presuppose a right to make 
this advance, and enjoin that the troops shall not be 
left more than two months in arrear. The origin of 
this law enforces the observation. It is known that 
it passed in consequence of a representation that the 
pay of the army was left too long in arrear, and it 
was intended to quicken the measures of payment. 
No person in either house of the Legislature, I be- 
lieve, doubted that there was power to precede the 
service by advances, so as to render the payment 
even more punctual than was enjoined. 

Indeed such advances, when the army operated at 
a distance, were necessary to fulfil the contract with 
the army. It became due monthly, and in strict- 
ness of contract, was to be made at the end of each 
month, — a thing impossible, unless advanced from 
the Treasury before it became due. No special au- 
thority was ever given for this purpose to the Treas- 
ury, but it appears to have been left to take its 
course on the principle that the disbursement might 
take place as soon as there was an appropriation, 
though in anticipation of the term of service. 

The foregoing observations vindicate, I trust, the 
construction of the Treasury as to the power of 
making disbursements in anticipation of services and 
supplies, if there has been a previous appropriation 
by law for the object, and if the advances never ex- 
ceed the amount appropriated ; and at the same time 
evince that this practice involves no violation of the 

136 Alexander Hamilton 

constitutional provisions with respect to appropri- 
ations. 

I proceed to examine that clause which respects 
the pay of the President. It is in these words : " The 
President shall, at stated times, receive for his ser- 
vices a compensation which shall neither be increased 
nor diminished during the period for which he shall 
have been elected, and he shall not receive within 
that period any other emolimient from the United 
States or any of them." 

I understand this clause as equivalent to the follow- 
ing : * 'There shall be established by law for the services 
of the President a periodical compensation, which shall 
not be increased nor diminished during the term for 
which he shall have been elected, and neither the 
United States nor any State shall allow him any emol- 
ument in addition to his periodical compensation." 

This will, I think, at first sight appear foreign to 
the question of provisional advance on account of 
the compensation periodically established by law for 
his services. 

The manifest object of the provision is to guard 
the independence of the President from the legisla- 
tive control of the United States or of any State, by 
the ability to withhold, lessen, or increase his com- 
pensation. 

It requires that the law shall assign him a definite 
compensation for a definite time. It prohibits the 
Legislature from increasing or diminishing this com- 
pensation during any term of his election, and it 
prohibits every State from granting him an addi- 
tional emolument. This is all that the clause imports. 

Explanation 137 

It is therefore satisfied as to the United States, 
when the Legislature has provided that the President 
shall be allowed a certain sum for a certain term of 
time; and so long as it refrains from making an 
alteration in the provision. All beyond this is for- 
eign to the subject. 

The Legislature having done this, an advance by 
the Treasury in anticipation of the service cannot be 
a breach of the provision. 'T is in no sense an addi- 
tional allowance by the United States. 'T is a mere 
advance or loan upon account of the established 
periodical compensation ; will legal ideas, or common 
parlance, warrant the giving the denomination of 
additional compensation, to the mere anticipation of 
the term of an established allowance? If they will 
not, 't is plain such an advance is no breach of this 
part of the Constitution „ 

If the clause is to be understood literally, it leads 
to an absurdity. The terms are, ''The President 
shall at stated times receive,'' etc.; and again, ''he 
shall not receive within that period," etc. 

His allowance is at the rate of 25,000 dollars per 
annum, 6,250 dollars quarter-yearly. Suppose at 
the end of a year an arrear of 5,000 dollars was due 
to him, which he omits to receive till some time in 
the succeeding year, and in the succeeding year ac- 
tually receives that balance with his full salary for 
the last year. T is plain, that he would not have 
received in the whole more than he was allowed by 
law, and yet in the stated period of one year he would 
have received 30,000 dollars, five thousand more 
than his salary for the year. In a literal sense, then, 

138 Alexander Hamilton 

constitutional provision as to actual payment would 
not have been complied with; for within the first 
stated period he would not have received the compen- 
sation allotted, and within the second of them he 
would have received more. In a literal sense it would 
be necessary to make the payment at the precise 
day, to the precise amount, neither more nor less, 
which as a general rule the indispensable forms of 
the Treasury render impossible. It follows that ac- 
tual receipt or payment are not the criterion — but 
the absolute definitive allowance by law. An ad- 
vance beforehand, or a payment afterward, are 
equally consistent with the true spirit and meaning 
of this part of the Constitution. 

Let us now see if the construction of the Treasury 
violates the law which establishes the President's 
compensation. 

The act of the 29th of September, 1789, allows to 
the President at the rate of 25,000 dollars per an- 
num, to commence from the time of his entering on 
the duties of his office, and to he paid quarterly out of 
the Treasury of the United States. 

The question is, what is to be understood from 
these words, ''to be paid quarterly out of the Treasury 
of the United States''? 

The conception of the Treasury has been, that 
these words, as used in this and in the analogous 
cases, were meant to define the time when the right 
of an individual to the compensation earned became 
absolute, not as a command to the Treasury to issue 
the money at a precise day and no other. 

As mentioned above, the indispensable forms of 

Explanation 139 

the Treasury, in compliance with the law establish- 
ing the department, and to secure a due accountabil- 
ity, make it impracticable to pay at the day ; and if 
expressions of the kind in question are to be con- 
strued literally, and as a positive injunction to the 
Treasury to issue the money at the period defined, 
it will be as much a breach of the law to pay after- 
ward as to advance beforehand. 

The position that an after-payment would be a 
breach of the law, will hardly be contended for ; and 
if not, the alternative seems to be the construction 
adopted by the Treasury. Such expressions denote 
simiply, that at certain periods individuals acquire a 
perfect right to particular sums of money for their 
services, which it becomes a matter of course to pay ; 
but they are not obliged to receive it at the day, nor 
is the Treasurer restrained from paying it afterward, 
or from anticipating by way of loan, if there are ade- 
quate reasons for such anticipation. 

It is not true, as alleged, that the invariable prac- 
tice of the Treasury as to compensations for services 
differs in principle from what was done in the case 
of the President. 

Instances to the contrary have been stated. As to 
what regards the army, there has been sufficient 
explanation. 

But it will be useful to be more particular as to the 
course which has been pursued with reference to the 
two houses of Congress. 

The law that regulates their compensations (passed 
the 29th of September, 1789) allows to each member 
a compensation of six dollars for every day he shall 

I40 Alexander Hamilton 

attend the House to which he belongs, together with 
six dollars for every twenty miles of distance to and 
from his place of residence; and directs that the 
compensation which shall be due shall be certified 
by the President of the Senate or Speaker of the 
House of Representatives, and shall be paid as pub- 
lic accounts are paid out of the Treasury. 

By an arrangement between each house and the 
Treasury Department, the course actually pursued 
has been as follows : 

Certain gross sums, usually at the commencement 
of each session, and from time to time afterward, 
have been advanced from the Treasury, at request, 
to the President of the Senate for the members of 
the Senate, to the Speaker of the House of Represent- 
atives for the members of that house, on account, 
and frequently in anticipation, of their accruing 
compensations. The President of the Senate in the 
Senate, and the Speaker of the House of Represent- 
atives in that house, disbursed the moneys to the 
individuals, and afterward, upon the close of each 
session, settled an account at the Treasury, accom- 
panied with the certificates required by the law, and 
the receipts of the members, which were examined, 
adjusted, and passed, as other public accounts. 

Whether there were any advances actually made to 
the members, in anticipation of their compensations, 
was a point never discussed between the Treasury 
and the presiding officers of the two houses with 
whom the money was deposited. But I understand 
that examples of such advances did exist in relation 
to the House of Representatives. The fact is, how- 

Explanation 141 

ever, immaterial to the point in issue ; that must be 
tested by the times of the advances from the Treasury; 
and it is certain that these were usually made in 
anticipation of compensations to grow due; and it is 
also certain that the course was well understood by 
both houses, and is exhibited by the accounts of the 
Treasurer laid before them in each session. 

If, therefore, the advances for the President were 
unconstitutional and illegal, those for both houses of 
Congress were equally so; and if the President be 
chargeable with a violation of the Constitution, of the 
laws, and of his oath of office, on account of extra 
advances to his secretaries, whether with or without 
his privity, the members of both houses of Congress, 
without exception, have been guilty of the same 
crimes, in consequence of the extra advances, with 
their privity, to the presiding officers of their re- 
spective houses. A distinction may possibly be 
attempted to be taken in the two cases from this cir- 
cumstance, that the law which allots the compensa- 
tion of the members of the two houses does not use 
the words, " to be paid every day out of the Treasury, '* 
while that which establishes the President's compen- 
sation does use the terms, '' to be paid quarterly out 
of the Treasury. " But this distinction would be evi- 
dently a cavil. When a law fixes the term of a com- 
pensation, whether per day, per month, per quarter, 
or annum, if it says nothing more, it is implied that 
it is payable at each epoch out of the Treasury, in 
the same sense as if this was expressly said. This 
observation applies as well to the monthly pay of the 
army as to the daily pay of Congress. 

142 Alexander Hamilton 

Having examined the question as it stands upon 
the Constitution and the laws, I proceed to examine 
the course of the fact. 

But previous to this I shall take notice of one 
point about which there have been doubts — and 
which it is not within my present recollection 
whether definitely settled or not by the accounting 
officers of the department. It respects the time of 
the commencement of the President's compensation. 
The law establishing it refers to the time of his en- 
tering upon the duties of his office, but without de- 
fining that time. 

When in a constitutional and legal sense did the 
President enter upon the duties of his office ? 

The Constitution enjoins that before he enters 
upon the execution of his office, he shall take a cer- 
tain oath, which is prescribed. This oath was not 
taken till the 30th of April, 1789. If we date the 
entrance upon the duties of his office at the time of 
taking this oath, it determines the epoch to be the 
30th of April, 1789. 

The purpose of the arrangement which was made 
for the payment of the members of Congress was 
twofold. It was to obviate embarrassment to them 
by facilitating and accelerating the receipt of their 
compensations, and to avoid an inconvenient multi- 
plication of adjustments, entries, warrants, and pay- 
ments. The theory of the provision admitted of as 
many Treasury settlements, entries, warrants, and 
payments, each day, as there were members in both 
houses. 

But there is room for another construction. The 

Explanation 143 

3d of March, 1789, is the day when the term for 
which the President, the Vice-President, and the 
members of the Congress were first elected, was 
deemed to commence. The Constitution declares 
that the President shall hold his office for four years ; 
and it is presumable that the clause respecting his 
compensation contemplates its being for the whole 
term for which he is to hold his office. Its object 
may otherwise be evaded. 

It is also, I believe, certain, that the President may 
execute his office and do valid acts as President with- 
out previously taking the oath prescribed; though 
in so doing, if voluntarily, he would be guilty of a 
breach of the Constitution, and would be liable to 
punishment. The taking the oath is not, therefore, 
necessarily, the criterion of entering upon the duties 
of office. 

It is a fact, if I remember right, that the Presi- 
dent was at New York, the place assigned for 
the first meeting of the government, on the 3d of 
March, 1789, which might be considered as an en- 
trance upon the duties of his office; though from 
the delays which attended the meeting of Con- 
gress, the oath was deferred till the 30th of April 
following. 

On the strength of these facts, it may be argued, 
that by force of the Constitution, dating the com- 
mencement of the President's term of service on the 
3d of March, 1789, the law respecting his compensa- 
tion ought to be considered as referring to that 
period, for a virtual entrance upon the duties of his 
office. 

144 Alexander Hamilton 

In stating this construction, I must not be under- 
stood to adopt it. I acknowledged that the other, 
as most agreeable to the more familiar sense of the 
law terms, has appeared to me preferable, though I 
had reason to believe that an important officer of the 
government (I do not mean the President) once 
thought otherwise. The result, in point of fact, will 
vary, as the one or the other is deemed the true 
construction. 

I return to an examination of the course of the 
transaction. 

Authentic statements which have been published, 
with some supplementary ones received from the 
Treasury upon the occasion, exhibit the following 
results. 

ist Result. The sums advanced for the use of 
the President from the Treasury have never exceeded 
the sums previously appropriated by law: though 
they have sometimes exceeded, sometimes fallen 
short, of the sums actually due for services. This is 
thus explained: 

An Act of the 29th of September, 1789, appropriated 
for the compensation of the President . .$25,000 

The sums to the 8th of April, 1790, and charged to 

this appropriation, are ..... 25,000 

An Act of the 26th of March, 1790, appropriated 

for the same purpose ..... 25,000 

The sums advanced from May 4, 1790, to 28th 
February, 1 79 1 , and charged to this appropria- 
tion, are ....... 25,000 

An Act of the nth February, 1791, appropriated 


Explanation 145 

The sums advanced from the 28th February, 1 791, 
to 27th of December in the same year, and 
charged to this appropriation, are . . .$22,150 

Excess of appropriation beyond the advances . 2,850 

An Act of the 23d December, 1791, appropriated 


The sums advanced from the 3d January, 1792, to 
the 15th January, 1793, and charged to this 
appropriation, are . ..... 25,000 

An Act of the 28th February, 1793, appropriates 


The sums advanced from the 9th March, 1793, to 
27th of December in the same year, and 
charged to this appropriation, are . . 25,000 

An Act of the 14th of March, 1794, appropriates 


The sums advanced from the 1 7th of March, 1 794, 
to the ist of January, 1795, and charged to 
the same appropriation, are .... 25,000 

An Act of the 2d of January, 1795, appropriated 


The sums advanced from the 12th of January, 
1795, and prior to the ist of October in the 
same year, and charged to this appropriation, 
are ........ 12,500 

Excess of appropriation beyond advances, on the 

ist of October, 1795 ..... 12,500 

Excess of appropriation on the Act of the i ith of 

February, 1791 2,850 

Total excess of appropriations beyond advances, to 

the ist of October, 1795 . . . $15,350 

VOL. VUI.— 10, 

146 Alexander Hamilton 

The residue of the proposition is illustrated by 
the quarterly statement of salary and advances at 
foot. 

2d Result. The Treasury has never been in ad- 
vance for the President beyond the sums actually 
accrued, and due to him for services, to the amount 
of one quarter's salary. The largest advance at any 
time is $6,154. A quarter's salary is, $6,250. De- 
duct the sums at certain times in arrear from those 
at other times in advance, the average of the ad- 
vances for the whole term of his service is about 

The particulars of this result appear in the state- 
ment at foot. This statement is digested by a quar- 
ter of the calendar year, which is the established 
course of the Treasury, and a course essential to 
the order of its affairs ; that is to say, it is essential 
there should be certain fixed periods to which the 
ordinary stated disbursements are referred, and in 
conformity with which the accounts of the Treasury- 
are kept. 

3d Result. On the ist of October, 1795, there was 
actually due to the President, for his compensation, 
over and above all advances for his use, the sum of 
$846. This likewise appears from the statement at 
foot, and entirely refutes the malevolent suggestion 
which has appeared, of an accumulation of advances 
to twelve or fifteen thousand dollars. 

4th Result. The sums advanced for the President 
prior to the commencement of the term of his second 
election, the 3d of March, 1793, fall short of the 
sums appropriated for his compensation, $2,850. 
Thus: 

Explanation i47 

The aggregate of the sums appropriated for four 
years, from the 29th of September, 1789, to 
the 23d of December, 1791, inclusively, is $100,000 

The amount of all the sums advanced prior to the 

3d of March, 1793, is 97.150 

Excess of appropriations beyond advances . $2,850 

It is nevertheless true, that not only have there 
been frequent anticipations of the President's salary, 
as appears more particularly in the statement at 
foot, but, counting from the 30th of April, 1789, as 
the commencement of his compensation, the sums 
advanced for his use prior to the 3d of March, 1793, 
the expiration of his first term of election, exceed 
those actually due up to that period, by $1,108.34. 

If, on the contrary, the construction were adopted 
which dates his compensation on the 4th of March, 
1789, there would have been a balance due to him 
on the 4th of March, 1795, of 2,850 dollars. 

But proceeding on the first supposition, the whole 
question still turns upon the legality of the advances. 
If it was legal to make him an advance, in anticipa- 
tion of his salary, within any period of his election — 
within one quarter, on account of a succeeding quar- 
ter,— it was equally legal to do it within one year, on 
account of a succeeding year; and within one term 
of an election, on account of a succeeding term. The 
only inquiry would be, in either case. Will the sum 
advanced be within the bounds of the sums before 
that time appropriated? It has been seen that the 
sums appropriated for the first four years of service 
exceeded those advanced prior to the commencement 

148 Alexander Hamilton 

of the second period of election by 2,850 dollars; 
besides this, on the 28th of February, 1793, there 
was a further appropriation of 25,000 dollars, so 
that at the beginning of the second term the total 
appropriations exceeded the total disbursements by 
27,850 dollars. 

Thus has it been shown that the advances for the 
use of the President have been governed by a rule of 
construction which has obtained in analogous cases, 
or, more truly, which has regulated the general 
course of disbursements from the Treasury — a rule 
which, I trust, has been demonstrated to be con- 
sonant with the Constitution and the laws. 

It is requisite to inquire a little further, whether 
there has been any improper use or rather abuse of 
the discretion which is contended for ; for here there 
is likewise an unquestionable responsibility. It is 
seen that the advances have at no time equalled one 
quarter's salary. 

I ask. Was it unreasonable or unfit, if constitu- 
tional and legal, to afford the President of the 
United States an accommodation of this extent? 

I pledge my veracity that I have always under- 
stood, and to this moment I have good reason to be 
satisfied, that the expenses of the President — those 
of his household and others incident to his official 
situation — have fully equalled, if not on some occa- 
sions exceeded, the allowance made to him by the 
United States. Under this conviction especially, 
how could the head of a department hesitate by so 
small an accommodation as the advance of less than 
a quarter's salary, to enable the President of the 

Explanation 149 

United States to meet his expenses as they accrued, 
without being obHged to encroach upon his own 
private resources, or to resort to the expedient of 
borrowing, to defray expenses imposed upon him by 
pubHc situation ? I knew that no possible risk could 
attend the advance, little considerable as it was. 
The estate of the President was answerable in case 
of death or other premature vacancy for the indem- 
nification of the government. 

Reasons of a peculiar kind forbade hesitation. 
The scale of expense was such as to render the in- 
come even of what is deemed a large landed property 
in this country, a slender auxiliary; without an 
advance from the Treasury, it was not impossible 
borrowing might be necessary. Was it just to com- 
pel the President to resort to that expedient, for a 
purpose in fact public, at his private expense? Was 
it for the dignity of the nation that he should have 
been exposed to a necessity, an embarrassment of 
this sort? 

My judgment and feelings answered both these 
questions in the negative. I entertained no doubt 
of the constitutionality and legality of the advance, 
and I thought the making of it due to the situation, 
due to propriety, due to every public consideration 
connected with the subject. I can never regret it. 

How far the President was privy to the course of 
advances I cannot say; but it is certain that they 
have been all made to his private secretaries upon a 
general arrangement, and not by special directions 
from him. And I think it proper to add, that very 
early in the day, and probably before any was made, 

150 Alexander Hamilton 

on an application to Mr. Lear for a sum which would 
constitute an advance, he qualified it by this observa- 
tion : *' If in your opinion it can be done with legality 
and perfect propriety." I answered that I had no 
doubt of either. I shall not attempt to assume any 
greater responsibility in this transaction than be- 
longs to me; but I have been accustomed to think 
that the responsibility for the due and regular dis- 
bursement of moneys from the Treasury lies exclu- 
sively with the officers of the department, and that, 
except in a very palpable and glaring case, the 
charge of blamable participation could not fall on 
any other person. 

As between the officers of the Treasury, I take the 
responsibility to stand thus. The Secretary and 
Comptroller, in granting warrants upon the Treasury, 
are both answerable for their legality. In this re- 
spect, the Comptroller is a check upon the Secretary. 
With regard to the expediency of an advance, in my 
opinion, the right of judging is exclusively with the 
head of the department. The Comptroller has no 
voice in this matter. So far, therefore, as concerns 
legality in the issues of money while I was in the 
department, the Comptroller must answer with me; 
so far as a question of expediency or the due exercise 
of discretion may be involved, I am solely answer- 
able. And uniformly was the matter so understood 
between successive comptrollers and myself. Also it 
is essential to the due administration of the depart- 
ment, that it should have been so understood. 

I have stated my reasons for considering the ad- 
vances made, for the use of the President, con- 

Explanation 1 5 1 

stitutional, legal, and proper. But I pretend not to 
infallibility ; 't is possible I may have erred ; but to 
convert error into guilt, it must be supposed to have 
been wilful. To suppose it wilful, it is necessary to 
trace it to some interested or sinister motive. If 
any appear, let it be pointed out. It is not common 
for men to commit crimes without some adequate 
inducement. 

What criminal inducement would have probably 
influenced the rule of construction as to advances 
which has been stated to have been adopted and 
acted upon at the Treasury ? What criminal induce- 
ment particularly could have led to the application 
of this rule to the President's compensation, in so 
restricted a form as never to equal one quarter's 
salary? Who in his senses will believe that the 
President would consciously have hazarded the im- 
putation of violating the Constitution, the laws, and 
his oath of oflice, by imposing on the officers of the 
Treasury the necessity of making him so paltry an 
advance, falsely and ridiculously called a donation? 
Who will believe that those officers would have con- 
sented to expose themselves to the same imputation, 
by compliance, when they knew that the evidence of 
their guilt must regularly be communicated in each 
succeeding session, to both houses of Congress, and 
to the public at large? To believe either, is to be- 
lieve all the parties concerned foolish, as well as 
profligate in the extreme, destitute equally of intel- 
lect as of principle. 

To an observation made by Mr. Wolcott in the 
communication from the Treasury, it has been 

152 Alexander Hamilton 

answered, that there was no merit in the disclosure, 
because the number of agents and the forms of the 
Treasury rendered it unavoidable. The fact is so — 
but the force of the observation turns upon the 
egregious folly of intentionally committing the 
crimes imputed; when it was certain, beforehand, 
that the means of detection must be furnished, and 
without delay, by the Treasury itself. 

It is certain, that there never has been the least 
attempt at mystery or concealment. The docu- 
ments reported by the Treasury to both houses of 
Congress, carried in their face the prominent evidence 
of what was done. Frequent and indiscriminate per- 
sonal suggestions regarded the principle of action. 
It is evident that it must have been understood and 
acquiesced in by all the members of the two houses 
of Congress. 

Hard would be the condition of public officers if 
even a misconstruction of constitutional and legal 
provisions, attended with no symptom of criminal 
motive, carrying the proof of innocence in the open- 
ness and publicity of conduct, could justly expose 
them to the odious charges which on this occasion 
are preferred. Harder still would be their condition 
if, in the management of the great and complicated 
business of a nation, the fact of misconstruction, 
which is to constitute their guilt, is to be decided by 
the narrow and rigid rules of a criticism no less pe- 
dantic than malevolent. Pre-eminently hard in such 
circumstances was the lot of the man who, called to 
the head of the most arduous department in the 
public administration in a new government, without 

Washington's Speech 153 

the guidance of antecedent practice and precedent, 
had to trace out his own path, and to adjust for 
himself the import and bearings of deHcate and im- 
portant provisions in the Constitution and in the 
laws. 

Reposing myself on a consciousness which, in no 
possible situation, can fail to prove an invulnerable 
shield to my tranquillity, I leave to a candid public 
to pronounce the sentence which is due to an at- 
tempt, on such a foundation, to erect against the 
President of the United States, my successor in 
office, and myself, the heinous charges of violation 
of the Constitution, violation of the laws, exaction of 
arbitrary will on the one side, abject submission on 
the other, misapplication of the public money, and, to 
complete the newspaper group, intentional perjury. 

A. Hamilton. 

WASHINGTON'S SPEECH TO CONGRESS ^ 

December 8, 1795. 

I trust I do not deceive myself while I indulge the 
persuasion, that I have never met you at any period, 
when more than at the present the situation of our 
public affairs has afforded just cause for mutual con- 
gratulation, and for inviting you to join with me 
in profound gratitude to the Author of all Good for 
the numerous and distinguished signal blessings we 
enjoy. 

The termination of the long, expensive, and dis- 
tressing war, in which we have been engaged with 

I Writings of Washington, xii., 56. This draft by Hamilton also was 
adopted verbatim. 

154 Alexander Hamilton 

certain Indians northwest of the Ohio, is placed in 
the option of the United States by a treaty which 
the commander of our army has provisionally con- 
cluded with twelve of the most powerful of the 
hostile tribes in that region. In the adjustment of 
these terms, the satisfaction of the Indians was 
deemed an object worthy no less of the policy than 
of the liberality of the United States, as the neces- 
sary basis of permanent tranquillity. This object, 
it is believed, has been fully attained. The articles 
agreed upon will be immediately laid before the 
Senate for their advice and consent. 

The Creek and Cherokee Indians, who alone of the 
Southern tribes had annoyed our frontier, have lately 
confirmed their pre-existing treaties with us, and 
have given unequivocal evidence of a sincere dis- 
position to carry them into effect by the surrender 
of the prisoners and property they had taken. But 
we have to lament that the fair prospect in this 
quarter has been momentarily clouded by wanton 
murders, which some citizens of Georgia have per- 
petrated on hunting parties of the Creeks, which 
have again involved that frontier in disquietude and 
danger, or which will be productive of further ex- 
pense, and is likely to occasion more effusion of 
blood. Measures are in train to obviate or mitigate 
the consequences, and with the reliance of being able 
at least to prevent general hostility. 

A letter from the Emperor of Morocco announces 
to me the renewal of our treaty, and consequently 
the restoration of peace, with that power. But the 
instrument for this purpose, which was to pass 

Washington's Speech 155 

through the hands of our minister resident at Lis- 
bon, who was temporarily absent on business of im- 
portance, is not yet received. It is with pecuHar 
satisfaction I can add to this intelHgence, that an 
agent, deputed on our part to Algiers, communicates 
that the preliminaries of a treaty with the regency 
of that country had been settled, and that he had 
no doubt of completing the business of his mission, 
comprehending the redemption of our unfortunate 
fellow-citizens from a grievous captivity. 

The last advices from our envoy to the court of 
Madrid give, moreover, the pleasing information that 
he had received positive assurances of a speedy and 
satisfactory conclusion of his negotiation. While 
the event, depending on unadjusted particulars, can- 
not be regarded as ascertained, it is agreeable to 
cherish the expectation of an issue, which, securing 
amicably very essential interests of the United 
States, will, at the same time, establish the founda- 
tion of durable harmony with a power whose friend- 
ship we have so uniformly and so sincerely endeavored 
to cultivate. 

Though not before officially disclosed to the 
House of Representatives, you are all apprised that 
a treaty of amity, commerce, and navigation has 
been negotiated with Great Britain, and that the 
Senate, by the voice of two thirds, have advised and 
consented to its ratification, upon a condition which 
excepts part of one article. Agreeably to this advice 
and consent, and to the best judgment I was able to 
form of the public interest, after full and mature 
deliberation, I have added my sanction. The result 

156 Alexander Hamilton 

on the part of His Britannic Majesty is unknown. 
When received, the subject will, without delay, be 
placed before Congress. 

This interesting summary of affairs, with regard 
to the foreign powers between whom and the United 
States controversies have subsisted, and with regard 
also to those of our Indian neighbors, with whom we 
have been in a state of enmity or misunderstanding, 
opens a wide field for consoling and gratifying re- 
flections. If, by prudence and moderation on every 
side, the extinguishment of all the causes of external 
discord, which have heretofore menaced our tran- 
quillity, on terms consistent with our national rights 
and honor, shall be the happy result, how firm and 
how precious a foundation will have been laid for 
establishing, accelerating, and maturing the prosper- 
ity of our country! 

Contemplating the situation of the United States 
in their internal as well as external relations, we find 
equal cause for contentment and satisfaction, while 
the greater part of the nations of Europe, with their 
American dependencies, have been, and several of 
them continue to be, involved in a contest unusually 
bloody, exhausting, and calamitous; in which the 
ordinary evils of foreign war are aggravated by do- 
mestic convulsion, riot, and insurrection; in which 
many of the arts most useful to society are exposed 
to decay or exile; and in which scarcity of subsist- 
ence embitters other sufferings, while even the antici- 
pations of the blessings of peace and repose are 
alloyed by the sense of heavy and accumulating bur- 
thens, which press upon all the departments of in- 

Washington's Speech 157 

dustry, and threaten to clog the future springs of 
government; — our favored country, happy in a 
striking contrast, enjoys universal peace — a peace 
the more satisfactory because preserved at the ex- 
pense of no duty. Faithful to ourselves we have not 
been unmindful of any obligation to others. Our agri- 
culture, our commerce, our manufactures, prosper 
beyond former examples (the occasional depreda- 
tions upon our trade, however detrimental to indi- 
viduals, being greatly overbalanced by the aggregate 
benefits derived to it from a neutral position). Our 
population advances with a celerity which exceeds 
the most sanguine calculations, augmenting fast 
our strength and resources, and guaranteeing more 
and more our national security. Every part of the 
Union gives indications of rapid and various im- 
provement. With burthens so light as scarcely to 
be perceived, with resources more than adequate to 
our present exigencies, with a mild Constitution and 
wholesome laws, is it too much to say that our 
country affords a spectacle of national happiness 
never surpassed, if ever before equalled, in the annals 
of human affairs ? 

Placed by Providence in a situation so auspicious, 
motives the most sacred and commanding admonish 
us, with sincere gratitude to Heaven and pure love 
of our country, to unite our efforts to preserve, pro- 
long, and improve the immense advantages of our 
condition. To co-operate with you in this most in- 
teresting work is the dearest wish of my heart. 

Fellow-citizens : — Amongst the objects which will 
claim your attention in the course of the session, a 

15S Alexander Hamilton 

review of our military establishment will not be the 
least important. It is called for by the events which 
have changed, and are likely still further to change, 
the relative situation of our interior frontier. In 
this review you will no doubt allow due weight to 
the consideration, that the questions between us ; 
and certain foreign powers are not yet finally ad- j 
justed, that the war in Europe is not yet termin- ; 
ated, and that the evacuation, of Western posts, 
when it shall happen, will demand a provision for 
garrisoning and securing them. You will consider 
this subject with a comprehensiveness equal to the 
extent and variety of its relations. The Secretary 
at War will be directed to lay before Congress the 
present state of the Department of War. 

With the review of our army is naturally connected 
that of our militia establishment. It will merit in- 
quiry what imperfections, in the existing plan, ex- 
perience may have unfolded; what improvements 
will comport with the progress of public opinion. The 
subject is of so much magnitude, in my estimation, 
as to beget a constant solicitude that the considera- 
tion of it will be renewed, till the greatest attainable 
degree of perfection is accomplished. Time, while it 
may furnish others, is wearing away some advan- 
tages for forwarding the object. None better de- 
serves the persevering attention of our public 
councils. 

In contemplating the actual condition of our West- 
em borders, the pleasure it is calculated to afford 
ought not to cause us to lose sight of a truth, to the 
confirmation of which every day's experience con- 

Washington's Speech 159 

tributes, viz. : That the provisions heretofore made 
are inadequate to protect the Indians from the 
violences of the irregular and lawless part of the 
frontier inhabitants; and that, without some more 
effectual plan for restraining the murders of those 
people, by bringing the murderers to condign pun- 
ishment, all the exertions of the government to pre- 
vent or repress the outrages of the Indians, and to 
preserve peace with them, must prove fruitless — all 
our present agreeable prospects fugitive and illusory. 
The frequent destruction of innocent women and 
children, chiefly the victims of retaliation, must con- 
tinue to shock humanity, while an expense truly 
enormous will drain the treasure of the Union. 

To enforce the observance of justice upon the In- 
dians, it is indispensable there should be competent 
means of rendering justice to them. If to these 
means could be added a provision to facilitate the 
supply of the articles they want on reasonable terms 
(a measure the mention of which I the more readily 
repeat, as in all the conferences with them they urge 
it with solicitude), I should not hesitate to entertain 
a strong hope of a permanent good understanding 
with them. It is agreeable to add that even the 
probability of their civilization, by perseverance in a 
proper plan, has not been diminished by the experi- 
ments thus far made. 

Gentlemen of the House of Representatives: 

The state of the revenue in its several relations, 
with the sums which have been borrowed and reim- 
bursed, pursuant to different acts of Congress, will be 

i6o Alexander Hamilton 

submitted by the proper officer — together with an 
estimate of the appropriations necessary to be made 
for the current service of the ensuing year. Reports 
from the late and present Director of the Mint 
(which I shall also cause to be laid before you) will 
show the situation and progress of that institution, 
and the necessity of some further legislative pro- 
visions for carrying the business of it more completely 
into execution, and for checking abuses which appear 
to be arising in particular quarters. 

Whether measures may not be advisable to rein- 
force the provision for the redemption of the public 
debt, will not fail, I am sure, to engage your atten- 
tion. In this examination, the question will natu- 
rally occur, whether the present be not a favorable 
juncture for the disposal of the vacant lands of the 
United States northwest of the Ohio. Congress have 
demonstrated the sense to be, and it were superfluous 
to repeat more, that whatever will tend to accelerate 
the honorable extinguishment of our public debt, 
will accord as much with the true interests of our 
country as with the general sense of our constituents. 

Gentlemen: — The progress in providing materials 
for the frigates, and in building them, and the state 
of the fortifications of our harbors, the measures 
which have been pursued for obtaining proper sites 
for arsenals, and for furnishing our magazines with 
military stores, and the steps which have been taken 
in execution of the law for opening a trade with the 
Indians, will also be presented for the information of 
Congress. 

Message i6i 

MESSAGE FOR WASHINGTON TO CONGRESS, IN REPLY 
TO A CALL FOR PAPERS RELATING TO THE TREATY 
WITH GREAT BRITAIN ' 

Draft by Hamilton. 

March 20, 1796. 

I have received your resolution of the inst., 

and have considered it with the attention always 
due to a request of the House of Representatives. 
I feel a consciousness (not contradicted I trust by 
any part of my conduct) of a sincere disposition to 
respect the rights, privileges, and authorities of Con- 
gress, collectively and in its separate branches — to 
pay just deference to their opinions and wishes — to 
avoid intrusion on their province — to communicate 
freely information pertinent to the subjects of their 
deliberation. But this disposition, keeping steadily 
in view the public good, must likewise be limited and 
directed by the duty incumbent upon us all, of pre- 
serving inviolate the constitutional boundary be- 
tween the several departments of the government ; a 
duty enjoined by the very nature of a Constitution 
which defines the powers delegated, and distributes 
them among different depositories; enforced by the 
solemn sanction of an oath ; and only to be fulfilled 
by a regard no less scrupulous for the rights of the 
Executive than for those of every other department. 

When I communicated to the House of Represent- 
atives the treaty lately made with Great Britain, I 
did not transmit the papers respecting its negotia- 
tion, for reasons which appeared to me decisive. 

^ Writings of Washington, xii., 112. 
VOL. vin.— II. 

1 62 Alexander Hamilton 

It is contrary to the general practice of govern- 
ments to promulge the intermediate transactions of 
a foreign negotiation, without weighty and special 
reasons. The motives for great delicacy and reserve 
on this point are powerful. There may be situations 
of a country in which particular occurrences of a 
negotiation, though conducted with the best views to 
its interest, and even to a satisfactory issue, if im- 
mediately disclosed, might tend to embarrassment 
and mischief in the interior affairs of that country. 
Confidential discussions and overtures are insepar- 
able from the nature of certain negotiations, and fre- 
quently occur in others. Essays are occasionally 
made by one party to discover the views of another 
in reference to collateral objects ; motives are some- 
times assigned for what is yielded by one party to 
another which, if made public, might kindle the re- 
sentment or jealousy of other powers, or might raise 
in them pretensions not expedient to be gratified. 
Hence it is a rule of mutual convenience and security 
among nations, that neither shall, without adequate 
cause and proper reserve, promulge the details of 
a negotiation between them; otherwise, one party 
might be injured by the disclosures of the other, and 
sometimes without being aware of the injury likely 
to be done. 

Consequently, the general neglect of this rule in 
the practice of a government, would naturally tend 
to destroy the confidence in its prudence and deli- 
cacy and that freedom of communication with it, 
which are so important in the intercourses between 
nation and nation, toward the accommodation of 

Message 163 

mutual differences and the adjustment of mutual 
interests. 

Neither would it be likely to promote the advan- 
tage of a nation, that the agents of a foreign govern- 
ment with which it was at any time in treaty, should 
act under the apprehension that every expression, 
every step of theirs, would presently be exposed, by 
the promulgation of the other party, to the criticism 
of their political adversaries at home. The disposi- 
tion to a liberal, and, perhaps, for that very reason, 
a wise policy in them, might be checked by the re- 
flection, that it might afterward appear from the 
disclosures on the other side, that they had not made 
as good bargains as they might have made. And 
while they might be stimulated by this to extraor- 
dinary effort and perseverance, maxims of greater 
secrecy and reserve in their cabinet would leave their 
competitors in the negotiation without the same 
motive to exertion. These having nothing to fear 
from the indiscretion of the opposite government, 
would only have to manage with caution their com- 
munications to their own. The consequence of such 
a state of things would naturally be an increase of 
obstacles to the favorable close of a negotiation, and 
the probability of worse bargains for the nation 
in the habit of giving indiscreet publicity to its 
proceedings. 

The agents of such a nation themselves would 
have strong inducements to extreme reserve in their 
communications with their own government, lest 
parts of their conduct might subject them in other 
quarters to unfriendly and uncandid constructions, 

164 Alexander Hamilton 

which might so narrow the information they gave, 
as scarcely to afford sufficient light, with regard 
either to the fitness of their own course of proceed- 
ing, or the true state and prospects of the negotia- 
tion with which they were charged. 

And thus, in different ways, the channels of 
information to a government might be materially 
obstructed by the impolitic practice of too free 
disclosure, in regard to its foreign negotiations. 

Moreover, it is not uncommon for the instructions 
to negotiating agents, especially where differences 
are to be settled, to contain observations on the 
views and motives of the other party, which after 
an amicable termination of the business it would 
be contrary to decorum, unfriendly and offensive to 
make public. Such instructions also frequently 
manifest views which, if disclosed, might renew 
sources of jealousy and ill-will which a treaty had 
extinguished, might exhibit eventual plans of pro- 
ceeding which had better remain unknown for future 
emergencies, and might even furnish occasion for 
suspicion, and pretext for discontent, to other 
powers. And in general, where more had been ob- 
tained by a treaty than the ultimata prescribed to 
the negotiator, it would be inexpedient to publish 
those ultimata; since, among other ill effects, the 
publication of them might prejudice the interest of 
the country in future negotiations with the same or 
with different powers. 

These reasons explain the grounds of a prevailing 
rule of conduct among prudent governments, namely, 
not to promulge without weighty cause, nor without 

Message 165 

due reserves, the particulars of a foreign negotiation. 
It so happens indeed that many of them have no 
immediate appHcation to the case of the present 
treaty. And it would be unadvisable to discriminate 
here between such as may and such as may not so 
apply. But it would be very extraordinary, situated 
as the United States were in relation to Great Brit- 
ain at the commencement of the negotiation, if some 
of them did not operate against a full disclosure of 
the papers in which it is recorded. 

Connected with these general reasons against the 
transmission of the papers with the treaty, it was 
proper to consider if there were any special reasons, 
which recommended in the particular case a depart- 
ure from the rule, and especially whether there was 
any purpose to which the House of Representatives 
is constitutionally competent which might be eluci- 
dated by those papers. 

This involved a consideration of the nature of the 
constitutional agency of that house, in regard to 
treaties. 

The Constitution of the United States empowers ^^.^ 
the President, with the advice and consent of the 
Senate, two thirds concurring, to make treaties. It 
nowhere professes to authorize the House of Repre- 
sentatives or any other branch of the government to 
partake with the President and Senate in the making 
of treaties. The whole power of making treaties is 
therefore by the Constitution vested in the President 
and Senate. 

To make a treaty, as applied to nations, is to con- 
clude a contract between them obligatory on their 

1 66 Alexander Hamilton 

faith: but that cannot be an obligatory contract, to 
the validity and obligation of which the assent of an- 
other power in the state is constitutionally necessary. 

Again, the Constitution declares that a treaty 
made under the authority of the United States shall 
be a "supreme law of the land," — let it be said "a 
law." A law is an obligatory rule of action pre- 
scribed by the competent authority, but that cannot 
be an obligatory rule of action or a law, to the valid- 
ity and obligation of which the assent of another 
power in the state is constitutionally necessary. 

Hence a discretionary right in the House of Repre- 
sentatives to assent or not to a treaty, or, what is 
equivalent, to execute it or not, would negative 
these two important provisions of our Constitution 
— ist, that the President and Senate shall have power 
to make treaties; 2dly, that a treaty made by them 
shall be a law; and in the room of them would es- 
tablish this provision, "that the power of making 
treaties resides in the President, Senate, and House 
of Representatives." For, whatever coloring may 
be given, a right of discretionary assent to a con- 
tract is a right to participate in the making of it. 

Is there any thing in the Constitution which by 
necessary implication changes the force of the ex- 
press terms that regulate the deposit of the power to 
make treaties? 

If there is, it must be found in those clauses which 
regulate the deposit of the legislative power. Here 
two questions arise: 

I St. Can the power of treaty reach and embrace 
objects upon which the legislative power is authorized 

Message 167 

to act, as the regulation of commerce, the defining of 
piracy, etc. ; or are these objects virtually excepted 
out of the operation of that power? 

2dly. If it can reach and embrace those objects, is 
there any principle which as to them gives to Con- 
gress, or, more properly, the House of Represent- 
atives, a discretionary right of assent or dissent? 

The affirmative of the first question is supported 
by these considerations: 

1 . The words which establish the power of treaty are 
manifestly broad enough to comprehend all treaties. 

2. It is a reasonable presumption that they were 
meant to extend to all treaties usual among nations, 
and so to be commensurate with the variety of 
exigencies and objects of intercourse which occur 
between nation and nation; in other words, that 
they were meant to enable the organ of the power 
to manage with efficacy the external affairs of the 
country in all cases in which they must depend upon 
compact with another nation. 

3. The treaties usual among nations are princi- 
pally those of peace, alliance, and commerce. It is 
the office of treaties of peace to establish the cessa- 
tion of hostilities and the conditions of it, including 
frequently indemnifications, sometimes pecuniary 
ones. It is the office of treaties of alliance to estab- 
lish cases in which nations shall succor each other in 
war, stipulating a union of forces, the furnishing of 
troops, ships of war, pecuniary and other aids. It is 
the office of treaties of commerce to establish rules 
and conditions according to which nations shall trade 
with each other, regulating as far as they go the 

1 68 Alexander Hamilton 

external commerce of the nations in treaty. Whence 
it is evident that treaties naturally bear in different 
ways upon many of the most important objects upon 
which the legislative power is authorized to act; as 
the appropriation of money, the raising of armies, 
the equipment of fleets, the declaring of war, the 
regulation of trade. But, 

4. This is no objection to the power of treaty 
having a capacity to embrace those objects: (First.) 
Because that latitude is essential to the great ends 
for which the power is instituted. (Second.) Be- 
cause, unless the power of treaty can embrace ob- 
jects upon which the legislative power may also 
act, it is essentially nugatory, often inadequate to 
mere treaties of peace, always inadequate to treaties 
of alliance or commerce. (Third.) Because it is the 
office of the legislative power to establish separate 
rules of action for the nation of which it is the organ, 
its arm being too short to reach a single case in which 
a common obligatory rule of action for two nations 
is to be established. (Fourth.) Because, inasmuch 
as a common rule of action for independent nations 
can only be established by compact, it necessarily is 
of the office of the power of treaty to effect its estab- 
lishment. (Fifth.) Because the power of legislation 
being unable to effect what the power of treaty must 
effect, it is unreasonable to suppose that the former 
was intended to exclude the action of the latter. 
(Sixth.) Because, on the other hand, there is no 
incongruity in the supposition that the power of 
treaty in establishing a joint rule of action with 
another nation may act upon the same subject which 

Message 169 

the legislative power may act upon in establishing a 
separate rule of action for one nation. (Seventh.) 
Because it is a common case for the different powers 
of government to act upon the same subject within 
different spheres and in different modes. Thus the 
legislative power lays and provides for the collection 
of a particular tax ; the executive power collects the 
tax and brings it into the treasury. So the treaty 
power may stipulate a pecuniary indemnification 
for an injury, and the legislative power may execute 
the stipulation by providing and designating the 
fund out of which the indemnification shall be made. 
As in the first instance the executive power is aux- 
iliary to the legislative, so in the last the legislative 
power is auxiliary to the treaty powers. (Eighth.) 
Because this document leads to no collision of pow- 
ers, inasmuch as the stipulations of a treaty may 
reasonably be considered as restraints upon the 
legislative discretion. Those stipulations operate by 
pledging the faith of a nation and restricting its will 
by the force of moral obligation, and it is a funda- 
mental principle of social right that the will of a na- 
tion, as well as that of an individual, may be bound 
by the moral obligation of a contract. (Ninth.) 
Because the organ of the power of treaty is as truly 
the organ of the will of a nation as that of its legisla- 
tive power; and there is no incongruity in the sup- 
position that the will of a nation acting through one 
organ may be bound by the pledge of its faith through 
another organ. From these different views of the 
subject it results that the position — that the power 
of legislation acting in one sphere, and the power of 

170 Alexander Hamilton 

treaty acting in another sphere, may embrace in 
their action the same objects — involves no inter- 
ference of constitutional powers; and, of course, 
that the latter may reach and comprehend objects 
which the former is authorized to act upon ; which it 
is necessary to suppose it does do, since the contrary 
supposition would essentially destroy the power of 
treaty : whereas the stipulations of treaties being only 
particular exceptions to the discretion of the legisla- 
tive power, this power will always still have a wide 
field of action beyond and out of the exceptions. 

The latitude of the power of treaty granted by ana- 
logous terms in the articles of our late confederation, 
as practised upon for years in treaties with several 
foreign powers, and acquiesced in by the govern- 
ment and citizens of these States, is an unequivocal 
comment upon the meaning of the provision of our 
present Constitution, and a conclusive evidence of 
the sense in which it was understood by those who 
planned and by those who adopted that Constitu- 
tion— supporting fully the construction of the power 
here advocated. That latitude could derive no aid 
from the circumstance of all the powers of the con- 
federation being vested in one body, for that body 
had very little legislative power, and none in several 
important particulars which were actually em- 
braced by our treaties. The examples of practice 
under our present government, without the least 
question of their propriety, is a further corrobora- 
tion of the intended and accepted sense of the con- 
stitutional instrument, agreeing with the foregoing 
construction. 

Message 1 7 1 

The negative of the second question above stated 
is supported by these considerations. 

First. — A discretionary right of assent in the House 
of Representatives (as before shown) would contra- 
dict the two important provisions of the Constitu- 
tion; that the President with the Senate shall have 
power to make treaties; that the treaties so made 
shall be laws. 

Secondly. — It supposes the House of Representa- 
tives at liberty to contravene the faith of the nation 
engaged in a treaty made by the declared constitu- 
tional agents of the nation for that purpose, and thus 
implies the contradiction that a nation may right- 
fully pledge its faith through one organ, and without 
any change of circumstances to dissolve the obliga- 
tion, may revoke the pledge through another organ. 

Thirdly. — The obvious import of the terms which 
grant the power of treaty can only be controlled, if 
at all, by some manifest necessary implication in 
favor of the discretionary right which has been men- 
tioned. But it has been seen that no such implica- 
tion can be derived from the mere grant of certain 
powers to the House of Representatives in common 
with the other branch of the legislative body. As 
there is a rational construction which renders the 
due exercise of these powers in the cases to which 
they are competent, compatible with the operation 
of the power of treaty, in all the necessary latitude, 
excluding the discretionary co-operation of the House 
of Representatives, that construction is to be pre- 
ferred. It is far more natural to consider the exer- 
cise of those powers as liable to the exceptions which 

172 Alexander Hamilton 

the power of treaty granted to the President and 
Senate may make, than to infer from them a right 
in the House to share in this power in opposition to 
terms of the grant, and without a single expression 
in the Constitution to designate the right. It is im- 
probable that the Constitution intended to vest in 
the House of Representatives so extensive a control 
over treaties without a single phrase that would look 
directly to the object. It is the more improbable, 
because the Senate being, in the first instance, a 
party to treaties, the right of discretionary co-opera- 
tion in the House of Representatives, in virtue of 
its legislative character, would, in fact, terminate in 
itself, though but a part of the legislative body — 
which suggests this question, Can the House of 
Representatives have any right in virtue of its 
general legislative character, which is not effectually 
participated by the Senate ? 

Fourthly. — The claim of such a right on the ground 
that the legislative power is essentially deliberative, 
that whenever its agency is in question it has a right 
to act or not, and that, consequently, when provision 
by law is requisite to execute a treaty there is liberty 
to refuse it, cannot be acceded to without admitting 
in the legislative body, and in each part of it an abso- 
lute discretion uncontrollable by any constitutional 
injunctions, limits, or restrictions, thereby overturn- 
ing the fabric of a fixed and definite Constitution, 
and erecting upon its ruins a legislative omnipotence. 

It would, for example, give to Congress a discre- 
tion to allow or not a fixed compensation to the 
judges, though the Constitution expressly enjoins 

Message 1 73 

"that they shall at stated times receive for their 
services a compensation, which shall not be dimin- 
ished during their continuance in office ' ' ; and would 
sacrifice this solemn and peremptory command of 
the Constitution to the opinion of Congress respecting 
a more essential application of the public money. 
Can this be true? Can any thing but absolute ina- 
bility excuse a compliance with this injunction, and 
does not the Constitution presuppose a moral im- 
possibility of such inability ? If there be a legal dis- 
cretion in any case to contravene this injunction, 
what limit is there to the legal discretion of the 
legislative body? What injunction, what restriction 
of the Constitution may they not supersede ? If the 
Constitution cannDt direct the exercise of their au- 
thority in particular cases, how can it limit it in any? 
What becomes of the appeal to our courts on the 
constitutionality of a legislative act? What be- 
comes of the power they solemnly assert to test such 
an act by the constitutional commission, and to pro- 
nounce it operative or null, according to its con- 
formity with or repugnance to that commission? 
What, in fine, becomes of the Constitution itself? 

This inquiry suggests a truth fundamental to the 
principles of our government, and all important to 
the security of the people of the United States — 
namely, that the legislative body is not deliberative 
in all cases; that it is only deliberative and discre- 
tionary where the Constitution and the laws lay it 
under no command nor prohibition ; that where they 
command, it can only execute ; where they prohibit, 
it cannot act. If the thing be commanded and the 

174 Alexander Hamilton 

means of execution are undefined, it may then de- 
liberate on the choice of the means, but it is obliged 
to devise some means. It is true that the Constitu- 
tion provides no method of compelling the legislative 
body to act, but it is not the less under a constitu- 
tional, legal, and moral obligation to act, where ac- 
tion is prescribed, and in conformity with the rule of 
action prescribed. 

In asserting the authority of laws as well as of 
the Constitution to direct and restrain the legislative 
action, the position is to be understood with this 
difference. The Constitution obliges always — the 
laws till they are annulled or repealed by the proper 
authority; but till then they oblige the legislative 
body as well as individuals, and all their antecedent 
effects are valid and binding. And the abrogation 
or repeal of a law must be by an act of the regular 
organ of the national will for that purpose, in the 
forms of the Constitution, — not by a mere refusal to 
give effect to its injunctions and requisitions; es- 
pecially by a part of the legislative body. A legal 
discretion to refuse the execution of a pre-existing 
law is virtually a power to repeal it, and to attribute 
this discretion to a part of the legislative body is to 
attribute to it the whole, instead of a part, of the 
legislative power in the given case. When towards 
the execution of an antecedent law, further legisla- 
tive provision is necessary, the past effects of the 
law are obligatory, and a positive repeal or suspen- 
sion by the whole Legislature is requisite to arrest 
its future operation. The idea is essential in a gov- 
ernment Hke ours, that there is no body of men or 

Message 1 75 

individuals above the law; not even the legislative 
body, till by an act of legislation they have annulled 
the law. 

The argument from the principle of an essentially 
deliberative faculty in the legislative body is the less 
admissible, because it would result from it that the 
nation could never be conclusively bound by a treaty. 
Why should the inherent discretion of a future Legis- 
lature be more bound by the assent of a preceding 
one, than this was by a pledge of the public faith 
through the President and Senate? Even the Sen- 
ate itself, after having assented to a treaty by two 
thirds in one capacity, might in another, by a bare 
majority, refuse to execute; a contradiction not to 
be vindicated by any just theory. 

Hence it follows that the House of Representa- 
tives have no moral power to refuse the execution of 
a treaty which is not contrary to the Constitution, 
because it pledges the public faith; and have no 
legal power to refuse its execution, because it is a 
law, until at least it ceases to be a law by a regular 
act of revocation of the competent authority. 

The ingredient peculiar to our Constitution in that 
provision which declares that treaties are laws, is of 
no inconsiderable weight in the question. It is one 
thing, whether a treaty pledging the faith of the na- 
I tion shall, by force of moral duty, oblige the legisla- 
tive will to carry it into effect; another, whether it 
shall be of itself a law. The last is the case in our 
Constitution, which, by a fundamental decree, gives 
the character of a law to every treaty made under the 
authority which it designates. Treaties, therefore, 

176 Alexander Hamilton 

in our government, of themselves, and without any 
additional sanction, have full legal perfection as 
laws. 

Questions may be made as to the cases in which, 
and the authority by which, under our Constitution, 
a treaty consonant with it may be pronounced to 
have lost or may be divested of its obligatory force ; 
a point not necessary now to be discussed. But ad- 
mitting that authority to reside in the legislative 
body, still its exercise must be by an act of Congress 
declaring the fact and the consequence, or declaring 
war against the power with whom the treaty is. 
There is perceived to be nothing in our Constitution, 
no rule of constitutional law to authorize one branch 
alone, or the House of Representatives in particular, 
to pronounce the existence of such cases, or from the 
beginning to refuse compliance with such a treaty, 
without any new events to change the original obli- 
gation. A right in the whole legislative body (in our 
Constitution the two houses of Congress), by a col- 
lective act, to pronounce the non-operation or nullity 
of a treaty, satisfies every claim in favor of the legis- 
lative power, and gives to it all the weight and 
efficacy which is reconcilable with the due operation 
of the treaty power. 

How discordant might be the results of a doctrine 
that the House of Representatives may at discretion 
execute or not a constitutional treaty! What con- 
fusion, if our courts of justice should recognize and 
enforce as laws treaties, the obligation of which was 
denied by the House of Representatives, and that on a 
principle of inherent discretion, which no decision of 

Message 177 

the courts could guide ! We might see our commercial 
and fiscal systems disorganized by the breaches made 
in antecedent laws by posterior treaties, through the 
want of some collateral provisions requisite to give 
due effect to the principle of the new rule. Can that 
doctrine be true which may present a treaty oper- 
ating as a law upon all the citizens of a country, and 
yet legally disregarded by a portion of the legislative 
body? 

The sound conclusion appears to be, that when 
a treaty contains nothing but what the Constitution 
permits, it is conclusive upon all, and all are bound 
to give it effect. When it contains more than the 
Constitution permits, it is void either in the whole, 
or as to so much as it improperly contains. While I 
can discover no sufficient foundation in the Constitu- 
tion for the claim of a discretionary right in the 
House of Representatives to participate in giving 
validity to treaties, I am confirmed in the contrary 
inference by the knowledge I have that the ex- 
pediency of this participation was considered by the 
convention which planned the Constitution, and was 
by them overruled. 

The greatness of the power of treaty under this 
construction is no objection to its truth. It is doubt- 
less a great power, and necessarily so, else it could 
not answer those purposes of national security and 
interest in the external relations of a country for 
which it is designed. Nor does the manner in which 
it is granted in our Constitution furnish any argu- 
ment against the magnitude which is ascribed to it, 
but the contrary. A treaty cannot be made without 

VOL. Via. — 12. 

178 Alexander Hamilton 

the actual co-operation and mutual consent of the 
Executive and two thirds of the Senate. This neces- 
sity of positive co-operation of the Executive charges 
him with a high responsibility, which cannot but 
be one great security for the proper exercise of the 
power. The proportion of the Senate requisite to 
their valid consent to a treaty approaches so near 
to unanimity, that it would always be very extra- 
ordinary if it should be given to one really pernicious 
or hurtful to the state. These great guards are 
manifest indications of a great power being meant 
to be deposited. So that the manner of its deposit 
is an argument for its magnitude rather than an 
argument against it, and an argument against the 
intention to admit with a view to security the dis- 
cretionary co-operation of the House of Repre- 
sentatives rather than in favor of such a right 
in them. 

Two thirds of the two houses of Congress may 
exercise their whole legislative power not only with- 
out but against the consent of the Executive. It is 
not evident on general principles that in this arrange- 
ment there is a materially greater security against a 
bad law than in the other against a bad treaty. The 
frequent absolute necessity of secrecy not only in the 
conduct of a foreign negotiation, but at certain con- 
junctures, as to the very articles of a treaty, is a natu- 
ral reason why a part, and that the least ntmierous 
part, of the legislative body was united with the 
Executive in the making of treaties in exclusion of 
the other and the most numerous. But if the de- 
posit of the power of treaty was less safe, and less 

Message 1 79 

well guarded than it is conceived to be, this would 
not be a good argument against its being in fact ex- 
clusively deposited as the terms of the Constitution, 
which establish it, import it to be. It would only 
be an argument for an amendment to the Constitu- 
tion modifying the deposit of the power differently, 
and superadding new guards. 

If the House of Representatives, called upon to 
act in aid of a treaty made by the President and 
Senate, believe it to be unwarranted by the Con- 
stitution which they are sworn to support, it will not 
be denied that they may pause in the execution 
until a decision on the point of constitutionality in 
the Supreme Court of the United States shall have 
settled the question. 

But this is the only discretion of that house, as to 
the obligation to carry a treaty made by the Presi- 
dent and Senate into effect, in the existence of which 
I can acquiesce as being within the intent of the 
Constitution. 

Hence there was no question, in my opinion, of the 
competency of the House of Representatives, which 
I could presuppose likely to arise, to which any of 
the papers now requested could be deemed applic- 
able ; nor does it yet appear that any such question 
has arisen, upon which the request has been predi- 
cated. 

Were even the course of reasoning which I have 
pursued less well founded than it appears to me to 
be, the call for papers as a preliminary proceeding 
of the house would still seem to be premature. 

A question on the constitutionality of a treaty can 

i8o Alexander Hamilton 

manifestly only be decided by comparing the instru- 
ment itself with the Constitution. 

A question whether a treaty be consistent with or 
adverse to the interests of the United States, must 
likewise be decided by comparing the stipulations 
which it actually contains with the situation of the 
United States in their internal and external relations. 

Nothing extrinsic to the treaty, or in the manner 
of its negotiation, can make it constitutional or un- 
constitutional, good or bad, salutary or pernicious. 
The internal evidence it affords is the only proper 
standard of its merits. 

Whatever therefore be the nature of the duty, or 
discretion of the House, as to the execution of the 
treaty, it will find its rule of action in the treaty. 

Even with reference to and animadversion on 
the conduct of the agents who made the treaty, the 
presumption of a criminal mismanagement of the 
interests of the United States ought first, it is con- 
ceived, to be deduced from the intrinsic nature of the 
treaty, and ought to be pronounced to exist prior to 
a further inquiry to ascertain the guilt and the guilty. 
Whenever the House of Representatives, proceeding 
upon any treaty, shall have taken the ground that 
such a presumption exists, in order to such an in- 
quiry, their request to the Executive to be caused to 
be laid before them papers which may contain in- 
formation on the subject, will rest on a foundation 
that cannot fail to secure to it due efficacy. 

But, under all the circumstances of the present re- 
quest (circumstances which I forbear to particularize), 
and in its present indefinite form, I adopt with re- 

Farewell Address i8i 

luctance and regret, but with entire conviction, the 
opinion, that a just regard to the Constitution and 
to the duty of my office forbids on my part a com- 
pliance with that request. 

FAREWELL ADDRESS ' 

ABSTRACT OF POINTS TO FORM AN ADDRESS ' 

1796. 

L — The period of a new election approaching, it is 
his duty to announce his intention to decline. 

IL — He had hoped that long ere this it would have 
been in his power, and particularly had nearly come 
to a final resolution in the year 1792 to do it, but the 
peculiar situation of affairs, and the advice of con- 
fidential friends, dissuaded. 

IIL — In acquiescing in a further election he still 
hoped a year or two longer would have enabled him 
to withdraw, but a continuance of causes has de- 
layed till now, when the position of our country, 
abroad and at home, justify him in pursuing his 
inclination. 

IV. — In doing it he has not been unmindful of his 
relation as a dutiful citizen to his country, nor is now 
influenced by the smallest diminution of zeal for its 
interest or gratitude for its past kindness, but by a 
belief that the step is compatible with both. 

V. — The impressions under which he first accepted 
were explained on the proper occasion. 

* See note to next paper, "Washington's Farewell Address." 

* This endorsement, together with the whole of this paper, is copied 
from a draft in Hamilton's hand. 

1 82 Alexander Hamilton 

VI. — In the execution of it he has contributed the 
best exertions of a very falHble judgment — antici- 
pated his insufficiency — experienced his disquahfica- 
tions for the difficult trust, and every day a stronger 
sentiment from that cause to yield the place — ad- 
vance into the decline of life — every day more sensi- 
ble of weight of years, of the necessity of repose, of 
the duty to seek retirement, etc. 

VII. — It will be among the purest enjoyments 
which can sweeten the remnant of his days, to par- 
take in a private station, in the midst of his fellow- 
citizens, the laws of a free government, the ultimate 
object of his cares and wishes. 

VIII. — As to rotation. 

IX. — In contemplating the moment of retreat, 
cannot forbear to express his deep acknowledgments 
and debt of gratitude for the many honors conferred 
on him — the steady confidence which, even amidst 
discouraging scenes and efforts to poison its source, 
has adhered to support him, and enabled him to be 
useful — marking, if well placed, the virtue and wis- 
dom of his countrymen. All the return he can now 
make must be in the vows he will carry with him to 
his retirement: ist, for a continuance of the Divine 
beneficence to his country; 2d, for the perpetuity of 
their union and brotherly affection — for a good ad- 
ministration insured by a happy union of watchful- 
ness and confidence; 3d, that happiness of people 
under auspices of liberty may be complete; 4th, 
that by a prudent use of the blessing they may 
recommend to the affection, the praise, and the adop- 
tion of every nation yet a stranger to it. 

Farewell Address 183 

X. — Perhaps here he ought to end. But an un- 
conquerable solicitude for the happiness of his 
country will not permit him to leave the scene with- 
out availing himself of whatever confidence may re- 
main in him, to strengthen some sentiments which 
he believes to be essential to their happiness, and to 
recommend some rules of conduct, the importance of 
which his own experience has more than ever im- 
pressed upon him. 

XL — To consider the Union as the rock of their 
salvation, presenting summarily these ideas: 

1. The strength and greater security from external 
danger. 

2. Internal peace, and avoiding the necessity of estab- 
lishments dangerous to liberty. 

3. Avoids the effect of foreign intrigue. 

4. Breaks the force of faction by rendering combina- 
tions more difficult. 

Fitness of the parts for each other by their very 
discriminations: 

1 . The North, by its capacity for maritime strength 
and manufacture. 

2. The agricultural South furnishing materials and 
requiring those protections. 

The Atlantic board to the western country by the 
strong interest of peace, and 

The Western, by the necessity of Atlantic mari- 
time protection. 

Cannot be secure of their great outlet otherwise — 
cannot trust a foreign connection. 

Solid interests invite to Union. Speculation of 

1 84 Alexander Hamilton 

difficulty of government ought not to be indulged, 
nor momentary jealousies — lead to impatience. 

Faction and individual ambition are the only ad- 
visers of disunion. 

Let confidence be cherished. Let the recent ex- 
perience of the West be a lesson against impatience 
and distrust. 

XIL — Cherish the actual government. It is the 
government of our own choice, free in its principles, 
the guardian of our common rights, the patron of our 
common interests, and containing within itself a pro- 
vision for its own amendment. 

But let that provision be cautiously used — not 
abused ; changing only in any material points as ex- 
perience shall direct; neither indulging speculations 
of too much or too little force in the system ; and re- 
membering always the extent of our country. 

Time and habit of great consequence to every gov- 
ernment of whatever structure. 

Discourage the spirit of faction, the bane of free 
government; and particularly avoid founding it on 
geographical discriminations. Discountenance slan- 
der of public men. Let the departments of govern- 
ment avoid interfering and mutual encroachment. 

XIIL — Morals, religion, industry, commerce, econ- 
omy. 

Cherish public credit — source of strength and se- 
curity. 

Adherence to systematic views. 

XIV. — Cherish good faith, justice, and peace with 
other nations : 

I . Because religion and morality dictate it. 

Farewell Address 185 

2. Because policy dictates it. 

If these could exist, a nation invariably honest and 
faithful, the benefits would be immense. 

But avoid national antipathies or national attach- 
ments. 

Display the evils; fertile wSource of wars — instru- 
ment of ambitious rulers. 

XV. — Republics peculiarly exposed to foreign in- 
trigue, those sentiments lay them open to it. 

XVI. — The great rule of our foreign politics ought 
to be to have as little political connection as possible 
with foreign nations. 

Cultivating commerce with all by gentle and natu- 
ral means, diffusing and diversifying it, but forcing 
nothing — and cherish the sentiment of independence, 
taking pride in the appellation of American. 

XVII. — Our separation from Europe renders stand- 
ing alliances inexpedient — subjecting our peace and 
interest to the primary and complicated relations of 
European interests. 

Keeping constantly in view to place ourselves upon 
a respectable defensive, and if forced into contro- 
versy, trusting to connections of the occasion. 

XVIII. — Our attitude imposing and rendering this 
policy safe. 

But this must be with the exception of existing 
engagements, to be preserved but not extended. 

XIX. — It is not expected that these admonitions 
can control the course of the human passions, but if 
they only moderate them in some instances, and now 
and then excite the reflections of virtuous men 
heated by party spirit, my endeavor is rewarded. 

1 86 Alexander Hamilton 

XX. — How far in the administration of my present 
office my conduct has conformed to these principles, 
the public records must witness. My conscience as- 
sures me that I believed myself to be guided by them. 

XXI. — Particularly in relation to the present war, 
the proclamation of the 2 2d of April, 1793, is the key 
to my plan. 

Approved by your voice and that of your represent- 
atives in Congress, the spirit of that measure has 
continually guided me, uninfluenced by, and regard- 
less of, the complaints and attempts of any of the 
powers at war or their partisans to change them. 

I thought our country had a right under all the cir- 
cumstances to take this ground, and I was resolved, 
as far as depended on me, to maintain it firmly. 

XXII. — However, in reviewing the course of my 
administration, I may be unconscious of intentional 
errors, I am too sensible of my own deficiencies not 
to believe that I may have fallen into many. I de- 
precate the evils to which they may tend, and pray 
Heaven to avert or mitigate and abridge them. I 
carry with me, nevertheless, the hope that my mo- 
tives will continue to be viewed with indulgence; 
that after forty-five years of my life devoted to pub- 
lic service, with a good zeal and upright views, the 
faults of deficient abilities will be consigned to ob- 
livion, as myself must soon be to the mansions of 
rest. 

XXIII. — Neither interest nor ambition has been 
my impelling motive. I never abused the power con- 
fided to me. I have not bettered my fortune, re- 
tiring with it, no otherwise improved than by the 

Farewell Address 187 

influence on property of the common blessings of my 
country. I retire with undefiled hands and an un- 
corrupted heart, and with ardent vows for the wel- 
fare of that country, which has been the native soil 
of myself and my ancestors for four generations. 

WASHINGTON'S FAREWELL ADDRESS ^ 

"Original Draft" by Hamilton. ^ 

August, 1796. 

The period for a new election of a citizen to ad- 
minister the executive government of the United 
States being not very distant, and the time actually 

^ The question of the authorship of the Farewell Address has been 
discussed with the utmost ability by Horace Binney in his Inquiry into 
the Formation of Washington's Farewell Address. That masterly argu- 
ment, in every way worthy of its distinguished author, finally settled 
all doubts or questionings on the subject, and to it every one interested 
in the matter must be referred. It is only needful here to give a bare 
outline of the facts in the case. 

In 1792, Washington, contemplating withdrawal from public life, 
sent Madison certain suggestions and asked him to put them into the 
form of an address. This Madison did very briefly, confining himself 
to the points given him by Washington. As Washington decided to 
accept a second term the paper was not used. In 1796 Washington 
sent to Hamilton the draft by Madison, together with certain addi- 
tional paragraphs of his own, which made, as Mr. Binney said, the ' 'soul 
of the address." These two papers constituted Washington's original 
draft, and Hamilton was requested to ''re-dress'' it. Hamilton, first 
incorporating these suggestions in the "abstract of points" just given, 
and adhering strictly to the lines marked out by Washington, made an 
entirely new draft of his own. This may be called Hamilton's original 
draft, which was sent to Washington at once. Hamilton then took 
Washington's original draft and consulted Jay in regard to it. The 
result of this conference was that Hamilton drew up a paper of changes 

2 This is a copy of the original draft in Hamilton's autograph. The 
notes embrace the final alterations in this draft — but there are many 
previous erasures which can only be given in a fac-simile. 

1 88 Alexander Hamilton 

arrived when your thoughts must be employed in 
designating the person who is to be clothed with that 
important trust for another term, it appears to me 
proper, and especially as it may conduce to a more 
distinct expression of the public voice, that I should 
now apprise you of the resolution I have formed to 

and corrections which he sent back to Washington together with the 
latter's original draft. Washington compared the three papers with 
his customary care, and then wrote that he greatly preferred Hamil- 
ton's original draft, and returned it to the author for certain changes 
including the addition of a paragraph on education, and asked that it 
be put in shape for the press. Hamilton, therefore, wrote a second 
draft, which may be called "Hamilton's revision," and sent it to 
Washington, September i, 1796. Washington then made an auto- 
graph copy of the revision, cancelled all those passages which he had 
told Hamilton he should expunge, and on Sept. 17th the "Farewell 
Address" was given to the world. Washington kept with wonted care 
every paper relating to the Farewell Address, but "Hamilton's 
revision" has disappeared. The circumstances connected with this 
disappearance are suspicious, but as Hamilton preserved his original 
draft, the suppression of the revision, if there was any evil intention 
in the matter, failed of its purpose. The original draft of Hamilton 
shows beyond question the hand which gave form to the Farewell 
Address. The differences between that draft and the Farewell 
Address are such as would have been made in the revision, except as 
to the cancelled passages which Washington cut out in bulk as he 
originally proposed. Jay's argument, written in 181 1, carries its own 
refutation, for he cites as a proof of his theory that Washington alone 
could with propriety write such a paper, a passage which is taken 
word for word from Madison's draft of 1792. Mr. Binney's conclusion 
is ima voidable. The thoughts and the general idea of the Farewell 
Address are all Washington's. The form, the arrangement, and the 
method of argument are Hamilton's. No edition of Hamilton's works 
would be complete without showing in some degree the share which 
he had in this famous paper. I have, therefore, printed here as best 
adapted for this purpose two documents. The first is the abstract of 
points just given, which was made by Hamilton for his own use and 
drawn from Washington's original draft composed of Madison's sketch 
and his own additional suggestions. The other is Hamilton's original 
draft. These papers can be readily compared with the Farewell 
Address as it finally appeared, and in this way Hamilton's share in 
this great state paper is at once apparent. In the private correspond- 

Farewell Address 189 

decline being considered among the number of those 
out of whom a choice is to be made. 

I beg you, nevertheless,' to be assured that the 
resolution which I announce has not been taken 
without a strict regard to all the considerations at- 
tached to '' the relation which, as a dutiful citizen, 
I bear ^ to my "^ country, and that in withdrawing the 
tender of my service, which silence in my situation 
might imply, I am influenced by no diminution of 
zeal for its future interest, nor by any deficiency of 
grateful respect for its past kindness, but by a 
full conviction that such a step is compatible with 
both. 

The acceptance of, and the continuance hitherto in 
the office to which your suffrages have twice called 
me, has been a uniform sacrifice of private inclina- 
tion to ^ the opinion of public duty coinciding with 
what appeared to be your wishes. I had constantly 
hoped that it would have been much earlier in my 
power, consistently with motives which I was not 
at liberty to disregard, to return to that retirement 
from which those ^ motives had reluctantly drawn me. 

The strength of my desire to withdraw previous to 
the last election, had even led to the preparation of 

ence in this edition, all Hamilton's letters on the subject will be found 
printed, in conjunction with those of Washington, for the first time. 

All the important documents are given in Mr. Binney's Inquiry, but 
the appendix to Irving's Life of Washington (vol. v.), the appendix to 
Sparks' edition of the Writings of Washington (vol. xii.), and Hamilton's 
History of the Republic (vol. vi., p. 492), should also be consulted by 
every one desiring the fullest information. 

' at the same time. * connected with — ^inseparable from — incident 
to. 

3 bears. •♦ his. s combined with a deference for. 6 they. 

190 Alexander Hamilton 

an address to declare it to you, but deliberate ' re- 
flection on the very critical and perplexed posture of 
our affairs with foreign nations, and the unanimous 
advice of men "" every way entitled to my confidence, 
obliged ^ me to abandon the idea. 

I rejoice that the state of your national concerns, 
external as well as internal, no longer renders the 
pursuit of my inclination incompatible with the 
sentiment of duty or propriety, and ^ that whatever 
partiality any portion of you may still retain for my 
services, they, under the existing circumstances of 
our country, will not disapprove the ^ resolution ^ 
I have formed. 

The impressions under which I first accepted the 
arduous trust of Chief Magistrate of the United 
States, were explained on the proper occasion. In 
the discharge of this trust, I can only say that I 
have, with pure intentions, contributed towards the 
organization and administration of the government 
the best exertions of which a very fallible judgment 
was capable ; that conscious at '' the outset of the 
inferiority of my qualifications for the station, ex- 
perience in my own eyes, and perhaps still more in 
those of others, has not diminished in me the diffi- 
dence of myself — and every day the increasing 
weight of years admonishes me more and more that 
the shade of retirement is as necessary ^ as it will be 
welcome to me. Satisfied that if any circumstances 
have given a peculiar value to my services, they were 
temporary, I have the consolation to believe that 

^ mature. « persons. 3 impelled. ^ whatever. 

^ my. 6 to retire. 7 in. 8 to me. 

Farewell Address 191 

while inclination and prudence urge me to recede 
from the political scene, patriotism does not forbid 
it. May I also have that of knowing in my retreat,' 
that the involuntary errors which I have probably 
committed have been the causes of no serious or 
lasting mischief to my country, and thus be spared 
the anguish of regrets which would disturb the 
repose of my retreat and embitter the remnant 
of my life! I may then expect to realize, with- 
out alloy, the pure enjoyment of partaking, in the 
midst of my fellow-citizens, of the benign influence 
of good laws under a free government; the ulti- 
mate object of all my wishes, and to which I look 
as the happy reward ^ of our mutual labors and 
dangers. 

In looking forward to the moment which is to ter- 
minate the career of my public life, my sensations do 
not permit me to suspend the deep acknowledgments 
required by that debt of gratitude, which I owe to 
my beloved country, for the many honors it has 
conferred upon me, still more for the distinguished 
and steadfast confidence it has reposed in me, and 
for the opportunities it has thus afforded me ^ of 
manifesting my inviolable attachment, by services 
faithful and persevering — however the inadequate- 
ness of my faculties may have ill seconded my 4 zeal. 
If benefits have resulted to you, my fellow-citizens, 
from these services, let it always be remembered to 
your praise, and as an instructive example in our 
annals, that the constancy of your support amidst 

^ retirement. * I hope. ^ i have thence enjoyed. 

4 have rendered their efforts unequal to my — disproportional. 

192 Alexander Hamilton 

appearances ' dubious, vicissitudes of fortune often 
discouraging, and in situations in which, not unfre- 
quently, want of success has seconded the criticisms 
of malevolence,^ was the essential prop of the efforts 
and the guaranty of the measures by which they 
were achieved. 

Profoundly penetrated with this idea, I shall carry 
it with me to my retirement, and to my grave, as a 
lively incitement to unceasing vows (the only re- 
turns I can henceforth make) that Heaven may 
continue to you the choicest tokens of its benefi- 
cence, merited by national piety and morality ; that 
your union and brotherly affection may be perpetual ; 
that the free Constitution, which is the work of 
your own hands, may be sacredly maintained; that 
its administration in every department may be 
stamped with wisdom and virtue; that, in fine, the 
happiness of the people of these States under the 
auspices of liberty may be made complete, by so 
careful a preservation, and so prudent a use of this 
blessing, as will acquire them the glorious satisfac- 
tion of recommending it to the affection, the praise, 
and the adoption of every nation which is yet a 
stranger to it. 

Here, perhaps, I ought to stop; but a solicitude 
for your welfare, which cannot end but with my life, 
and the fear that there may exist projects unfriendly 
to it, against which it may be necessary you should 
be guarded, urge me in taking leave of you to offer 
to your solemn consideration and frequent review, 

' tinder circiimstances in which the passions, agitated in every 
direction, were liable to the greatest fluctuations. ^ sometimes. 

Farewell Address 193 

some sentiments, the result of mature reflection con- 
firmed by observation and experience, which appear 
to me essential to the permanency of your felicity as 
a people. These will be offered with the more free- 
dom, as you can only see in them the disinterested 
advice of a parting friend, who can have no personal 
motive to tincture or bias his counsel. 

Interwoven as is the love of liberty with every fibre 
of your hearts, no recommendation is necessary to 
fortify your attachment to it. Next to this, that 
unity of government which constitutes you as one 
people, claims your vigilant care and guardianship — 
as a main pillar of your real independence, of your 
peace, safety, freedom, and happiness. 

This being the point in your political fortress 
against which the batteries of internal and external 
enemies will be most constantly and actively, how- 
ever covertly and insidiously levelled, it is of the 
utmost importance that you should appreciate, in its 
full force, the immense value of your political union 
to your national and individual happiness — that you 
should cherish towards it an affectionate and im- 
movable attachment, and that you should watch for 
its preservation with zealous solicitude. 

For this, you have every motive of sympathy and 
interest. Children for the most part of a common 
country, that country claims and ought to concen- 
trate your affections. The name of American must 
always gratify and exalt the just pride of patriotism 
more than any denomination which can be derived 
from local discriminations. You have, with slight 
shades of difference, the same religion, manners, 

VOL. VIII. — 13. 

194 Alexander Hamilton 

habits, and political institutions and principles ; you 
have, in a common cause, fought and triumphed 
together. The independence and liberty you enjoy 
are the work of joint councils, efforts, dangers, suf- 
ferings, and successes. By your union you have 
achieved them, by your union you will most effectu- 
ally maintain them. 

The considerations which address themselves to 
your sensibility are greatly ' strengthened ^ by those 
which apply to your interest. Here, every portion 
of our country will find the most urgent and com- 
manding motives for guarding and preserving the 
union of the whole. 

The North, in ^ intercourse with the South, under 
the equal laws of one government, will, in the pro- 
ductions of the latter, many of them peculiar, find 
vast additional resources of maritime and commer- 
cial enterprise. 4 The South, in the same intercourse, 
will share in the benefits of the agency of the North, 
will find its agriculture promoted and its commerce 
extended by turning into its own channels those 
means of navigation which the North more abun- 
dantly affords; and while it contributes to extend 
the national navigation, will participate in the pro- 
tection of a maritime strength to which itself is un- 
equally adapted. The East, in a like intercourse with 
the West, finds ^ a valuable vent for the commodi- 
ties which it brings from abroad or manufactures 
at home. The West derives through this channel 

^ even. ^ outweighed. ^ free and unfettered. 

^ and precious materials of their manufacturing industry, 
s and in the progressive improvement of internal navigation will 
more and more find. 

Farewell Address 195 

an essential supply of its wants; and what is far 
more important to it, it must owe the secure and 
permanent enjoyment of the indispensable outlets 
for its own productions to the weight, influence, and 
maritime resources of the Atlantic States.' The 
tenure by which it could hold this advantage, either 
from its own separate strength, or by an apostate and 
unnatural connection with any foreign nation, must 
be intrinsically and necessarily precarious, at every 
moment liable to be disturbed by the ^ combinations 
of those primary ^ interests which constantly regu- 
late the conduct of every portion of Europe — and 
where every part finds a particular interest in the 
Union. All the parts of our country will find in 
their Union ^ strength, proportional security from 
external danger, less frequent interruption of their 
peace with foreign nations; and what is far more 
valuable, an exemption from those broils and wars 
between the parts if disunited, which, then, our 
rivalships, fomented by foreign intrigue or the op- 
posite alliances with foreign nations engendered by 
their mutual jealousies, would inevitably produce.^ 

These considerations speak a conclusive language 
to every virtuous and considerate mind. They place 

1 directed by an indissoluble commtinity of interests. 

2 fluctuating. 

3 European. 

"♦ greater independence from the superior abundance and variety of 
production incident to the diversity of soil and climate. All the parts 
of it must find in the aggregate assemblage and reaction of their mutual 
population — production . 

s consequent exemption from the necessity of those military estab- 
lishments upon a large scale which bear in every coiintry so menacing 
an aspect towards liberty. 

196 Alexander Hamilton 

the continuance of our union among the first objects 
of patriotic desire. Is there a doubt whether a com- 
mon government can long embrace so extensive a 
sphere? Let time and experience decide the ques- 
tion. Speculation in such a case ought not to be 
listened to. And 't is rational to hope that the 
auxiliary ' governments of the subdivisions, with a 
proper organization of the whole, will secure a favor- 
able issue to the experiment. 'T is allowable to be- 
lieve that the spirit of party, the intrigues of foreign 
nations, the corruption and the ambition of individ- 
uals, are likely to prove more formidable adver- 
saries to the unity of our empire, than any inherent 
difficulties in the scheme. 'T is against these that 
the guards ^ of national opinion, national sympathy, 
national prudence and virtue, are to be erected. 
With such obvious motives to union, there will be 
always cause from the fact itself to distrust the 
patriotism of those who ^ may endeavor to weaken 
its bands. And by all the love I bear you, my fellow- 
citizens, I conjure "^ you, as often as ^ it appears, to 
frown upon the attempt. 

Besides the more serious causes which have been 
hinted at as endangering our Union, there is another 
less dangerous, but against which it is necessary to 
be on our guard ; I mean the petulance of party ^ 
differences of opinion. It is not uncommon to hear 
the irritations which these excite, vent themselves in 
declarations that the different parts of the Union 
are ill assorted and cannot remain together — in 

^ agency of. 3 in any quarter. 5 "often" — instead of "far." 

^ moiinds. ■* exhort — (written first). ^ collisions and disgusts. 

Farewell Address 197 

menaces from the inhabitants of one part to those 
of another, that it will be dissolved by this or that 
measure. Intimations of the kind are as indiscreet 
as they are intemperate. Though frequently made 
with levity and without being in earnest, they have 
a tendency to produce the consequence which they 
indicate. They teach the minds of men to consider 
the Union as precarious, as an object to which they 
are not to attach their hopes and fortunes, and thus 
weaken the sentiment in its favor. By rousing the 
resentment and alarming the pride of those to whom 
they are addressed, they set ingenuity to work to 
deprecate the value of the object, and to discover 
motives of indifference to it. This is not wise. Pru- 
dence demands that we should habituate ourselves in 
all our words and actions to reverence the Union as 
a sacred and inviolable palladium of our happiness, 
and should discountenance whatever can lead to a 
suspicion that it can in any event be abandoned. 

'T is matter of serious concern that parties in this 
country for some time past have been too much 
characterized by geographical discriminations — 
northern and southern States, Atlantic and western 
country. These discriminations,' which are the 
mere artifice of the spirit of party (always dexterous 
to avail itself of every source of sympathy,^ of every 
handle by which the passions can be taken hold of, 
and which has been careful to turn to account the 
circumstance of territorial vicinity ^),have furnished 
an argument against the Union as evidence of a real 
difference of local interests and views, and serve to 

^ of party. " sympathy of. 3 neighborhood. 

198 Alexander Hamilton 

hazard it by organizing large districts of country 
under the direction of ' different factions whose pas- 
sions and prejudices, rather than the true interests 
of the country, will be too apt to regulate the use 
of their influence. If it be possible to correct this 
poison in the affairs of our country, it is worthy the 
best endeavors of moderate and virtuous men to 
effect it. 

One of the expedients which the partisans of fac- 
tion employ towards strengthening their influence 
by local discriminations, "" is to misrepresent the 
opinions and views of rival districts. The people at 
large cannot be too much on their guard against the 
jealousies which grow out of these misrepresenta- 
tions. They tend to render aliens to each other 
those who ought to be tied together by fraternal 
affection. The people of the western country have 
lately had a useful lesson on this subject. They 
have seen in the negotiation by the Executive, and 
in the unanimous ratification of the treaty with 
Spain by the Senate, and in the universal satisfac- 
tion at that event in all parts of the country, a de- 
cisive proof how unfounded have been the suspicions 
instilled ^ in them of a policy in the Atlantic States, 
and in the different departments of the general gov- 
ernment, hostile to their interests in relation to the 
Mississippi. They have seen two treaties formed 
which secure to them every thing that they could 
desire to confirm their prosperity. Will they not 
henceforth rely for the preservation of these advan- 
tages on that Union by which they were procured? 

* the leaders of. * within local spheres. ^ propagated among. 

Farewell Address 199 

Will they not reject those counsellors who would 
render them alien to their brethren and connect 
them with aliens? 

To the duration and efficacy of your Union, a gov- 
ernment extending over the whole is indispensable. 
No alliances however strict between the parts could 
be an adequate substitute. These could not fail to 
be liable to the infractions and interruptions which 
all alliances in all times have suffered. Sensible of 
this important truth, you have lately established a 
Constitution of general government, better calcu- 
lated than the former for an intimate union, and 
more adequate to the duration of your common con- 
cerns. This government, the offspring of your own 
choice, uninfluenced and unawed, completely free in 
its principles, in the distribution of its powers, unit- 
ing energy with safety, and containing in itself a 
provision for its own amendment, is well entitled to 
your confidence and support. Respect for its au- 
thority, compliance with its laws, acquiescence in its 
measures,' are duties dictated by the fundamental 
maxims of true liberty. The basis of our political 
systems is the right of the people to make and 
to alter their constitutions of government. But the 
Constitution for the time, and until changed by an 
explicit and authentic act of the whole people, is 
sacredly binding upon all. The very idea of the 
right and power of the people to establish govern- 
ment presupposes the duty of every individual to 
obey the established government. 

All obstructions to the execution of the laws — all 

^ ordinary management of affairs to be left to represent. 

200 Alexander Hamilton 

combinations and associations under whatever plaus- 
ible character, with the real design to counteract,' 
control,'' or awe the regular ^ action of the constituted 
authorities, are contrary to this fundamental prin- 
ciple, and of the most fatal tendency. They serve 
to organize faction,^ and to put in the stead of the 
delegated will of the whole nation the will of a party, 
often a small ^ minority of the whole community ; 
and according to the alternate triumph of different 
parties to make the public administration reflect 
the ^ schemes and projects of faction rather than the 
wholesome plans of common councils and delibera- 
tions. However combinations or associations of this 
description may occasionally promote popular ends 
and purposes, they are likely to produce, in the 
course of time and things, the most effectual engines 
by which artful, ambitious, and unprincipled men 
will be enabled to subvert the power of the people 
and usurp the reins of government. 

Towards the preservation of your government and 
the permanency of your present happy state, it is 
not only requisite that you steadily discountenance 
irregular oppositions to its authority, but that you 
should be upon your guard against the spirit of in- 
novation upon its principles, however specious the 
pretexts. One method of assault may be to effect 
alterations in the forms of the Constitution tending 
to impair the energy of the system, and so to under- 
mine what cannot be directly overthrown. In all 

^ direct. * influence. 3 deliberation or. 

4 to give it an artificial force. s but artftil and enterprising. 

6 ill concerted. 

Farewell Address 201 

the changes to which you may be invited, remember 
that time and habit are as necessary to fix the true 
character of governments as of any other human 
institutions; that experience is the surest standard 
by which the real tendency of existing constitutions 
of government can be tried ; that changes upon ' the 
credit of mere hypothesis and opinion expose you to 
perpetual change from the successive and endless 
variety of hypothesis and opinion. And remember 
also,^ that for the efficacious management of your 
common interests, in a country so extensive as ours, 
a government of as much force and strength as is 
consistent with the perfect security of liberty is 
indispensable. Liberty itself will find in such a 
government, with powers properly distributed and 
arranged, its surest guardian and protector. In my 
opinion, the real danger in our system is, that the 
general government, organized as at present, will 
prove too weak rather than too powerful. 

I have already observed the danger to be appre- 
hended from founding our parties on geographical 
discriminations. Let me now enlarge the view of 
this point, and caution you in the most solemn man- 
ner against the baneful effects of party spirit in gen- 
eral. This spirit unfortunately is inseparable from 
human nature, and has its root in the strongest pas- 
sions of the human heart. It exists under different 
shapes in all governments, but 3 in those of the popu- 
lar form it is always seen in its utmost vigor and 
rankness, and is their worst enemy. In republics of 

' facility in. ^ always. 

3 in difEerent degrees stifled, controlled, or repressed. 

202 Alexander Hamilton 

narrow extent, it is not difficult for those who at any 
time possess the reins of administration, or even for 
partial combinations of men, who from birth, riches, 
and other sources of distinction have an extraor- 
dinary influence, by possessing or acquiring the direc- 
tion of the military force, or by sudden efforts of 
partisans and followers, to overturn the established 
order of things, and effect a usurpation. But in re- 
publics of large extent, the one or the other is scarcely 
possible. The powers and opportunities of resist- 
ance of a numerous and wide-extended nation defy 
the successful efforts of the ordinary military force, 
or of any collections ' which wealth and patronage 
may call to their aid, especially if there be no city of 
overbearing force, resources, and influence. In such 
republics it is perhaps safe to assert that the con- 
flicts of popular faction offer the only avenues to 
tyranny and usurpation. The domination of one 
faction over another, stimulated by that spirit of 
revenge which is apt to be gradually engendered, and 
which in different ages and countries has produced 
the greatest enormities, is itself a frightful despot- 
ism. But this leads at length to a more formal and 
permanent despotism. The disorders and miseries 
which result predispose the minds of men to seek 
repose and security in the absolute power of a single 
man. And the ^ leader of a prevailing faction, more 
able or more fortunate than his competitors, turns 
this disposition to the purposes of an ambitious and 
criminal self-aggrandizement. 

Without looking forward to such an extremity 

^ assemblages. ^ some. 

Farewell Address 203 

(which, however, ought not to be out of sight), the 
ordinary and continual mischiefs of the spirit of 
party make it the interest and the duty of a wise 
people, to discountenance and repress it. 

It serves always to distract the councils and en- 
feeble the administration of the government. It 
agitates the community with ill-founded jealousies 
and false alarms.' It opens inlets for foreign cor- 
ruption and influence, which find an easy access 
through the channels of party passions, and causes 
the true policy and interest of our own country to be 
made subservient to the policy and interest of one 
and another foreign nation, sometimes enslaving our 
own government to the will of a foreign government. 

There is an opinion that parties in free countries 
are salutary checks upon the administration of the 
government, and serve to invigorate the spirit of lib- 
erty. This, within certain limits, is true; and in 
governments of a monarchical character or bias, 
patriotism may look with some favor on the spirit of 
party. But in those of the popular kind, in those 
purely elective, it is a spirit not to be fostered or 
encouraged. From the natural tendency of such 
governments, it is certain there will always be 
enough of it for every salutary purpose, and there 
being constant danger of excess, the effort ought to 
be, by the force of public opinion, to mitigate and 
correct it. 'T is a fire which ^ cannot be quenched, 
but demands ^ a uniform vigilance to prevent its 

* embittering one part of the community against another, and pro- 
ducing occasionally riot and insurrection. 

2 not to. 3 demanding. 

204 Alexander Hamilton 

bursting into a flame — ^lest it should not only warm 
but consume. 

It is important, likewise, that the habits of think- 
ing of the people should tend to produce caution 
in their public agents in the several departments of 
government, to retain each within its proper sphere, 
and not to permit one to encroach upon another; 
that every attempt of the kind, from whatever quar- 
ter, should meet with the discountenance ' of the 
community, and that, in every case in which a pre- 
cedent of encroachment shall have been given, a cor- 
rective be sought in [revocation be effected by] a 
careful attention to the next choice ^ of public 
agents. The spirit of encroachment tends to absorb ^ 
the powers of the several branches and departments 
into one, and thus to establish, under whatever form, 
a despotism. A just knowledge of the himian heart, 
of that love of power which predominates in it, 
is alone sufficient to establish this truth. Experi- 
ments, ancient and modern, some in our own country, 
and under our own eyes, serve to confirm it. If, in 
the public opinion, the distribution of the constitu- 
tional powers be in any instance wrong, or in- 
expedient, let it be corrected by the authority of 
the people in a legitimate constitutional course. Let 
there be no change by usurpation, for though this 
m.ay be the instrument of good in one instance, 
it is the ordinary ^ instrument of the destruc- 
tion ^ of free government — and the influence of 
the precedent is always infinitely more pernicious 

' reprobation. " election. ^ and consolidate. 

4 and natural. ^ death. 

Farewell Address 205 

than any thing which it may achieve can be bene- 
ficial. 

In all those dispositions which promote political 
happiness,' religion and morality are essential props. 
In vain does he "" claim the praise of patriotism, who 
labors to subvert or undermine these great pillars of 
human happiness, these firmest foundations of the 
duties of men and citizens. The mere politician, 
equally with the pious man, ought to respect and 
cherish them. A volume could not trace all their 
connections with private and public happiness. 

Let it simply be asked, where is the security for 
property, for reputation, for life, if the sense of 
moral and religious obligation deserts the oaths 
which are administered ^ in courts of justice ? Nor 
ought we to flatter ourselves that morality can be 
separated from religion. Concede as much as may 
be asked to the effect of refined education in minds 
of peculiar structure, can we believe, can we in pru- 
dence suppose, that national morality can be main- 
tained in exclusion of religious principles? Does it 
not require the aid of a generally received and di- 
vinely authoritative religion? 

'T is essentially true that virtue or morality is a 
main and necessary spring of popular or republican 
governments. The rule, indeed, extends with more 
or less force to all free governments. Who that is a 
prudent and sincere friend to them, can look with 
indifference on the ravages which are making in the 
foundation of the fabric — religion? The uncommon 

^ prosperity. ^ that man. 

3 instruments of investigation. 

2o6 Alexander Hamilton 

means which of late have been directed to this fatal 
end, seem to make it in a particular manner the duty 
of a retiring chief of a nation to warn his country 
against tasting of the poisonous draught. 

Cultivate, also, industry and frugality. They are 
auxiliaries of good morals, and great sources of pri- 
vate and national prosperity. Is there not room for 
regret, that our propensity to expense exceeds the 
maturity of our country for expense? Is there not 
more luxury among us, in various classes, than suits 
the actual period of our national progress? What- 
ever may be the apology for luxury in a country 
mature in all the arts which are its ministers and 
the means of national opulence — can it promote the 
advantage of a young agricultural country, little 
advanced in manufactures, and not much advanced 
in wealth? ' 

Cherish public credit as a means of strength and 
security. As one method of preserving it, use it as 
little as possible. Avoid occasions of expense by 
cultivating peace — remembering always that the 
preparation against danger, by timely and provident 
disbursements, is often a mean of avoiding greater 
disbursements to repel it. Avoid the acctmiulation 
of debt by avoiding occasions of expense, and by 
vigorous exertions in time of peace to discharge the 
debts which unavoidable wars may have occasioned, 
not transferring to posterity the burthen which we 
ought to bear ourselves. Recollect, that towards the 
payment of debts there must be revenue, that to 

^ in the infancy of the arts, and certainly not in the manhood of 
wealth. 

Farewell Address 207 

have revenue there must be taxes, that it is impos- 
sible to devise taxes which are not more or less in- 
convenient and unpleasant — that they are always a 
choice of difficulties, that the intrinsic embarrass- 
ment which never fails to attend a selection of ob- 
jects ought to be a motive for a candid construction 
of the conduct of the government in making it, and 
that a spirit of acquiescence in those measures for 
obtaining revenue which the public exigencies dic- 
tate, is, in an especial manner, the duty and interest 
of the citizens of every state. 

Cherish good faith and justice towards, and peace 
and harmony with, all nations. Religion and moral- 
ity enjoin this conduct, and it cannot be but that 
true policy equally demands it. It will be worthy 
of a free, enlightened, and at no distant period, a 
great nation, to give to mankind the magnanimous 
and too novel example of a people invariably gov- 
erned by ' those exalted views. Who can doubt 
that in a long course of time and events the fruits of 
such a conduct would richly repay any temporary 
advantages which might be lost by a steady adher- 
ence to the plan ? Can it be that Providence has not 
connected the permanent felicity of a nation with its 
virtue? The experiment is recommended by every 
sentiment which ennobles human nature. Alas! is 
it rendered impossible by its vices? 

Towards the execution of such a plan,^ nothing is 
more essential than that ^ antipathies against par- 

^ exalted justice and benevolence. 
* it is very material. 

3 that while we entertain proper impressions of particular cases— of 
friendly or imfriendly conduct of different foreign nations towards us, 

2o8 Alexander Hamilton 

ticular nations and passionate attachments for others 
should be avoided, and that instead of them we 
should cultivate just and amicable feelings towards 
oll^ * * ^ That nation which indulges towards 
another an habitual hatred or an habitual fondness, 
is in some degree a slave. * * * It is a slave to 
its animosity, or to its affection — either of which is 
sufficient to lead it astray from its duty and interest. 
Antipathy against one nation, which never fails to 
beget a similar sentiment in the other, disposes each 
more readily to offer injury and insult to the other, 
to lay hold of slight causes of umbrage, and to be 
haughty and untractable when accidental or trifling 
differences arise. Hence frequent quarrels ' and bit- 
ter and obstinate contests. The nation urged by 
resentment and rage, sometimes compels the govern- 
ment to war, contrary to its own calculations of 
policy. The government sometimes participates in 
this propensity, and does through passion what 
reason would forbid at other times; it makes the 
animosity of the nations subservient to hostile pro- 
jects which originate in ambition and other sinister 
motives. The peace, often, and sometimes the lib- 
erty of nations, has been the victim of this cause. 

In like manner "" sl passionate attachment of one 
nation to another produces multiplied ills. Sym- 
pathy for the favorite nation, promoting ^ the illu- 
sion of a supposed common interest, in cases where 
it does not exist, "^ the enmities of the one betray the 

we nevertheless avoid fixed and rooted antipathies against any, or 
passionate attachments for any, instead of these cultivating, as a 
general rule, just and amicable feelings towards all. 

^ broils. ^So likewise, ^facilitating, ^and communicating to one. 

Farewell Address 209 

other into a participation in its quarrels and wars, 
without adequate inducements or justifications. It 
leads to the concession of privileges to one nation, 
and to the denial of them to others, which is apt 
doubly to injure the nation making the concession 
by an unnecessary yielding of what ought to have 
been retained, and by exciting jealousy, ill-will, and 
retaliation in the party from whom an equal privi- 
lege is withheld. And it gives to ambitious, cor- 
rupted ' citizens, who devote themselves to the views 
of the favorite foreign power, facility in betraying 
or sacrificing the interests of their own country, 
even with popularity, "" gilding with ^ 

As avenues to foreign influence in innumerable 
ways, such attachments are peculiarly alarming 
to the enlightened independent patriot. How many 
opportunities do they afford to intrigue with domes- 
tic factions, to practise with success the arts of 
seduction, to mislead "^ the public opinion — to influ- 
ence or awe the public councils? Such an attach- 
ment of a small or weak towards a great and 
powerful nation, destines the former to revolve 
round the latter as its satellite. 

Against the mischiefs of foreign influence all the 
jealousy of a free people ought to be constantly ^ 
exerted ^ ; but the jealousy of it to be useful must 

^ or deluded. - * without odium. 

3 the appearance of a virtuous impulse, the base yieldings of ambition 
or corruption. 

4 "mislead" for "misdirect." 5 continually. 

6 all history and experience in different ages and nations have proved 
that foreign influence is one of the most baneful foes of republican 
government. 

VOL. VIII.— 14. 

2IO Alexander Hamilton 

be impartial, else it becomes an instrument of the 
very influence to be avoided, instead of a defence ' 
against it. 

Excessive partiality for one foreign nation, and 
excessive dislike of another, leads to see danger only 
on one side, and serves to veil ^ the arts of influence 
on the other. Real patriots, who resist the intrigues 
of the favorite, become suspected and odious. Its 
tools and dupes usurp the applause and confidence of 
the people to betray their interests. 

The great rule of conduct for us in regard to for- 
eign nations ought to be to have as little political 
connection with them as possible. So far as we 
have already formed engagements, let them be ful- 
filled with circumspection, indeed, but with perfect 
good faith; here ^ let it stop. 

Europe has a set of primary interests, which have 
none or a very remote relation to us. Hence she 
must be involved in frequent contests, the causes 
of which will be essentially foreign to us. Hence 
therefore, it must necessarily be unwise on our part 
to implicate ourselves by an artificial connection in 
the ordinary vicissitudes of European politics — in 
the combination and collisions of her friendships or 
enmities. 

Our detached and distant situation invites us to 
a different course, and enables us to pursue it. If 
we remain a united people, under an eflicient govern- 
ment, the period is not distant when we may defy 
material injury from external annoyance — when we 
may take such an attitude as will cause the neu- 

^ guard. * and second. 3 but there. 

Farewell Address 211 

trality we shall at any time resolve to observe, 
to be violated with caution — when it will be the 
interest of belligerent nations, under the impos- 
sibility of making acquisitions upon us, to be very 
careful how either forced us to throw our weight 
into the opposite scale — when we may choose 
peace or war, as our interest, guided by justice, shall 
dictate. 

Why should we forego the advantages of so felici- 
tous a situation ? Why quit our own ground to 
stand upon foreign ground? Why, by interweaving 
our destiny with any part of Europe, should we 
entangle our prosperity and peace in the nets of 
European ambition, rivalship, interest, or caprice? 

Permanent alliance, intimate connection with any 
part of the foreign world is to be avoided; so far, I 
mean, as we are now at liberty to do it; for let me 
never be understood as patronizing infidelity to pre- 
existing engagements. These must be observed in 
their true and genuine sense.' 

Harmony, liberal intercourse, and commerce with 
all nations are recommended by justice, humanity, 
and interest. But even our commercial policy 
should hold an equal hand, neither seeking nor 
granting exclusive favors or preferences — consulting 
the natural course of things — diffusing and diversify- 
ing by gentle means the streams of commerce, but 
forcing nothing — establishing with powers so dis- 

^ But 't is not necessary, nor will it be prudent, to extend them. 
'T is our true policy, as a general principle, to avoid permanent or 
close alliances. Taking care always to keep ourselves by suitable 
establishments in a respectably defensive position, we may safely trust 
to occasional alliances for extraordinary emergencies. 

212 Alexander Hamilton 

posed ' temporary * rules of intercourse, the best 
that present circumstances and mutual opinion of 
interest will permit, but temporary, and liable to be 
abandoned or varied, as time, experience, and future 
circumstances may dictate — remembering ^ that it is 
folly in one nation to expect disinterested favor in 
another, that to accept "^ is to part with a portion 
of its independence, and that it may find itself in the 
condition of having given equivalents for nominal 
favors, and of being reproached with ingratitude in 
the bargain. There can be no greater error in na- 
tional policy than to desire, expect, or calculate upon 
real favors. 'T is an illusion that experience must 
cure, that a just pride ought to discard. 

In offering to you, my countrymen, these coun- 
sels of an old and affectionate friend — counsels sug- 
gested by laborious reflection, and matured by a 
various experience, I dare not hope that they will 
make the strong and lasting impressions I wish — 
that they will control the current of the passions, or 
prevent our nation from running the course which 
has hitherto marked the destiny of all nations. 

But ^ if they may even produce partial benefit, 
some occasional good * * * that they some- 
times recur to moderate the violence of party spirit, 
to warn against the evils of foreign intrigue, to guard 
against the impositions of pretended patriotism, the 
having offered them must always afford me a precious 
consolation. 

» In order to give to trade a stable course, to define the rights of our 
merchants, and enable the government to support them. 

* and conventional. 3 always. ♦ any thing tinder that character. 
5 I may flatter myself. 

Farewell Address 213 

How far in the execution of my present office I 
have been guided by the principles which have been 
recommended,' the public records and the external 
evidences of my conduct must witness. My con- 
science assures me that I have at least believed my- 
self to be guided by them. 

In reference to the present war of Europe, my 
proclamation of the 2 2d April, 1793, is the key to 
my plan, sanctioned by your approving voice, and 
that of your Representatives in Congress — the spirit 
of that measure has continually governed me — un- 
influenced and unawed by the attempts of any of the 
warring powers, their agents, or partisans, to deter 
or divert from it. 

After deliberate consideration, and the best lights 
I could obtain (and from men who did not agree in 
their views of the origin, progress, and nature of that 
war), I was satisfied that our country, under all the 
circumstances of the case, had a right and was bound 
in propriety and interest to take a neutral position. 
And having taken it, I determined as "" should de- 
pend on me to maintain it steadily and firmly.^ 

Though in reviewing the incidents of my adminis- 
tration I am unconscious of intentional error, I am 
yet too sensible of my own deficiencies, not to think 
it possible ^ that I have committed many errors ; I 
deprecate the evils to which they may tend, and 
fervently implore the Almighty to avert or mitigate 

^ "inculcated" for "recommended." 
^ as far as. 

3 Here a large space is foimd in the draft evidently for the insertion 
of other matter. 

4 "probable" for "possible." 

214 Alexander Hamilton 

them. I shall carry with me, nevertheless, the hope 
that my motives will continue to be viewed by my 
country with indulgence, and that after forty-five 
years of my life, devoted with an upright zeal to the 
public service, the faults of inadequate abilities will 
be consigned to oblivion, as myself must soon be to 
the mansions of rest. 

Neither ambition nor interest has been the impel- 
ling cause of my actions. I never designedly mis- 
used any power confided in me. The fortune with 
which I came into office, is not bettered otherwise 
than by that improvement in the value of property 
which the natural progress and peculiar prosperity 
of our country have produced. I retire ' with a 
pure heart,^ with undefiled hands, and with ardent 
vows for the happiness of a country, the native soil 
of myself and progenitors for four generations. 

PART OF WASHINGTON'S SPEECH TO 
CONGRESS 3 

First Draft by Hamilton. 

December 7, 1796. 

That, among the objects of labor and industry, 
agriculture, considered with reference either to indi- 
vidual or national welfare, is first in importance, 
may safely be affirmed, without derogating from the 
just and real value of any other branch. It is, in- 

^ without cause for a blush. 

* with no alien sentiment to the ardor of those vows for the happiness 
of his country, which is so natural to a citizen who sees in it. 
3 Writings of Washington, xiii., 65. 

Speech 2 1 5 

deed, the best basis of the prosperity of every other. 
In proportion as nations progress in population and 
other circumstances of maturity, this truth forces 
itself more and more upon the conviction of rulers, 
and makes the cultivation of the soil more and more 
an object of public patronage and care. Institu- 
tions for promoting it sooner or later grow up, sup- 
ported by the public purse — and the full fruits of 
them, when judiciously conceived and directed, have 
fully justified the undertaking. 

Among these, none have been found of greater 
utility than Boards, composed of proper characters, 
charged with collecting and communicating informa- 
tion, and enabled to stimulate enterprise and ex- 
periment by premiums and honorary rewards. 
These have been found very cheap instruments of 
immense benefits. They serve to excite a general 
spirit of discovery and improvement, to stimulate 
invention, to excite new and useful experiments — 
and accumulating in one centre the skill and improve- 
ment of every part of the nation, they spread it thence 
over the whole nation, at the same time promoting 
new discovery, and diffusing generally the knowledge 
of all the discoveries which are made. 

In the United States, hitherto, no such institution 
has been essayed, though perhaps no country has 
stronger motives to it. 

Agriculture among us is certainly in a very im- 
perfect state. In much of those parts where there 
have been early settlements, the soil, impoverished 
by an unskilful tillage, yields but a scanty reward for 
the labor bestowed upon it, and leaves its possessors 

2i6 Alexander Hamilton 

under strong temptation to abandon it, and emi- 
grate to distant regions, more fertile, because they 
are newer, and have not yet been exhausted by an 
unskilful use. This is every way an evil. The un- 
due dislocation of our population from this cause 
promotes neither the strength, the opulence, nor the 
happiness of our country. It strongly admonishes 
our national councils to apply, as far as may be prac- 
tical, by natural and salutary means, an adequate 
remedy. Nothing appears to be more unexceptiona- 
ble, and likely to be more efficacious, than the insti- 
tution of a Board of Agriculture, with the views I 
have mentioned, and with a moderate fund towards 
executing them. After mature reflection, I am per- 
suaded it is difficult to render our coimtry a more 
precious and general service, than by such an in- 
stitution. 

I will, however, observe, that if it be thought ex- 
pedient, the objects of the Board may be still more 
comprehensive. It may embrace the encouragement 
of the mechanic and manufacturing arts by means 
analogous to those for the improvement of agricul- 
ture, and with an eye to the introduction, from 
abroad, of useful machinery, etc. Or there may be 
separate Boards, one charged with one object, the 
other with the other. 

I have, heretofore, suggested the expediency of 
establishing a National University, and a Military 
Academy. The vast utility of both these measures 
presses so seriously and so constantly upon my mind, 
that I cannot forbear with earnestness to repeat the 
recommendation . 

Speech 2 1 7 

The assembly to which I address myself will not 
doubt that the extension of science and knowledge is 
an object primarily interesting to our national wel- 
fare. To effect this is most naturally the care of the 
particular local jurisdictions into which our country 
is subdivided, as far as regards those branches of in- 
struction which ought to be universally diffused, and 
it gives pleasure to observe that new progress is con- 
tinually making in the means employed for this end. 
But, can it be doubted that the general government 
would with peculiar propriety occupy itself in afford- 
ing nutriment to those higher branches of science, 
which, though not within the reach of general ac- 
quisition, are in their consequences and relations 
productive of general advantage? Or can it be 
doubted that this great object would be materially 
advanced by a university erected on that broad 
basis to which the national resources are most ade- 
quate, and so liberally endowed, as to command the 
ablest professors in the several branches of liberal 
knowledge? It is true, and to the honor of our 
country, that it offers many colleges and academies, 
highly respectable and useful, but the funds upon 
which they are established are too narrow to permit 
any of them to be an adequate substitute for such 
an institution as is contemplated, and to which they 
would be excellent auxiliarie^s. Amongst the mo- 
tives to such an institution, the assimilation of the 
principles, opinions, manners, and habits of our 
countrymen, by drawing from all quarters our youth 
to participate in a common education, well deserves 
the attention of government. To render the people 

2i8 Alexander Hamilton 

of this country as homogeneous as possible, must 
tend as much as any other circumstance to the per- 
manency of their union and prosperity. 

The eligibleness of a military academy depends on 
that evident maxim of policy which requires every 
nation to be prepared for war while cultivating 
peace, and warns it against suffering the military 
spirit and military knowledge wholly to decay. 
However particular instances, superficially viewed, 
may seem exceptions, it will not be doubted by any 
who have attentively considered the subject, that 
the military art is of a complicated and comprehen- 
sive nature, that it demands much previous study 
as well as practice, and that the possession of it in its 
most improved state is always of vast importance 
to the security of a nation. It ought, therefore, to 
be a principal care of every government, however 
pacific its general policy, to preserve and cultivate 
— indeed, in proportion as the policy of a country is 
pacific, and it is little liable to be called to practise the 
rules of the military art, does it become the duty of 
the government to take care, by proper institutions, 
that it be not lost. A military academy, instituted 
on proper principles, would serve to secure to our 
country, though within a narrow sphere, a solid fund 
of military information, which would always be 
ready for national emergencies, and would facilitate 
the diffusion of military knowledge as those emer- 
gencies might require. 

A systematic plan for the creation of a moderate 
navy appears to me recommended by very weighty 
considerations. An active external commerce de- 

Speech 219 

mands a naval power to protect it, besides the dan- 
gers from wars, in which a maritime state is a party. 
It is a truth, which our own experience has con- 
firmed, that the most equitable and sincere neu- 
trality is not sufficient to exempt a state from the 
depredations of other nations at war with each other. 
It is essential to induce them to respect that neutral- 
ity, that there shall be an organized force ready to 
vindicate the national flag. This may even prevent 
the necessity of going into war by discouraging from 
those insults and infractions of right, which some- 
times proceed to an extreme that leaves no alter- 
native. The United States abound in materials. 
Their commerce, fast increasing, must proportion- 
ately augment the number of their seamen, and give 
us rapidly the means of a naval power, respectable, 
if not great. Our relative situation, likewise, for 
obvious reasons, would render a moderate force very 
influential, more so, perhaps, than a much greater in 
the hands of any other power. It is submitted as 
well deserving consideration, whether it will not be 
prudent immediately and gradually to provide and 
lay up magazines of ship-timber, and to build and 
equip annually one or more ships of force, as the de- 
velopment of resources shall render convenient and 
practicable, so that a future war in Europe, if we 
escape the present storm, may not find our com- 
merce in the defenceless situation in which the pres- 
ent found it. 

There is a subject which has dwelt long and much 
upon my mind, which I cannot omit this opportunity 
of suggesting. It is the compensation to our public 

220 Alexander Hamilton 

officers, especially those in the most important sta- 
tions. Every man acquainted with the expense, 
even of the most frugal plan of living in our great 
cities, must be sensible of their inadequateness. 
The impolicy of such defective provisions seems not 
to have been sufficiently weighed. 

No plan of governing is well founded, which does 
not regard man as a compound of selfish and virtuous 
passions. To expect him to be wholly guided by the 
latter, would be as great an error as to suppose him 
wholly destitute of them. Hence the necessity of 
adequate rewards for those services of which the pub- 
lic stand in need. Without them, the affairs of a 
nation are likely to get sooner or later into incom- 
petent or unfaithful hands. If their own private 
wealth is to supply in the candidates for public office 
the deficiency of public liberality, then the sphere of 
those who can be candidates, especially in a country 
like ours, is much narrowed, and the chance of a 
choice of able as well as upright men much lessened. 
Besides that, it would be repugnant to the first prin- 
ciples of our government to exclude men, from the 
public trusts, because their talents and virtues, how- 
ever conspicuous, are unaccompanied by wealth. 
If the rewards of the government are scanty, those 
who have talents without wealth, and are too vir- 
tuous to abuse their stations, cannot accept public 
offices without a sacrifice of interest; which, in ordi- 
nary times, may hardly be justified by their duty to 
themselves and their families. If they have talents 
without virtue, they may, indeed, accept offices to 
make a dishonest and improper use of them. The 

Speech 
tendency then is to transfer the management of pub- 
lic affairs to wealthy but incapable hands, or to hands 
which, if capable, are as destitute of integrity as of 
wealth. For a time, particular circumstances may 
prevent such a course of things, and hitherto the in- 
ference has not been verified in our experience. But 
it is not the less probable, that time will prove it to 
be well founded. In some governments men have 
many allurements to office, exclusive of pecuniary 
rewards — but from the nature of our government, 
pecuniary reward is the only aliment to the inter- 
ested passions which public men who are not vicious 
can expect. If, then, it be essential to the prospei- 
ous course of every government, that it shall be able 
to command the services of its most able and most 
virtuous citizens of every class, it follows, that the 
compensations which our government allows ought to 
be revised and materially increased. The character 
and success of republican government appear abso- 
lutely to depend on this policy. 

Congress have repeatedly directed their attention 
to the encouragement of manufactures, and have 
no doubt promoted them in several branches. The 
object is of too much importance not to assure a con- 
tinuance of their efforts in every way which shall ap- 
pear proper and conducive to the end. But in the 
present state of our country, we cannot expect that 
our progress, in some essential branches, will be as 
expeditious as the public welfare demands, — par- 
ticularly in reference to security and defence in time 
of war. This reflection is the less pleasing when it 
is remembered how large a proportion of our supply 

2 22 Alexander Hamilton 

the coiirse of our trade derives from a single nation. 
It appears very desirable, that at least, with a view 
to security and defence, some measures more effica- 
cious than have heretofore been adopted should be 
taken. As a general rule, manufactories carried on 
upon public account are to be avoided. But every 
general rule may admit of exceptions. Where the 
state of things in our country leaves little expectation 
that certain branches of manufacture will, for a great 
(^' length of time, be sufficiently cultivated — when these 
^^ are of a nature to be essential to the furnishing and 

^ '^^ equipping of the troops and ships of war of which we 

>^ stand in need — are not establishments on the public 

account, to the extent of the public demand for supply, 
recommended by very strong considerations of na- 
tional policy? Ought our country to be dependent 
in such cases upon foreign supply, precarious be- 
cause liable to be interrupted? If the necessary 
supplies ' should be procured in this mode, at great 
expense — in time of peace — will not the security and 
independence arising from it very amply compen- 
sate? Institutions of this kind commensurate only 
with our peace establishments, will in time of war 
be easily extended in proportion to the public ex- 
igencies, and they may even perhaps be rendered 
contributary to the supply of our citizens at large, 
so as greatly to mitigate the privation arising from 
the interruption of trade. 

The idea at least is worthy of the most serious 

' Additional paragraph of Washington's first draft of speech of Dec. 
7, 1796, now first printed from Hamilton's MSB.; see pp. 69, 70, and 74, 
vol. xii., Writings of Washington. 

Address 223 

consideration. If adopted, the plan ought, of course, 
to exclude all those branches which may be con- 
sidered as already established in our country, and to 
which the efforts of individuals appear already, or 
likely to be, speedily adequate. 

A reinforcement of the existing provisions for dis- 
charging our public debt was mentioned in my ad- 
dress at the opening of the last session. Congress 
took some preliminary steps, the maturing of which 
will no doubt engage their zealous attention during 
the present. I will only add that it will afford me 
a heartfelt satisfaction to concur in such auxiliary 
measures as will ascertain to our country the pro- 
spect of a speedy extinguishment of the debt. Pos- 
terity may have cause to regret if, from any motive, 
intervals of tranquillity are left unemployed for 
accelerating this valuable end. 

ADDRESS TO THE ELECTORS OF THE STATE 

OF NEW YORK 

1801. 
Fellow-Citizens : 

We lately addressed you on the subject of the 
ensuing election for Governor and Lieutenant-Gov- 
ernor— recommending to your support Stephen Van 
Rensselaer and James Watson. Since that, we have 
seen the address of our opponents, urging your 
preference of George Clinton and Jeremiah Van 
Rensselaer. 

The whole tenor of our address carries with it the 
evidence of a disposition to be temperate and liberal ; 

224 Alexander Hamilton 

to avoid giving occasion to mutual recrimination. It 
would have been agreeable to us to have seen a like 
disposition in our adversaries; but we think it can- 
not be denied that their address manifests a different 
one. It arraigns the principles of the Federalists 
with extreme acrimony, and by the allusion to Great 
Britain, in the preposterous figure of the mantle, 
attributes to them a principle of action, which every 
signer of the address knows to have no existence, 
and which for its falsehood and malice merits indig- 
nation and disdain. 

So violent an attack upon our principles justifies 
and calls for an exhibition of those of our opponents. 
To your good sense, to your love of country, to your 
regard for the welfare of yourself and families, the 
comment is submitted. 

The pernicious spirit which has actuated many 
of the leaders of the party denominated anti-federal, 
from the moment when our national Constitution 
was first proposed down to the present period, has 
not ceased to display itself in a variety of disgusting 
forms. In proportion to the prospect of success it 
has increased in temerity. Emboldened by a mo- 
mentary triumph in the choice of our national Chief 
Magistrate, it seems now to have laid aside all re- 
serve, and begins to avow projects of disorganization, 
with the sanction of the most respectable names of 
the party, which before were merely the anonymous 
ravings of incendiary newspapers. 

This precipitation in throwing aside the mask will, 
we trust, be productive of happy effects. It will 
serve to show that the mischievous designs ascribed 

Address 225 

to the party have not been the effusions of male- 
volence, the inventions of political rivalship, or the 
visionary forebodings of an over-anxious zeal; but 
that they have been just and correct inferences 
from an accurate estimate of characters and prin- 
ciples. It will serve to show that moderate men, 
who have seen in our political struggles nothing more 
than a competition for power and place, have been 
deceived ; that in reality the foundations of society, 
the essential interests of our nation, the dearest con- 
cerns of individuals, are staked upon the eventful 
contest. And by promoting this important dis- 
covery, it may be expected to rally the virtuous and 
the prudent of every description round a common 
standard; to endeavor, by joint efforts, to oppose 
mounds to that destructive torrent, which in its 
distant murmuring seemed harmless, but in the por- 
tentous roaring of its nearer approach, menaces our 
country with all the horrors of revolutionary frenzy. 

To what end, fellow-citizens, has your attention 
been carried across the Atlantic, to the Revolution 
of France, and to that fatal war of which it has been 
the source? To what end are you told, that this is 
the most interesting conflict man ever witnessed — ■ 
that it is a war of principles — a war between equal 
and unequal rights — between republicanism and 
monarchy — -between liberty and tyranny. 

What is there in that terrific picture which you are 
to admire or imitate? Is it the subversion of the 
throne of the Bourbons, to make way for the throne 
of the Bonaparte sf Is it the un distinguishing mas- 
sacre in prisons and dungeons, of men, women, and 

VOL. VIII.— 15. 

226 Alexander Hamilton 

children? Is it the sanguinary justice of revolu- 
tionary tribunals, or the awful terrors of a guillo- 
tine? Is it the rapid succession of revolution upon 
revolution, erecting the transient power of one set 
of men upon the tombs of another ? Is it the assas- 
sinations which have been perpetrated, or the new 
ones which are projected? Is it the open profession 
of impiety in the public assemblies, or the ridiculous 
worship of a Goddess of Reason, or the still con- 
tinued substitution of decades to the Christian Sab- 
bath? Is it the destruction of commerce, the ruin 
of manufactures, the oppression of agriculture ? Or, 
is it the pomp of war, the dazzling glare of splendid 
victories, the bloodstained fields of Europe, the 
smoking cinders of desolated cities, the afflicting 
spectacle of millions precipitated from plenty and 
comfort to beggary and misery? If it be none of 
these things, what is it? 

Perhaps it is the existing government of France, 
of which your admiration is solicited? 

Here, fellow-citizens, let us on our part invite you 
to a solemn pause. Mark, we beesech you, carefully 
mark, in this result, the fruit of those extravagant 
and noxious principles which it is desired to trans- 
plant into our happy soil. 

Behold a consul for ten years elected, not by the 
people, but by a conservatory Senate, self-created and 
self-continued for life; a magistrate who, to the 
plenitude of executive authority, adds the peculiar 
and vast prerogative of an exclusive right to origi- 
nate every law of the republic. 

Behold a Legislature elected, not by the people, but 

Address 227 

by the same conservatory Senate, one branch for 
fourteen, the other for ten years; one branch with a 
right to debate the law proposed by the consul, but 
not to propose ; another with right neither to debate 
nor propose, but merely to assent or dissent, leaving 
to the people nothing more than the phantom of 
representation, or the useless privilege of designating 
one tenth of their whole mass as candidates indis- 
criminately for the officers of the State, according to 
the option of the conservatory Senate. 

Behold this magic lantern of republicanism; the 
odious form of real despotism; garnished and de- 
fended by the bayonets of more than five hundred 
thousand men in disciplined array. 

Do you desire an illustration of the practical effect 
of this despotic system, read it in the last advices 
from France. Read it in the exercise of a power by 
the chief consul, recognized to belong to him by the 
conservatory Senate, to banish indefinitely the citi- 
zens of France without trial, without the formality 
of a legislative act. Then say, where can you find 
a more hideous despotism? Or, what ought ye to 
think of those men who dare to recommend to you 
as the Bible of your political creed, the principles of 
a revolution, which in its commencement, in its 
progress, in its termination (if termination it can 
have, before it has overthrown the civilized world), 
is only fitted to serve as a beacon to warn you to 
shun the gulfs, the quicksands, and the rocks of 
those enormous principles? 

Surely ye will applaud neither the wisdom nor the 
patriotism of men, who can wish you to exchange 

228 Alexander Hamilton 

the fair fabric of republicanism which you now 
enjoy, modelled and decorated by the hand of 
federalism, for that tremendous form of despotism 
which has sprung up amidst the volcanic eruptions 
of principles at war with all past and present ex- 
perience, at war with the nature of man. * 

Or, was the allusion to France and her Revolution, i 
to the war of principles of which you have heard, . 
intended to familiarize your ears to a war of arms, 
as one of the blessings of the new order of things? 
Facts, which cannot be mistaken, demonstrate that 
in the early period of the French Revolution, it was 
the plan of our opponents to engage us in the war as 
associates of France. But at this late hour, when 
even the pretence of supporting the cause of liberty 
has vanished, when acquisition and aggrandizement 
have manifestly become the only, the exclusive ob- 
jects of this war, it was surely to have been expected 
that we should have been left to retain the advan- 
tage of a pacific policy. 

If there are men who hope to gratify their ambi- 
tion, their avarice, or their vengeance, by adding 
this country to the league of northern powers, in the 
fantastic purpose of an extension of neutral rights, 
the great body of the people will hardly, we imagine, 
see in this project benefits sufficiently solid and dur- 
able to counterbalance the certain sacrifices of present 
advantages, and the certain sufferings of positive 
evils inseparable from a state of war. 

Let us now attend to some other parts of this ex- 
traordinary address. 

We are told that there are many in the bosom of 

Address 229 

our country who have long aimed at unequal privi- 
leges, and who have too well succeeded, by arrogat- 
ing to themselves the right to be considered as the 
only friends of the Constitution, the guardians of 
order and religion, by the lavish abuse of their 
opponents, and by representing opposition to par- 
ticular plans of administration as hostility to the 
government itself. 

What is meant by this aiming at unequal privi- 
leges ? 

If we are to judge of the end by the means stated 
to have been used, the charge amounts to this, that 
the Federalists have sought to retain in their own 
hands, by the suffrages of the people, the exercise of 
the powers of the government. 

Admitting the charge to be true, have not the 
Anti-Federalists pursued exactly the same course? 
Have they not labored incessantly to monopolize 
the power of our national and State governments? 
Whenever they have had it, have they not strained 
every nerve to keep it? Why is it a greater crime 
in the Federalists than in their rivals to aim at an 
ascendant in the councils of our country? 

It is true, as alleged, that the Federalists insisted 
upon their superior claim to be considered as the 
friends of our Constitution, and have imputed to 
their adversaries improper and dangerous designs; 
but it is equally true, that these have asserted a simi- 
lar claim, have advanced the pretension of being the 
only republicans and patriots, have charged their 
opponents with being in league with Great Britain 
to establish monarchy, have imputed to men of 

230 Alexander Hamilton 

unblemished characters for probity in high public 
offices, corruption and peculation, and have per- 
sisted in the foul charge after its falsity had been 
ascertained by solemn public inquiry; and in their 
wanton and distempered rage for calumny have not 
scrupled to brand even a Washington as a tyrant, sl 
conspirator, sl peculator. 

It is also true, that the Federalists have repre- 
sented the leaders of the other party as hostile to our 
national Constitution; but it is not true that it was 
because they have been unfriendly to particular plans 
of its administration. 

It is because, as a party, and with few exceptions, 
they were violent opposers of the adoption of the 
Constitution itself; predicted from it every possible 
evil, and painted it in the blackest colors, as a mon- 
ster of political deformity. 

It is because the amendments subsequently made, 
meeting scarcely any of the important objections 
which were urged, leaving the structure of the gov- 
ernment, and the mass and distribution of its powers 
where they were, are too insignificant to be with any 
sensible man a reason for being reconciled to the 
system if he thought it originally bad. 

It is because they have opposed not particular 
plans of the administration, but the general course 
of it, and almost all the measures of material conse- 
quence, and this, too, not under one man or set of 
men, but under all the successions of men. 

It is because, as there have been no alterations of 
the Constitution sufficient to change the opinion of 
its merits, and as the practice under it has met with 

Address 231 

the severest reprobation of the party, there is no cir- 
cumstance from which to infer that they can really 
have been reconciled to it. 

It is because the newspapers under their direction 
have from time to time continued to decry the Con- 
stitution itself. 

It is because they have openly avowed their at- 
tachment to the excessive principles of the French 
Revolution, and to leading features in the crude 
forms of government which have appeared only to 
disappear; utterly inconsistent with the sober max- 
ims upon which our federal edifice was reared, and 
with essential parts in its structure. As specimens 
of this, it is sufficient to observe that they have ap- 
proved the unity of the legislative power in one 
branch, and have been loud in their praises of 
an executive directory — that five-headed monster of 
faction and anarchy. 

It is because they have repeatedly shown, and in 
their present address again show, that they con- 
template innovations in our public affairs, which, 
without doubt, would disgrace and prostrate the 
government. 

On these various and strong grounds have the 
Federalists imputed to their opponents disaffection 
to the national Constitution. As yet they have no 
reason to retract the charge. To future proofs of 
repentance and reconciliation must an exculpation 
be referred. The Anti-Federalists have acquired 
the administration of the national government. Let 
them show by a wise and virtuous management that 
they are its friends, and they shall then have all the 

232 Alexander Hamilton 

credit of so happy a reformation ; but till then their 
assertions cannot be received as proofs. 

And if the views which the signers of the address 
now boldly avow should unfortunately be those 
which should regulate the future administration of 
the government, the tokens of their amity would be 
as pernicious as could possibly be the tokens of their 
most deadly hatred. 
, I They enumerate, as the crimes of the Federalists, 
the funding system, the national debt, the taxes 
which constitute the public revenue, the British 
treaty, the federal city, the mint, a mausoleum, the 
sedition law, and a standing army; and they tell us 
in plain terms that these are '' abuses no longer to 
be suffered." 

Let it be observed in the first place that these cry- 
ing sins of our government are not to be placed ex- 
clusively to the account of the Federalists; that for 
some of them the other party are chiefly responsible, 
and that in others they have participated. 

As to the federal city, it is not to be denied that 
this was a favorite of the illustrious Washington. 
But it is no less certain that it was warmly patron- 
ized by Mr. Jefferson, Mr. Madison, and the great 
majority of the members who at the time composed 
the opposition in Congress, and who are now influ- 
ential in the anti-federal party. It is also certain 
that the measure has never been a favorite of a 
majority of the federal party. 

As to the mint, it was not at all a measure of party. 
With slight diversities of opinion about some of the 
details, it was approved by both parties. 

Address 233 

As to the mausoleum, it has not taken place at all. 
The bill for erecting it was lost in the Senate, where 
the Federalists have a decided majority; and, in- 
stead of it, an appropriation of fifty thousand dollars 
was made for erecting an equestrian statue, agreeably 
to a resolution of Congress passed under the old Con- 
federation. Is there an American who would refuse 
this memorial of gratitude to the man who is the 
boast of his country, the honor of his age ? 

As to the funding system, it was thus far a measure 
of both parties, that both agreed there should be a 
funding system. In the formation of it the chief 
points of difference were, ist, a discrimination be- 
tween original holders and transferees of the public 
debt; 2d, a provision for the general debt of the 
Union, leaving to each State to make separate pro- 
vision for its particular debt. 

Happily for our country, by the rejection of the 
first, which would have been an express violation of 
contracts, the faith of the government was preserved, 
its credit maintained and established. 

Happily for our country, by not pursuing the last, 
unity, simplicity, and energy were secured to our 
fiscal system. The entanglements of fourteen con- 
flicting systems of finance were avoided. The same 
mass of debt was included in one general provision 
instead of being referred to fourteen separate pro- 
visions, more comprehensive justice was done, the 
States which had made extraordinary exertions for 
the support of the common cause were relieved from 
the unequal pressure of burthens which must have 
crushed them, and the people were saved from the 

234 Alexander Hamilton 

immense difference of expense between a collection of 
the necessary revenues by one set of officers or by 
fourteen different sets. 

The truth, then, fellow-citizens, is this: — Both 
parties agreed that there should be a funding system ; 
and the particular plan which prevailed was most 
agreeable to the contract of the government, most 
conducive to general and equal justice among the 
States and individuals, to order and efficiency in the 
finances, to economy in the collection. 

Ought not these ideas to have governed ? What is 
meant by holding up the funding system as an abuse 
no longer to be tolerated? 

What is this funding system? It is nothing more 
nor less than the pledging of adequate funds or revenues 
for paying the interest and for the gradual redemption 
of the principal of that very debt which was the 
sacred price of independence. The country being 
unable to pay off the principal, what better could 
have been done ? 

It is recollected, that long before otir revolution 
most of the States had their funding systems. They 
emitted their paper money, which is only another 
phrase for certificates of debt; and they pledged 
fimds for its redemption, which is but another phrase 
for funding it. What, then, is there so terrible in 
the idea of a funding system ? Those who may have 
been accustomed under some of the State govern- 
ments to gamble in the floating paper, and when 
they had monopolized a good quantity of it among 
themselves at low prices, to make partial legislative 
provisions for the payment of the particular kinds, 

Address 235 

would very naturally be displeased with a fixed and 
permanent system, which would give to the evi- 
dences of debt a stable value, and lop off the oppor- 
tunities for gambling speculations; but men who 
are sensible of the pernicious tendency of such 
a state of things, will rejoice in a plan which was 
designed to produce, and has produced, a contrary 
result. 

What have been the effects of this system? An 
extension of commerce and manufactures, the rapid 
growth of our cities and towns, the consequent pro- 
sperity of agriculture, and the advancement of the 
farming interest. All this was effected by giving 
life and activity to a capital in the public obligations, 
which was before dead, and by converting it into a 
powerful instrument of mercantile and other indus- 
trious enterprise. 

We make these assertions boldly, because the fact 
is exemplified by experience, and is obvious to 
all discerning men. Our opponents in their hearts 
know it to be so. 

As to the public debt ; the great mass of it was not \ 
created by the Federalists peculiarly. It was con- 
tracted by all who were engaged in our councils dur- 
ing our revolutionary war. The Federalists have 
only had a principal agency in providing for it. No 
man can impute that to them as a crime who is not 
ready to avow the fraudulent and base doctrine, that 
it is wiser and better to cheat than to pay the credit- 
ors of a nation. 

It is a fact certain and notorious, that under the 
administration of the first Secretary of the Treasury 

236 Alexander Hamilton 

ample provision was made, not only for paying the 
interest of this debt, but for extinguishing the prin- 
cipal in a moderate term of years. 

But it is alleged that this debt has been increased, 
and is increasing. 

On this point we know that malcontent individ- 
uals make the assertion and exhibit statements in- 
tended to prove it. But this we also know, that a 
committee of the House of Representatives, particu- 
larly charged with the inquiry, have stated and re- 
ported the contrary; and we think that more credit 
is due to their representation than to that of in- 
dividuals, especially as nothing is easier than in a 
matter of this sort to make plausible statements, 
which, though utterly false, cannot be detected except 
by those who possess all the materials of a complex 
calculation, who are qualified, and who will take the 
pains to make it. 

We know likewise that extraordinary events have 
compelled our government to extraordinary expend- 
itures— an Indian war, for some time disastrous, but 
terminated on principles likely to give durable tran- 
quillity to our frontier; two insurrections fomented 
by the opposition to the government ; the hostilities 
of a foreign power, encouraged by the undissembled 
sympathies of the same opposition, which obliged the 
government to arm for defence and security. These 
things have retarded the success of the efficacious 
measures which have been adopted for the discharge 
of our debt; measures which, with a peaceable and 
orderly course of things, accelerated by the rapid 
growth of our country, are sufficient in a few years, 

Address 237 

without any new expedient, to exonerate it from the 
whole of its present debt. 

These, fellow-citizens, are serious truths, well 
known to most of our opponents, but which they 
shamefully endeavor to disfigure and disguise. 

As to taxes, they are evidently inseparable from 
government. It is impossible without them to pay 
the debts of the nation, to protect it from foreign 
danger, or to secure individuals from lawless violence 
and rapine. It is always easy to assert that they 
are heavier than they ought to be, always difficult to 
refute the assertion, which cannot ever be attempted 
without a critical review of the whole course of pub- 
lic measures. This gives an immense advantage to 
those who make a trade of complaint and censure. 

But, fellow-citizens, it is in our power to state to 
you in relation to this subject, and upon good in- 
formation, one material fact. 

There is, perhaps, no item in the catalogue of our 
taxes which has been more unpopular than that 
which is called the direct tax. 

This tax may emphatically be placed to the ac- 
count of the opposite party; it was always insisted 
upon by them as preferable to taxes of the indirect 
kind. And it is a truth capable of full proof, that 
Mr. Madison, second in the confidence of the anti- 
federal party, the confidential friend of Mr. Jeffer- 
son, and now Secretary of State by his nomination, 
was the proposer of this tax. This was done in a 
committee of the last House of Representatives, of 
which he was a member, was approved by that com- 
mittee, and referred to the late Secretary of the 

238 Alexander Hamilton 

Treasury, Mr. Wolcott, with instructions to prepare 
a plan as to the mode. Let it be added that it was a 
principle of the federal party never to resort to this 
j species of tax but in time of war or hostility with a 
) foreign power ; that it was in such a time when they 
did resort to it, and that the occasion ceasing by the 
prospect of an accommodation, it has been resolved 
by them not to renew the tax. 

As to the British treaty, it is sufficient to remind 
, you of the extravagant predictions of evil persons of 
' its ratification, and to ask you in what have they 
, been realized? You have seen our peace preserved, 
you have seen our western posts surrendered, our 
commerce proceed with success in its wonted chan- 
nels, and our agriculture flourish to the extent of 
every reasonable wish ; and you have been witnesses 
to none of the mischiefs which were foretold. You 
will, then, conclude with us that the clamors against 
this treaty are the mere ebullitions of ignorance, of 
prejudice, and of faction. 

As to the sedition law, we refer you to the debates 
in Congress for the motives and nature of it. More 
would prolong too much this reply, already longer 
than we could wish. 

We will barely say that the most essential object 
of this act is to declare the courts of the United 
States competent to the cognizance of those slanders 
against the principal officers and departments of the 
Federal Government, which at common law are pun- 
ishable as libels, with the liberal and important miti- 
gation of allowing the truth of an accusation to be 
given in exoneration of the accuser. What do you 

Address 239 

see in this to merit the execrations which have been 
bestowed on the measure? 

As to a standing army, there is none, except four 
small regiments of infantry, insufficient for the serv- 
ice of guards in the numerous posts of our immense 
frontiers stretching from Niagara to the borders of 
Florida, and two regiments of artillery, which oc- 
cupy in the same capacity the numerous fortifications 
along our widely extended sea-coast. What is there 
in this to affright or disgust? If these corps are 
to be abolished, substitutes must be found in the 
militia. If the experiment shall be made, it is to 
foretell that it will prove not a measure of economy, 
but a heavy bill of additional cost, and like all 
other visionary schemes will be productive only of 
repentance and a return to a plan injudiciously 
renounced. 

This exposition of the measures which have been 
represented to you as abuses no longer to be suffered 
(mark the strength of the phrase) will, we trust, 
serve to satisfy you of the violence and absurdity 
of those crude notions which govern our opposers, 
if we beheve them to be sincere. Happily for our 
country, however, there has just beamed a ray of 
hope that these violent and absurd notions will not 
form the rule of conduct of the person whom the 
party have recently elevated to the head of our 
national affairs. 

In the speech of the new President upon assuming 
the exercise of his office, we find among the articles 
of his creed, — ''the honest payment of our debt, and 
sacred preservation of the public faith/* 

240 Alexander Hamilton 

The funding system, the national debt, the British 
treaty, are not therefore in his conception abuses, 
which, if no longer to be tolerated, would be of 
course to be abolished. 

But we think ourselves warranted to derive from 
the same source, a condemnation still more exten- 
sive of the opinions of our adversaries. The speech 
characterizes our present government ''as a republi- 
can in the full tide of successful experiment.'" Suc- 
cess in the experiment of a government, is success in 
the practice of it, and this is but another phrase for 
an administration, in the main, wise and good. That 
administration has been hitherto in the hands of the 
Federalists. 

Here then, fellow-citizens, is an open and solemn 
protest against the principles and opinions of our 
opponents, from a quarter which as yet they dare 
not arraign. 

In referring to this speech, we think it proper to 
make a public declaration of our approbation of its 
contents. We view it as virtually a candid retrac- 
tion of past misapprehensions, and a pledge to the 
community, that the new President will not lend 
himself to dangerous innovations, but in essential 
points will tread in the steps of his predecessors. 

In doing this, he prudently anticipates the loss of 
a great portion of that favor which has elevated him 
to his present station. Doubtless, it is a just fore- 
sight. Adhering to the professions he has made, it 
will not be long before the body of the Anti- Federal- 
ists will raise their croaking and ill-omened voices 
against him. But in the talents, the patriotism, and 

Address 241 

the firmness of the Federalists, he will find more than 
an equivalent for all that he shall lose. 

All those of whatever party who may desire to 
support the moderate views exhibited in the presi- 
dential speech, will unite against the violent projects 
of the men who have addressed you in favor of Mr. 
Clinton, and against a candidate who, in all past ex- 
perience, has evinced that he is likely to be a fit in- 
strument of these projects. 

Fellow-citizens, we beseech you to consult your 
experience and not listen to tales of evil, which exist 
only in the language, not even in the imaginations, 
of those who deal them out. This experience will 
tell you, that our opposers have been uniformly mis- 
taken in their views of our Constitution, of its ad- 
ministration, in all the judgments which they have 
pronounced of our public affairs ; and, consequently, 
that they are unfaithful or incapable advisers. It 
will teach you that you have eminently prospered 
under the system of public measures pursued and 
supported by the Federalists. In vain are you told 
that you owe your prosperity to your own industry, 
and to the blessings of Providence. To the latter, 
doubtless, you are primarily indebted. You owe to 
it, among other benefits, the Constitution you enjoy, 
and the wise administration of it by virtuous men as 
its instruments. You are likewise indebted to your 
own industry. But has not your industry found 
aliment and incitement in the salutary operation of 
your government — in the preservation of order at 
home — in the cultivation of peace abroad — in the 
invigoration of confidence in pecuniary dealings — 

VOL. VIII, — 16. 

242 Alexander Hamilton 

in the increased energies of credit and commerce — in 
the extension of enterprise, ever incident to a good 
government well administered? Remember what 
your situation was immediately before the establish- 
ment of the present Constitution? Were you then 
deficient in industry more than now ? If not, why were 
you not equally prosperous? Plainly, because your 
industry had not at that time the vivifying influences 
of an efficient and well-conducted government. 

There is one more particular in the address which 
we cannot pass over in silence, though, to avoid 
being tedious, we must do little more than mention 
it. It is a comparison between the administration 
of the former and present governors of this State, on 
the point of economy, accompanied with the observa- 
tion, that the former had shown an anxious solicitude 
to exempt you from taxation. 

The answer to this is, that under the administra- 
tion of Mr. Clinton the State possessed large resources, 
which were the substitute for taxation — the duties 
of impost, the proceeds of confiscated property, and 
immense tracts of new land, which, if they had been 
providently disposed of, would have long deferred 
the necessity of taxation. That this was not done, 
Mr. Clinton, as one of the commissioners of the land 
office, is in a principal degree responsible. 

Under the administration of Mr. Jay, the natural 
increase of the State has unavoidably augmented 
the expense of the government, and the appropria- 
tions of large sums, in most of which all parties have 
concurred, to a variety of objects of public utility and 
necessity, have so far diminished the funds of the 

Address 243 

State as in the opinion of all parties to have required 
a resort to taxes. 

The principal of these objects have been: i. The 
erection of fortifications, and the purchase of cannon, 
arms, and other warlike implements for the pur- 
pose of defence. 2. The building and maintenance of 
the State prisons, in the laudable experiment of an 
amelioration of our penal code. 3. The purchase 
from Indians of lands which, though resold, have not 
yet been productive of revenue. 4. The payment of 
dower to the widows of persons whose estates have 
been confiscated. 5. Large appropriations for the 
benefit of common schools, roads, and bridges. 6. 
The erection of an arsenal and public offices in the 
city of Albany. 

Hence it is evident that the difference which has 
been remarked to you in respect to taxation, has pro- 
ceeded from a difference of circumstances, not from 
the superior providence or economy of the former, 
or from the improvidence or profusion of the existing 
administration. Our opponents may be challenged 
to bring home to Mr. Jay the proofs of prodigality, 
and they may be told that the purity and integrity 
of his conduct in relation to the public property have 
never for a moment been drawn into question. 

We forbear to canvass minutely the personal- 
ities in which our adversaries have indulged. 'T is 
enough for us, that they acknowledge our candidate 
to possess the good qualities which we have ascribed 
to him. If he has inherited a large estate, 't is cer- 
tainly no crime. 

'T is to his honor that his benevolence is as large 

244 Alexander Hamilton 

as his estate. Let his numerous tenants be his wit- 
nesses : — attached as they are to him, not by the ties 
of dependence (for the greater part of them hold their 
lands in fee simple and upon easy rents), but by the 
ties of affection, by those gentle and precious cords 
which link gratitude to kindness. Let the many in- 
digent and distressed who have been gladdened by 
the benign influence of his bounty, be his witnesses. 
And let every reflecting man well consider, whether 
the people are likely to suffer because the ample for- 
tune of a virtuous and generous Chief Magistrate 
places him beyond the temptation of a job, for the 
accimiulation of wealth. 

We shall not inquire how ample may be the do- 
mains, how productive the revenues, how numerous 
the dependents of Mr. Clinton, nor how his ample 
domains may have been acquired. 'T is enough for 
us to say, that if Mr. Van Rensselaer is rich, Mr. 
Clinton is not poor, and that it is at least as innocent 
in the former to have been bom to opulence, as in 
the latter to have attained to it by means of the ad- 
vantages of the first office of the State, long, very 
long enjoyed, for three years at least too long, be- 
cause, by an unlawful tenure, contrary to a known 
majority of suffrages. 

We shall not examine how likely it is that a man 
considerably past the meridian of life, and debilitated 
by infirmities of body, will be a more useful and 
efficient governor, and more independent of the aid 
of friends and relations, than a man of acknowledged 
good sense, of mature years, in the full vigor of life, 
and in the full energy of his faculties. 

Address 245 

We shall not discuss how far it is probable that the 
radical antipathy of Mr. Clinton to the vital parts of 
our National Constitution has given way to the little 
formal amendments which have since been adopted. 
We are glad to be assured that it has. It gives us 
pleasure to see proselytes to the truth; nor shall we 
be over-curious to inquire how men get right if we 
can but discover that they are right. If, happily, 
the possession of the power of our once-detested gov- 
ernment shall be a talisman to work the conversion 
of all its enemies, we shall be ready to rejoice that 
good has come out of evil. 

But we dare not too far indulge this pleasing hope. 
We know that the adverse party has its Dantons, 
and its Robespierres, as well as its Brissots and its 
Rolands ; and we look forward to the time when the 
sects of the former will endeavor to confound the 
latter and their adherents, together with the Feder- 
alists, in promiscuous ruin. 

In regard to these sects, which compose the pith 
and essence of the anti-federal party, we believe it 
to be true that the contest between us is indeed a 
war of principles — a war between tyranny and lib- )| 
erty, but not between monarchy and republicanism. 
It is a contest between the tyranny of Jacobinism, 
which confounds and levels every thing, and the 
mild reign of rational liberty, which rests on the basis 
of an efficient and well-balanced government, and 
through the medium of stable laws shelters and pro- 
tects the life, the reputation, the civil and religious 
rights of every member of the community. 

'T is against these sects that all good men should 

246 Alexander Hamilton 

form an indissoluble league. To resist and frus- 
trate their machinations is alike essential to every 
prudent and faithful administration of our govern- 
ment, whoever may be the depositories of the power. 

EXAMINATION OF JEFFERSON'S MESSAGE 
TO CONGRESS OF DECEMBER 7, 1801 ' 

NO. I 

December 17, 1801. 

Instead of delivering a speech to the Houses of 
Congress, at the opening of the present session, the 
President has thought fit to transmit a Message. 
Whether this has proceeded from pride or from hu- 
mility, from a temperate love of reform or from a 
wild spirit of innovation, is submitted to the con- 
jectures of the curious. A single observation shall 
be indulged — since all agree that he is unlike his 
predecessors in essential points, it is a mark of con- 
sistency to differ from them in matters of form. 

Whoever considers the temper of the day must 
be satisfied that this message is likely to add much 
to the popularity of our Chief Magistrate. It con- 
forms, as far as would be tolerated at this early stage 
of our progress in political perfection, to the be- 
witching tenets of that illuminated doctrine, which 
promises man, erelong, an emancipation from the 

' This paper and that which precedes it really constitute a defence of 
the Federalist party and an elaborate and bitter criticism of their 
opponents. As specimens of controversial political writing, they take 
very high rank, and are admirable examples of Hamilton's power and 
force in this field of literature. 

Jefferson's Message 247 

burdens and restraints of government ; giving a fore- 
taste of that pure felicity which the apostles of this 
doctrine have predicted. After having, with infinite 
pains and assiduity, formed the public taste for this 
species of fare, it is certainly right, in those whom 
the people have chosen for their caterers, to be at- 
tentive to the gratification of that taste. And 
should the viands, which they may offer, prove bane- 
ful poisons instead of wholesome aliments, the justi- 
fication is both plain and easy — Good patriots must 
at all events please the people. But those whose 
patriotism is of the old school, who differ so widely 
from the disciples of the new creed, that they would 
rather risk incurring the displeasure of the people by 
speaking unpalatable truths, than betray their in- 
terest by fostering their prejudices, will never be 
deterred by an impure tide of popular opinion from 
honestly pointing out the mistakes or the faults of 
weak or wicked men, who may have been selected 
as guardians of the public weal. 

The message of the President, by whatever mo- 
tives it may have been dictated, is a performance 
which ought to alarm all who are anxious for the 
safety of our government, for the respectability and 
welfare of our nation. It makes, or aims at making, 
a most prodigal sacrifice of constitutional energy, of 
sound principle, and of public interest, to the popu- 
larity of one man. 

The first thing in it, which excites our surprise, is 
the very extraordinary position, that though Tripoli 
had declared war in form against the United States, 
and had enforced it by actual hostility, yet that 

248 Alexander Hamilton 

there was not power, for want of the sanction of Con- 
gress y to capture and detain her cruisers with their 
crews. 

When the newspapers informed us that one of 
these cruisers, after being subdued in a bloody con- 
flict, had been liberated and permitted quietly to 
return home, the imagination was perplexed to divine 
the reason. The conjecture naturally was, that pur- 
suing a policy too refined perhaps for barbarians, it 
was intended, by that measure, to give the enemy a 
strong impression of our magnanimity and humanity. 
No one dreamt of a scruple as to the right to seize and 
detain the armed vessel of an open and avowed foe, 
vanquished in battle. The enigma is now solved, 
and we are presented with one of the most singu- 
lar paradoxes ever advanced by a man claiming 
the character of a statesman. When analyzed, it 
amounts to nothing less than this, that between two 
nations there may exist a state of complete war on 
the one side — of peace on the other. 

War, of itself, gives to the parties a mutual right to 
kill in battle, and to capture the persons and prop- 
erty of each other. This is a rule of natural law ; a 
necessary and inevitable consequence of the state of 
war. This state between two nations is completely 
produced by the act of one — it requires no concurrent 
act of the other. It is impossible to conceive the 
idea, that one nation can be in full war with another, 
and this other not in the same state with respect to 
its adversary. The moment that two nations are, in 
an absolute sense, at war, the public force of each 
may exercise every act of hostility, which the general 

Jefferson's Message 249 

laws of war authorize, against the persons and prop- 
erty of the other. As it respects this conclusion, 
the distinction between offensive and defensive war 
makes no difference. That distinction is only ma- 
terial to discriminate the aggressing nation from 
that which defends itself against attack. The war 
is offensive on the part of the state which makes it ; 
on the opposite -side it is defensive; but the rights of 
both, as to the measure of hostility, are equal. 

It will be readily allowed, that the constitution of 
a particular country may limit the organ charged 
with the direction of the public force, in the use or 
application of that force, even in time of actual war ; 
but nothing short of the strongest negative words, 
of the most express prohibitions, can be admitted to 
restrain that organ from so employing it, as to de- 
rive the fruits of actual victory, by making prisoners 
of the persons and detaining the property of a van- 
quished enemy. Our Constitution, happily, is not 
chargeable with so great an absurdity. The framers 
of it would have blushed at a provision, so repugnant 
to good sense, so inconsistent with national safety 
and convenience. That instrument has only provided 
affirmatively, that, " The Congress shall have power 
to declare war"; the plain meaning of which is, that 
it is the peculiar and exclusive province of Congress, 
when the nation is at peace, to change that state into 
a state of war; whether from calculations of policy, 
or from provocations or injuries received; in other 
words, it belongs to Congress only, to go to war. But 
when a foreign nation declares or openly and avow- 
edly makes war upon the United States, they are 

250 Alexander Hamilton 

then by the very fact already at war, and any de- 
claration on the part of Congress is nugatory; it 
is at least unnecessary. This inference is clear in 
principle, and has the sanction of established prac- 
tice. It is clear in principle, because it is self- 
evident, that a declaration by one nation against 
another, produces at once a complete state of war 
between both, and that no declaration on the other 
side can at all vary their relative situation; and in 
practice, it is well known that nothing is more com- 
mon than when war is declared by one party, to 
prosecute mutual hostilities without a declaration 
by the other. 

The doctrine of the message includes the strange 
absurdity, that without a declaration of war by Con- 
gress, our public force may destroy the life but may 
not restrain the liberty or seize the property of an 
enemy. This was exemplified in the very instance 
of the Tripolitan corsair. A number of her crew 
were slaughtered in the combat, and after she was 
subdued, she was set free with the remainder. But 
it may perhaps be said that she was the assailant, 
and that resistance was an act of mere defence and 
self-preservation. Let us then pursue the matter a 
step further. Our ships had blockaded the Tripoli- 
tan admiral in the Bay of Gibraltar ; suppose he had 
attempted to make his way out, without first firing 
upon them; if permitted to do it, the blockade was a 
farce ; if hindered by force, this would have amounted 
to more than a mere act of defence ; and if a combat 
had ensued, we should then have seen a perfect il- 
lustration of the unintelligible right, to take the life 

Jefferson*s Message 251 

but not to abridge the liberty or capture the prop- 
erty of an enemy. Let us suppose an invasion of 
our territory, previous to a declaration of war by 
Congress. The principle avowed in the message 
would authorize our troops to kill those of the in- 
vader, if they should come within the reach of their 
bayonets, perhaps to drive them into the sea, and 
drown them; but not to disable them from doing 
harm, by the milder process of making them prison- 
ers and sending them into confinement. Perhaps it 
may be replied that the same end would be an- 
swered by disarming, and leaving them to starve. 
The merit of such an argument would be complete 
by adding that, should they not be famished before 
the arrival of their ships with a fresh supply of arms, 
we might then, if able, disarm them a second time, 
and send them on board their fleet, to return safely 
home. 

The inconvenience of the doctrine in practice is 
not less palpable than its folly in theory. In every 
case it presents a most unequal warfare. In the in- 
stance which has occurred, the vanquished bar- 
barian got off with the loss of his guns. Had he 
been victorious, those Americans, whose lives might 
have been spared, would have been doomed to wear 
out a miserable existence in slavery and chains. 
Substantial benefits would have rewarded his suc- 
cess; while on our side, life, liberty, and property 
were put in jeopardy for an empty triumph. This, 
however, presents a partial inconvenience — cases 
may arise in which evils of a more serious and com- 
prehensive nature would be the fruits of this visionary 

252 Alexander Hamilton 

and fantastical principle. Suppose that, in the re- 
cess of Congress, a foreign maritime power should 
unexpectedly declare war against the United States, 
and send a fleet and army to seize Rhode Island, in 
order from thence to annoy our trade and our sea- 
^ port towns. Till the Congress should assemble and 
declare war, which would require time, our ships 
might, according to the hypothesis of the message, 
be sent by the President to fight those of the enemy 
as often as they should be attacked, but not to cap- 
ture and detain them; if beaten, both vessels and 
crews would be lost to the United States; if success- 
ful, they could only disarm those they had overcome, 
and must suffer them to return to the place of com- 
mon rendezvous, there to equip anew, for the pur- 
pose of resuming their depredations on our towns 
and our trade. 

Who could restrain the laugh of derision at posi- 
tions so preposterous, were it not for the reflection 
that in the first magistrate of our country they cast 
a blemish on otir national character ? What will the 
world think of the fold when such is the shepherd ? 

Lucius Crassus. 

NO. II 

December 21, 1801. 

The next most prominent feature in the message 
is the proposal to abandon at once all the internal 
revenue of the country. The motives avowed for 
this astonishing scheme are, that "there is reasonable 
ground of confidence that this part of the revenue 
may now be safely dispensed with ; that the remain- 

Jefferson's Message 253 

ing sources will be sufficient to provide for the sup- 
port of government, to pay the interest of the public 
debt, and to discharge the principal in shorter periods 
than the laws or the general expectation had contem- 
plated; and that though wars and untoward events 
might change this prospect of things, and call for 
expenses which the impost could not meet, yet that 
sound principles would not justify our taxing the in- 
dustry of our fellow-citizens to accumulate treasure 
for wars to happen we knew not when, and which 
might not perhaps happen but from the temptations 
offered by that treasure." 

If we allow these to be more than ostensible mo- 
tives, we shall be driven to ascribe this conduct to a 
deficiency of intellect, and to an ignorance of our 
financial arrangements, greater than could have been 
suspected ; if but ostensible, it is then impossible to 
trace the suggestion to any other source than the 
culpable desire of gaining or securing popularity at 
an immediate expense of public utility, equivalent, 
on a pecuniary scale, to a million ' of dollars annu- 
ally, and at the greater expense of a very serious 
invasion of our system of public credit. 

That these at least are the certain consequences of 
the measure, shall be demonstrated by arguments 
which are believed to be unanswerable. 

To do this the more effectually, it is necessary to 
premise that some of the revenues now proposed to 

^ This is taken as a rotind number. The present net product, includ- 
ing the duties on stamps, seems to be between eight and nine hundred 
thousand. Very speedily, by the natural progress of the country, they 
would amount to a million, and soon after exceed it. A million there' 
fore is a moderate ratio. 

254 Alexander Hamilton 

be relinquished are, with every solemnity of law, 
pledged for paying the interest and redeeming the 
principal of our public debt, foreign and domestic. 
As to the interest, and such parts of the principal as 
by the original constitution of the debts are payable 
by annual instalments, the appropriation is absolute. 
As to the residue, it is qualified. On the 3d of 
March, 1795, was passed an act of Congress which 
forms a main pillar in the fabric of our public debt; 
which, maturing and perfecting the establishment of 
a sinking fund, endeavors, with peculiar solicitude, 
to render it adequate, effectual, and inviolable. By 
the 8th section of this act it is provided, "That all 
surpluses of the revenue, which shall remain at the 
end of any year, and which at the next session of 
Congress shall not be otherwise appropriated or re- 
served by law, shall ipso facto become a part of the 
Sinking Fund/' This fund, by other provisions of 
the same act, is vested in commissioners in trust, to 
be applied to the redemption of the debt, by reim- 
bursement or by purchase, until the whole shall be 
extinguished; and the faith of the United States is 
expressly engaged, that the monies which are to 
constitute the fund shall inviolably remain so ap- 
propriated and vested, until the redemption of the 
debt shall be completely effected. 

The simple statement of these provisions goes far 
to confirm the character which we have given to 
the proposition. But a distinct examination of the 
reasons by which it is supported, will, when taken in 
connection with those provisions, place beyond doubt 
its absurd and pernicious tendency. 

Jefferson's Message 255 

The first inducement offered for relinquishing the 
internal revenue, is a reasonable ground of confidence 
that it may safely be dispensed with. 

When it is considered that we are in the very crisis 
of an important change of situation ; passing from a 
state in which neutrality had procured to our com- 
merce, and to the revenues depending on it, a great 
artificial increase — with good reason to look for a 
diminution, and without satisfactory data to enable 
us to fix the extent of this diminution, — can any 
thing be more rash, more empirical, than voluntarily 
to abandon a valuable and growing branch of income 
of which we are already in possession? Can it be 
said that merely " a reasonable ground of confidence," 
is a sufficient warrant for so important a surrender? 
Surely we ought to have been told that there was at 
least a moral certainty of the fact. But even this 
would not have been deemed enough by a prudent 
statesman. Nothing less than experimental certainty 
ought to have been relied upon. There was no pres- 
sure of circumstances making it proper to precipitate 
the measure. It would have been ridiculous to 
pretend that the burden is so heavy, as to demand 
immediate relief; and without this incentive to re- 
linquishment, experience ought undoubtedly to have 
been taken as the only fit and sure guide. 

Not only is it problematical what the present 
duties on imports will for succeeding years produce; 
but it is in a degree questionable, whether it may 
not be found necessary to reduce the rates. That 
they are now high, when compared with the com- 
mercial capital of our country, is not to be denied, 

256 Alexander Hamilton 

and whether they may not be found too high for a 
beneficial course of our trade, is yet to be decided by 
experiment. The latter augmentations of the rates 
of duty were made at times and under circumstances 
in the situations of this and of other countries, which 
forbid us to regard past experience as conclusive on 
the point. 

Should it be said in answer, that the revenues can 
hereafter be renewed, if on trial it shall be found that 
they have been prematurely abandoned, the decisive 
reply is, that this is to invert the natural order of just 
reasoning. Were it now the question, whether such 
revenues should be created, in anticipation of a pos- 
sible deficiency, the correct answer would be, let 
experiment first ascertain the necessity: as they 
already exist, on a question to abolish them, the 
answer equally ought to be, let experience first show 
them to be unnecessary. 

But how can they be unnecessary? Let us grant 
that the remaining sources will be equal to the pur- 
poses enumerated in the message, does it follow that 
it will not still be wise to retain the internal revenue ? 
Is it not desirable that government should have it 
in its power to discharge the debt faster than may 
have been contemplated? Is not this a felicity in 
our situation which ought to be improved ; a precious 
item in the public fortune which ought not rashly to 
be squandered? But it is not even true that the 
laws have exclusively contemplated a definite period 
for the ultimate redemption of the entire debt. 
They have only made a determinate provision for its 
extinguishment, at all events, within a given term of 

Jefferson's Message 257 

years. But, anxious to shorten the period, they, in 
the clause which has been quoted respecting the 
surpluses of revenue, have made an auxiliary pro- 
vision for the purpose of abridging that term. The 
message, while it goes to impair the efficacy of the 
principal provision, proposes formally to renounce 
the auxiliary, and thus to disappoint the provident 
care of the laws to accelerate the discharge of the 
debt. 

How is this reconcilable with the wanton and un- 
just clamors heretofore vented against those who 
projected and established our present system of pub- 
lic credit ; charging them with a design to perpetuate 
the debt, under the pretext that a public debt was a 
public blessing? It is not to be forgotten, that in 
these clamors Mr. Jefferson liberally participated! 
Now, it seems, the tone is entirely changed. The 
past administrations, who had so long been calum- 
niated by the imputation of that pernicious design, 
are of a sudden discovered to have done too much 
for the speedy discharge of the debt, and its duration 
is to be prolonged, by throwing away a part of the 
fund destined for its prompt redemption. Wonder- 
ful union of consistency and wisdom! 

Before we yield our approbation to the proposal, 
we ought to have a guaranty for the continuance of 
our peace, long enough to give effect to the leisurely 
operation of that residue of the fund which it is in- 
tended to retain ; else war, which never fails to bring 
with it an accumulation of debt, may intervene, and 
we may then rapidly hasten to that period when the 
exigencies of government may render it necessary 

VOL. VIII. — 17. 

258 Alexander Hamilton 

to appropriate too large a portion of the earnings 
of labor. To guard against so unfortunate a result, 
towards which there is always too great a tendency 
in the affairs of nations, our past administrations 
have evinced a deep foresight, and exercised a truly 
patriotic care. Unhappy will it be, if any succeed- 
ing projector shall be permitted to frustrate their 
salutary plan. 

It has been seen, that the message anticipates and 
attempts to answer objections to the dereliction of 
revenue: it is said, that "sound principles will not 
permit us to tax the industry of our citizens to ac- 
cumulate treasure for wars to happen we know not 
when, and which might not perhaps happen but for 
the temptations offered by that treasure." Unless, 
however, the accumulation of treasure be the neces- 
sary consequence of retaining the revenue, this argu- 
ment is evidently futile. But the President had only 
to open our statute book to learn, that this conse- 
quence is chimerical. All future surpluses of re- 
venue being already eventually appropriated to the 
discharge of the public debt, it follows that till the 
whole debt shall have been extinguished, there could 
be no accumulation of treasure — no spoil from that 
source to tempt the rapacity of a greedy invader. 
Here we fix the charge of ignorance of our financial 
arrangements; to which there can be no alternative 
but a deliberate design to delude the people. Be- 
tween the two, let the worshippers of the idol make 

their option. 

Lucius Crassus. 

Jefferson's Message 259 

NO. Ill 

December 24, 1801. 

Had our laws been less provident than they have 
been, yet must it give us a very humble idea of the 
talents of our President as a statesman, to find him 
embarrassed between an absolute abandonment of 
revenue, and an inconvenient accumulation of treas- 
ure. Pursuing the doctrine professed by his sect, 
that our public debt is a national curse, which cannot 
too promptly be removed, and adhering to the assur- 
ance which he has virtually given,' that a sponge, 
the favorite instrument, shall not be employed for the 
purpose, how has it happened that he should have 
overlooked the simple and obvious expedient of 
using the supposed excess of income as a remedy for 
so great a mischief ? 

After all we have heard in times past, it would ill 
become either the head or any member of the ortho- 
dox sect to contend, that a too rapid reimbursement 
of the debt might be attended with evils. In cour- 
tesy, however, this shall be supposed to be urged by 
some new convert, who has not entirely shaken off 
the prejudices of former modes of thinking; and it 
shall be examined, whether this argument will afford 
a justification of the measure recommended. 

It shall not be denied, that the immediate pay- 
ment of our whole debt, if practicable, would be 
likely to be injurious in various ways. It would, in 
the first instance, produce a money-plethora (if the 

' One of the essential principles of government is," the honest payment 
of our debts and the sacred preservation of the public faith.'* — Inaugural 
Speech. 

26o Alexander Hamilton 

phrase may be allowed) , which experience has shown 
to be inauspicious to the energies, and especially to 
the morality and industry, of a nation. The quick 
efflux of this money to pay a considerable part of 
the debt in the hands of foreigners, and to procure 
from abroad the means of gratifying an increased 
extravagance, would, after some time, substitute a 
too great vacuity to a too great fulness, leaving us 
to struggle with the bad habits incident to the latter 
state, and with the embarrassments of a defective 
circulation. To these, other reasons might be added, 
which, though equally just and solid, are omitted as 
being more liable to dispute. 

Though an extreme case is here presented, the im- 
mediate reimbursement of the entire debt, yet it 
must be admitted that the same considerations are 
applicable in a less degree to a summary or very 
rapid repayment by large instalments. But the an- 
swer to all this is, that it would have been full time 
to adopt precautionary measures against evils f'-om 
such a source, when experience has realized the 
danger. Till such time it is certainly the highest 
wisdom to continue the employment of a fund which 
is already provided, and without overburdening the 
people, for the all-important purpose of exonerating 
our nation from debt, and of placing it in a condi- 
tion, with competent resources to meet future con- 
tingencies which may threaten its safety. On the 
other hand, is it not a mark of the highest impro- 
vidence and folly, to throw away an important part 
of this fund, on the mere speculation that it may 
possibly be superfluous? 

Jefferson's Message 261 

But admitting it to be clearly ascertained, that the 
fund is greater than is requisite to extinguish the debt 
with convenient celerity, does it follow that the ex- 
cess, if retained, must be suffered to accumulate, and 
that no different method could have been found to 
employ it which would have been productive of ade- 
quate utility? 

Whatever diversity of opinion there may be with 
regard to military and naval preparations, for the 
defence and security of the country, there are some 
things in which all well-informed and reflecting men 
unite. In order that upon the breaking out of a 
war there may be a sufficient supply of warlike im- 
plements, together with the means of speedily 
creating a navy, arsenals, foundries, dock-yards, 
magazines (especially of materials for the construction 
and equipment of ships), are by all deemed eligible 
objects of public care. To provide for these objects 
upon a competent, though moderate scale, will be 
attended with expense so considerable, as to leave 
nothing to spare from the amount of our present 
income. To persons unacquainted with the subject, 
the quantities of several articles on hand may ap- 
pear ample ; but to good judges there is hardly any 
one class of supplies which will not be thought to 
require much augmentation. As far as a navy is 
concerned, the deficiency is palpable. 

If dock-yards are to be established in earnest, they 
ought certainly to be well protected. For this pur- 
pose, fortifications of a substantial and durable 
nature, very different from the temporary shifts 
hitherto adopted, ought to be erected. And if the 

262 Alexander Hamilton 

President will inquire into the cost of even these 
trifling constructions, in the instances where they 
have been managed with all practicable economy, he 
will become convinced that the erection of proper 
works would call for an expenditure forbidding the 

* supposition of a superfluity of revenue. 

In addition to objects of national security, there 
are many purposes of great public utility to which 
the revenues in question might be applied. The im- 
provement of the communications between the dif- 
ferent parts of our country is an object well worthy 
of the national purse, and one which would abun- 
dantly repay to labor the portion of its earnings, 
which may have been borrowed for the purpose. To 
provide roads and bridges is within the direct pur- 
view of the Constitution. In many parts of the 
country, especially in the Western Territory, a 
matter in which the Atlantic States are equally in- 
terested, aqueducts and canals would also be fit sub- 
jects of pecuniary aid, from the general government. 
In France, England, and other parts of Europe, 
institutions exist supported by public contributions', 
which eminently promote agriculture and the arts. 
Such institutions merit imitation by our govern- 

. ment; they are of the number of those which di- 
rectly and sensibly recompense labor for what it 

. lends to their agency. 

To suggestions of the last kind, the adepts of the 
new school have a ready answer: Industry will suc- 
ceed and prosper in proportion as it is left to the exer- 
tions of individual enterprise. This favorite dogma, 
when taken as a general rule, is true; but as an 

Jefferson*s Message 263 

exclusive one, it is false, and leads to error in the 
administration of public affairs. In matters of in- 
dustry, human enterprise ought, doubtless, to be 
left free in the main; not fettered by too much 
regulation; but practical politicians know that it 
may be beneficially stimulated by prudent aids and 
encouragements on the part of the government. 
This is proved by numerous examples too tedious to 
be cited; examples which will be neglected only bv 
indolent and temporizing rulers, who love to loll in 
the lap of epicurean ease, and seem to imagine that 
to govern well, is to amuse the wondering multitude 
with sagacious aphorisms and oracular sayings. 

What has been observed is sufficient to render it 
manifest that, independent of the extinguishment 
of the debt, the revenues proposed to be yielded up 
would find ample and very useful employment for a 
variety of public purposes. Already in the posses- 
sion of so valuable a resource; having surmounted 
the difficulties which, from the opinions and habits 
of our citizens, obstruct, in this, more than in any 
other country, every new provision for adding to our 
public income; certainly without a colorable pre- 
tence of their being a grievous or undue pressure on 
the community — how foolish will it be to resign the 
boon, perhaps in a short time to be compelled again 
to resort to it; and for that purpose to hazard a 
repetition of the obstacles which have been before 
encountered and overcome, — obstacles which gave 
birth to one insurrection, and may give birth to 
another ! Infatuated must be the councils from 
which so injurious a project has proceeded! 

264 Alexander Hamilton 

But admitting the position, that there is an excess 
of income which ought to be rehnquished, still the 
proposal to surrender the internal revenue is impoli- 
tic. It ought to be carefully preserved, as not being 
exposed to the casualties incident to our intercourse 
with foreign nations, and therefore the most certain. 
It ought to be preserved, as reaching to descriptions 
of persons who are not proportionately affected by 
the impost, and as tending, for this reason, to dis- 
tribute the public burden more equitably. It ought 
to be preserved, because if revenue can really be 
spared, it is best to do it in such a manner as will 
conduce to the relief or advancement of our naviga- 
tion and commerce. Rather let the tonnage duty 
on American vessels be abolished, and let the duties 
be lessened on some particular articles on which they 
may press with inconvenient weight. Let not the 
merchant be provoked to attempt to evade the 
duties by the sentiment that his ease or interest is 
disregarded, and that his capital alone is to be 
clogged and incumbered by the demands of the 
Treasury. 

But who and what are the merchants, when com- 
pared with the patriotic votaries of whiskey in Penn- 
sylvania and Virginia? 

Lucius Crassus. 

NO. IV 

December 26, 1801. 

It is a matter of surprise to observe a proposition 
to diminish the revenue, associated with intimations 
which appear to contemplate war. The suggestions 

Jefferson's Message 265 

in the message respecting the Barbary States plainly 
enough imply that treaties are found to be too feeble 
cords to bind them; and that a resort to coercive 
means will probably be requisite to enforce a greater 
sense of justice towards us. Accordingly, as a com- 
ment on this hint, we have seen a resolution brought 
into the House of Representatives, authorizing the 
President to take measures effectually to protect our 
commerce against those states. Believing it to be 
a sound position, that these predatory nations will 
never be brought to respect sufficiently the rights of 
this country, whether derived from nature or from 
compact, without first being made to feel its power, 
there is no disposition to condemn the efficacious 
employment of force. Yet, considering the maxims 
by which those states are governed, and the obstin- 
acy which they have evinced upon other occasions, 
it is likely that a policy of this sort will be attended 
with considerable, and with no very temporary, ex- 
pense. This alone is conceived to be a conclusive 
reason against parting with any portion of our pre- 
sent income; nothing could be less advisable, at a 
moment when there is the prospect, if not the pro- 
ject, of a general rupture with those powers. 

Hitherto the proposal for sacrificing the internal 
revenue has been tried almost wholly by the test of 
expediency; it is time to put it to a severe test — 
that of right. Can the proposed abolition take effect 
without impairing the public faith? 

This is a question of infinite moment to the char- 
acter of our government — to the prosperity of our 
nation. If it is to be answered in the negative, it 

266 Alexander Hamilton 

must be matter of profound regret that a proposal 
which could give rise to it should have come from the 
First Magistrate of the United States. 

It is hardly necessary to premise, by way of ex- 
planation, that to pledge or appropriate funds for a 
public debt is, in effect, to mortgage them to the pub- 
lic creditors for their security. Retracing our finan- 
cial system to its commencement, we find the impost 
and the excise on distilled spirits repeatedly and 
positively pledged, first, for the payment and interest 
of the debt, next, for the reimbursement of certain 
instalments of the principal. It is true, the appro- 
priation is qualified by the words, '' so much as may 
be necessary," but the public faith is engaged in ex- 
press terms, that both the funds shall continue to be 
levied and collected, until the whole debt shall be 
discharged; with the single reserve, that the govern- 
ment shall be at liberty to substitute other funds 
of equal amount. It follows that these two items of 
revenue constitute a joint fund for the security of 
the public creditor, co-extensive in duration with the 
existence of any portion of the debt; and it is to be 
inferred that the government, contemplating the pos- 
sibility of a deficiency in one, intended that the other 
should serve as an auxiliary, and that the co-opera- 
tion of the two should effectually guard the credi- 
tor against the fluctuations and casualties to which 
either singly might be exposed. Anticipating, how- 
ever, the possibility that the one or the other, in 
whole or in part, might in practice be found incon- 
venient, a right was reserved to exchange either for 
an adequate substitute. But it is conceived that this 

Jefferson's Message 267 

does not imply the right to exchange the one for the 
other. The effect would be essentially different in 
the two cases : in the first there would always be two 
funds, aggregately of the same or similar force and 
value, to secure the creditor; in the last there would 
be only one: from being double, the security would 
become single. 

This mode of reasoning is the only one upon 
which the rights and the interests of the creditors 
can safely rest; it is plain and intelligible, and 
avoids the dangers of erroneous speculations about 
the separate sufficiency of the respective funds. Ad- 
mitting, however, for the sake of the argument, that 
this is too rigid a construction of the contract, and 
that when one of the two funds should have acquired 
a stable increase, which would render it equal to the 
purpose of the pledge, it might then be made to 
stand in the place of both; yet, surely, neither the 
purity of the public faith, nor the safety of the credi- 
tor, will endure the application of this principle to 
any other, than to an ascertained result. Neither, 
certainly, will tolerate, that merely a reasonable 
ground of confidence shall authorize so material an 
alteration in the essence of the security which pro- 
tects the debt. 

The foregoing reasoning as to the question of 
right, may be further elucidated by a particular pro- 
vision in the act ' which introduced the excise on 
distilled spirits. After a permanent appropriation of 
the proceeds of the tax to the interest of the debt, 
it provides that the surplus, if any there shall be, at 

' Passed March 3, 1791. 

268 Alexander Hamilton 

the end of each year shall be applied to the reduction 
of the principal ; unless the surplus or any part of 
it should be required for public exigencies of the 
United States, and should be so appropriated by 
special "acts of Congress." While at this early 
period of our finances it was not thought expedient 
to appropriate this surplus absolutely to the sinking 
fund, it was contemplated that it should not be 
diverted, except for public exigencies. Gratuitously 
to relinquish it, is therefore contrary to the letter as 
well as to the spirit of the original institution of the 
fund. The like observations, though with less force, 
apply to the provision noticed in another num- 
ber, respecting the surpluses of the revenue generally, 
which, as we have seen, are all appropriated to the 
sinking fund. At the session of Congress imme- 
diately succeeding any year in which such surpluses 
may accrue, they may be specially appropriated or 
reserved by law, for other purposes; but, if this be 
not done, they are then to go of course to the sink- 
ing fund. To appropriate or to reserve, plainly, can 
never mean to relinquish. The true meaning of the 
provision appears, therefore, to be, that though Con- 
gress, under the restriction expressed as to the time, 
may appropriate or reserve these surpluses for other 
objects of the public service, yet if not wanted for 
such other objects, they shall continue to enure to 
the fund for the reduction of the debt, so long as, 
by the laws regulating their duration, they are con- 
tinued to be levied. 

Thus, on whatever side it is viewed, there is a 
temerity and a levity in the proposition which con- 

Jefferson's Message 269 

founds and amazes. If, unhappily, it shall receive 
the sanction of Congress, there will remain nothing 
in principle of our system of public credit — nothing 
on which the confidence of the creditor can safely 
repose. The precedent of a fatal innovation will 
have been established, and its extension to a total 
annihilation of the security would be a step not much 
more violent than that by which the inroad had 
commenced. But it is devoutly to be hoped, that 
the delirium of party spirit will not so far transport 
the legislative representatives of the nation, as to 
induce them to put the seal to a measure, as motive- 
less— as precipitate — as impolitic — as faithless — as 
could have been dictated, even by deliberate hostil- 
ity to the vital principles of our national credit. 
Peculiarly the guardians of the public faith, and of 
the public purse, they surely will not consent to be- 
tra}^ the one, and impoverish the other, through an 
abject and criminal complaisance. 

It is a fact not unknown to himself, that abroad, as 
well as at home, a diffidence has been entertained of 
the opinions and views of the person now at the 
head of our government, with regard to our system 
of public credit. This undoubtedly ought to have 
been with him a strong reason for caution, especially 
at so early a stage of his administration, as to any 
step which might strengthen that diffidence, which 
might be in the least equivocal in its tendency. Nor 
ought it to have been overlooked, that the interest 
of the State and a regard for his own reputation de- 
manded this caution. The appearance of instability 
in the plans of a government, particularly respecting 

270 Alexander Hamilton 

its finances, can never fail to make injurious impres- 
sions. To a government, the character of which has 
not yet been established by time, the example of 
sudden and questionable innovations may be ex- 
pected to be in the highest degree detrimental. Pru- 
dent men everywhere are apt to take the alarm at 
great changes not manifestly beneficial and proper — 
a disposition which has been much increased by the 
terrible events of the present revolutionary era. Yet, 
disregarding these salutary and obvious reflections, 
the President has ventured, in the very infancy of 
his administration, upon the bold and unjustifiable 
step of recommending to the legislative body a 
renunciation of the whole internal revenue of the 
country; though the nation is at this moment 
encumbered with a considerable public debt, and 
though that very revenue is, by the existing laws, an 
established fund for its discharge. 

What, then, are we to think of the ostentatious 
assurance in the Inaugural Speech as to the preserva- 
tion of Public Faith ? Was it given merely to 
amuse with agreeable but deceptive sounds? Is it 
possible that it could have been intended to conceal 
the insidious design of aiming a deadly blow at a 
system which was opposed in its origin, and has 
been calumniated in every stage of its progress ? 

Alas! how deplorable will it be, should it ever 
become proverbial, that a President of the United 
States, like the Weird Sisters in Macbeth, " Keeps his 
word of promise to our ear, but breaks it to our hope! ' ' 

Lucius Crassus. 

Jefferson's Message 271 

NO. V 

December 29, 1801. 

In the rage for change, or under the stimulus of 
a deep-rooted animosity against the former adminis- 
trations, or for the sake of gaining popular favor by 
a profuse display of extraordinary zeal for economy, 
even our judiciary system has not passed unassailed. 
The attack here is not so open as that on the revenue ; 
but when we are told that the States individually 
have ''principal care of our persons, our property, 
and our reputation, constituting the great field of 
human concerns; and that, therefore, we may well 
doubt whether our organization is not too complicated, 
too expensive; whether offices and officers have not 
been multiplied unnecessarily, and sometimes in- 
juriously to the service they were meant to promote"; 
when afterwards it is observed that "the judiciary 
system will, of course, present itself to the contem- 
plation of Congress"; and when it appears that 
pains had been taken to form and communicate a 
numerical list of all the causes decided since the first 
establishment of the courts, in order that Congress 
might be able to judge of the proportion which the 
institution bears to the business; — with all these in- 
dications, it is not to be misunderstood that the 
intention was unequivocally to recommend material 
alterations in the system. 

No bad thermometer of the capacity of our Chief 
Magistrate for government is furnished by the rule 
which he offers for judging of the utility of the Fed- 
eral Courts; namely, the exact number of causes 
which have been by them decided. There is hardly 

272 Alexander Hamilton 

any stronger symptom of a pigmy mind, than a pro- 
pensity to allow greater weight to secondary than to 
primary considerations. 

It ought, at least, to have been adverted to, that if 
this circumstance were a perfect criterion, it is yet 
too early to apply it, especially to the courts re- 
cently erected ; and it might have merited reflection, 
that it would have been prudent to wait for a more 
advanced period of the presidential term, to ascer- 
tain what influence the great change which has lately 
happened in our public functionaries may have on 
the confidence, which in many parts of the Union 
has heretofore been reposed in the State Courts, so 
as to prevent a preference of those of the United 
States. 

But, to enable us duly to appreciate the wisdom 
of the projected innovation, it is necessary to review 
the objects which were designed to be accomplished 
by the arrangement of the judiciary power, as it is 
seen in the Constitution, and to examine the organ- 
ization which has been adopted, to give effect to 
those objects. 

It is well known to all who were acquainted with 
the situation of our public affairs when the Constitu- 
tion was framed, and it is to be inferred from the 
provisions of the instrument itself, that the objects 
contemplated, were: ist. To provide a faithful and 
efficient organ for carrying into execution the laws 
of the United States, which otherwise would be a 
dead letter. 2d. To secure the fair interpretation and 
execution of our treaties with foreign nations. 3d. 
To maintain harmony between the individual States ; 

Jefferson's Message 273 

not only by an independent and impartial mode 
of determining controversies between them, but by 
frustrating the effects of partial laws in any one, 
injurious to the rights of the citizens of another. 
4th. To guard generally against invasions of prop- 
erty and right, by fraudulent and oppressive laws 
of particular States, enforced by their own tribunals. 
5 th. To guard the rights and conciliate the confidence 
of foreigners, by giving them the option of tribunals 
created by, and responsible to the general govern- 
ment; which, having the immediate charge of our 
external relations, including the care of our national 
peace, might be expected to be more tenacious of 
such an administration of justice as would leave to 
the citizens of other countries no real cause of com- 
plaint. 6th. To protect reciprocally the rights and 
inspire mutually the confidence of the citizens of 
different States in their intercourse with each other, 
by enabling them to resort to tribunals so constituted 
as to be essentially free from local bias or partiality. 
7 th. To give the citizens of each State a fair chance 
of impartial justice through the medium of those 
tribunals, in cases in which the titles to property 
might depend on the conflicting grants of different 
States. These were the immensely important ob- 
jects to be attained by the institution of an adequate 
judiciary power in the government of the United 
States. Nor did its institution depend upon mere 
speculative opinion, though, indeed, even that would 
have been sufficient to indicate the expediency of 
the measure; but experience had actually, in a 
variety of ways, demonstrated its necessity. 

VOL. VIII.— 18. 

2 74 Alexander Hamilton 

The treaties of the United States had been in- 
fracted by State laws, put in execution by State 
judicatories. The rights of property had been in- 
vaded by the same means, in numerous instances, as 
well with respect to foreigners as to citizens ; as well 
between citizens of different States as between citi- 
zens of the same State. There were many cases in 
which lands were held or claimed under adverse 
grants of different States, having rival pretensions; 
and in respect to which, the local tribunals, even if 
not fettered by the local laws, could hardly be ex- 
pected to be impartial. In several of the States the 
courts were so constituted as not to afford sufficient 
assurance of a pure, enlightened, and independent 
administration of justice; an evil which in some of 
them still continues. From these different sources 
serious mischiefs have been felt. The interests of 
the United States, in their foreign concerns, had suf- 
fered; their reputation had been tarnished; their 
peace endangered; their mutual harmony had been 
disturbed or menaced; creditors in numerous in- 
stances had been ruined or very much injured ; con- 
fidence in pecuniary transactions had been destroyed, 
and the springs of industry had been proportionably 
relaxed. To these circumstances, as much, perhaps, 
as any other that accompanied a defective social 
organization, are we to attribute that miserable and 
prostrate situation of our affairs which, immediately 
before the establishment of our present national 
Constitution, filled every intelligent lover of his 
country with affliction and mortification. To the 
institution of a competent judiciary, little less than 

Jefferson's Message 275 

to any one provision in that Constitution, is to be 
ascribed the rapid and salutary renovation of our 
affairs, which succeeded. 

The enumeration ' of the component parts of the 
judicial power, in the Constitution, has an evident 
eye to the several objects which have been stated. 
And considering their vast magnitude, no sound 
politician will doubt that the principal question with 
the administration ought to be, how to give the 
greatest efficacy to this essential part of the system ; 
in comparison with which the more or less of ex- 
pense must be a matter of trivial moment. The 
difference of expense between an enlarged and a 
contracted plan may be deemed an atom in the 
great scale of national expenditure. The fulfilment 
of the important ends of this part of our constitu- 
tional plan, though with but a small degree of 
additional energy, facility, or convenience, must 
infinitely overbalance the consideration of such dif- 
ference of expense. 

The number of causes which have been tried in 
these courts, as already intimated, can furnish but a 
very imperfect test by which to decide upon their 
utility or necessity. Their existence alone has a 

^ "Sec. II. The judicial power shall extend to all cases in law and 
eqtiity, arising under this Constitution; the laws of the United States, 
and treaties made, or which shall be made, under their authority; to 
all cases affecting ambassadors, other public ministers, and consuls; 
to all cases of admiralty and maritime jurisdiction; to controversies 
to which the United States shall be a party; to controversies between 
two or more States; between a State and citizens of another State; 
between citizens of different States; between citizens of the same 
State, claiming lands under grants of different States; and between a 
State, or the citizens thereof, and foreign states, citizens, or subjects." 

276 Alexander Hamilton 

powerful and salutary effect. The liberty to use 
them, even where it is not often exercised, inspires 
confidence in the intercourse of business. They are 
viewed as beneficent guardians, whose protection 
may be claimed when necessary. They induce cau- 
tion in the State Courts, and promote in them a more 
attentive, if not a more able administration of jus- 
tice. Though in some districts of the Union the 
Federal Courts are seldom resorted to, in others they 
are used in an extensive degree, particularly as be- 
tween foreigners and citizens, and between citizens 
of different States. 

That their organization throughout the United 
States ought to be uniform will not be denied, and it 
is evident that it ought to be regulated by the situa- 
tion of those parts in which a greater degree of em- 
ployment denotes the courts to be most necessary. 
Of consequence, if the quantity of business were at 
all a guide, the scenes in which there is the greatest 
employment for the Federal Courts ought to furnish 
the rule for computation; it ought not to be sought 
for in the aggregate of business throughout the 
Union. In reference to this point, it is likewise 
material to observe that, from the manner in which 
the Federal Courts were constituted, previous to 
the last arrangement, the organization of the State 
Courts was so much better adapted to expedition, as 
to afford a strong motive for giving them a prefer- 
ence. The establishment of Circuit Courts, as now 
modified, will vary that circumstance, and thus at- 
tract more business; but it is evident that it must 
require a course of years fully to exemplify its opera- 

Jefferson's Message 277 

tion. To attempt, therefore, to draw important 
inferences from the short experience hitherto had, is 
worse than puerile. 

Lucius Crassus. 

NO. VI 

January, 1802. 

' In answer to the observations in the last number, 
it may perhaps be said, that the message meant 
nothing more than to condemn the recent multipli- 
cation of Federal Courts, and to bring them back to 
their original organization: considering that as ade- 
quate to all the purposes of the Constitution; to all 
the ends of justice and policy. 

Towards forming a right judgment on this point, 
it may be of service to those who are not familiar 
with the subject, to state briefly what was the for- 
mer and what is the present establishment. 

The former consisted of one Supreme Court with 
six judges, who twice a year made the tour of the 
United States, distributed into three circuits, for the 
trial of causes arising in the respective districts of 
each circuit; and of fifteen District Courts, each 
having a single judge. The present consists of one 
Supreme Court with the like number of judges, to be 
reduced on the first vacancy happening, to five; of 
six Circuit Courts, having three distinct judges each, 
excepting one circuit, which has only a single circuit 
judge; and of twenty-two District Courts, with a 
judge for each as before. In both plans, the Supreme 
Court is to hold two terms at the seat of government, 
and the Circuit Courts are to be holden twice a year 

278 Alexander Hamilton 

in each district. The material difference in the two, 
as it respects the organs by which they are executed, 
is reducible to the creation of twenty-three additional 
judges; sixteen for the six Circuit Courts, seven for 
the superadded District Courts, and the addition of 
the necessary clerks, marshals, and subordinate offi- 
cers of seven courts. This shows at a single view, 
that the difference of expense, as applied to the 
United States, is of trifling consideration. 

But here an inquiry naturally presents itself : why 
was the latter plan substituted to the former more 
economical one? The solution is easy and satisfac- 
tory. The first was inadequate to its object, and in- 
capable of being carried into execution. The extent 
of the United States is manifestly too large for the 
due attendance of the six judges in the Circuit Courts. 
The immense journeys they were obliged to perform 
kept them from their families for several successive 
months in the year ; this rendered the office a griev- 
ous burden, and had a strong tendency to banish or 
exclude men of the best talents and characters from 
these important stations. It is known to have been 
no light inducement with one Chief -Justice, whose 
health was delicate, to quit that office for another at- 
tended with less bodily fatigue ; and it is well under- 
stood that other important members of the Supreme 
Court were prepared to resign their situations, if 
there had not been some alterations of the kind which 
has taken place. It was also no uncommon circum- 
stance for temporary interruption in the health of 
particular judges, of whom only one was attached to 
a circuit, to occasion a failure in the sessions of the 

Jefferson's Message 279 

courts; to the no small disappointment, vexation, 
and loss of the suitor. At any rate the necessity of 
visiting, within a given time, the numerous parts of 
an extensive circuit, unavoidably rendered the ses- 
sions of each court so short, that, where suits were in 
any degree multiplied or intricate, there was not time 
to get through the business with due deliberation. 
Besides all this, the incessant fatigue^ of the judges 
of the Supreme Court, and their long and frequent 
absences from home, prevented that continued at- 
tention to their studies, which even the most learned 
will confess to be necessary for those intrusted in the 
last resort with questions frequently novel, always 
of magnitude, affecting not only the property of in- 
dividuals, but the rights of foreign nations, and the 
Constitution of the country. 

For these reasons it became necessary either to re- 
nounce the Circuit Courts or to constitute them 
differently: the latter was preferred. The United 
States were divided into six circuits, with a proper 
number of judges to preside over each. No man of 
discernment will pretend that the number of circuits 
is too great. Surely three States forming an area 
equal to that possessed by some of the first powers of 
Europe, must afford a quantity of business sufficient 
to employ three judges on a circuit, twice a year; 
and certainly not less than three will suffice for the 
dispatch of business, whether the number of cases be 
small or great. The inconsiderable addition made 
to the number of the District Courts will hardly 
excite criticism, and does not, therefore, claim a 
particular discussion, nor will their necessity be 

28o Alexander Hamilton 

generally questioned. They are almost continually 
occupied with revenue and admiralty causes, besides 
the great employment collaterally given to the judges 
in the execution of the Bankrupt Act, which proba- 
bly must increase instead of being diminished. 

Perhaps it may be contended that the Circuit 
Courts ought to be abolished altogether, and the 
business for which they are designed left to the State 
Courts, with a right of appeal to the Supreme Courts 
of the United States. Indeed, it is probable that this 
was the true design of the intimation in the message : 
A disposition to magnify the importance of the par- 
ticular States, in derogation from that of the United 
States, is a feature in that communication not to be 
mistaken. But to such a scheme there are insupera- 
ble objections. The right of appeal is by no means 
equivalent to the right of applying, in the first in- 
stance, to a tribunal agreeable to the suitor. The 
desideratum is to have impartial justice, at a moder- 
ate expense, administered ''promptly and without 
delay"; not to be obliged to seek it through the 
long, and tedious, and expensive process of an ap- 
peal. It is true, that in causes of sufficient magni- 
tude an appeal ought to be open ; which includes the 
possibility of going through that process ; but when 
the courts of original jurisdiction are so constituted 
as not only to deserve but to inspire confidence, 
appeals, from the inevitable inconvenience attached 
to them, are exceptions to the general rule of re- 
dress; where the contrary is the situation, they be- 
come the general rule itself. Appeals will then be 
multiplied to a pernicious extent, while the difficul- 

JefFerson*s Message 281 

ties to which they are hable operate in numerous in- 
stances as a preventive of justice, because they fall 
with most weight on the least wealthy suitor. It is 
to be remembered that the cases in which the Fed- 
eral Courts would be preferred, are those where there 
would exist some distrust of the State Courts, and 
this distrust would be a fruitful source of appeals. 
To say that there could be no good cause for distrust, 
and that the danger of it is imaginary, is to be wiser 
than experience, and wiser than the Constitution. 
The first officer of the government, when speaking 
in his official capacity, has no right to attempt to be 
thus wise. His duty exacts of him that he should 
respectfully acquiesce in the spirit and ideas of that 
instrument under which he is appointed. 

The detail would be invidious, perhaps injurious; 
else it would be easy to show that however great the 
confidence to which the tribunals in some of the States 
are entitled, there is just cause for suspicion as to 
those of others ; and that in respect to a still greater 
number, it would be inexpedient to delegate to them 
the care of interests which are specially and properly 
confided to the Government of the United States. 

The plan of using the State Courts as substitutes 
for the Circuit Courts of the Union, is objectionable 
in another view. The citizens of the United States 
have a right to expect from those who administer our 
government, the efficacious enjoyment of those privi- 
leges, as suitors, for which the Constitution has pro- 
vided. To turn them round, from the enjoyment of 
those privileges, in originating their causes, to the 
eventual and dilatory resource of an appeal, is in a 

282 Alexander Hamilton 

great degree to defeat the object contemplated. 
This is a consideration of much real weight, es- 
pecially to the merchants in our commercial States. 

In the investigation of our subject, it is not to be 
forgotten that the right to employ the agency of the 
State Courts, for executing the laws of the Union, is 
liable to question, and has, in fact, been seriously 
questioned. This circumstance renders it the more 
indispensable, that the permanent organization of 
the Federal Judiciary should be adapted to the 
prompt and vigorous execution of those laws. 

The right of Congress to discontinue judges once 
appointed, by the abrogation of the courts for which 
they were appointed, especially as it relates to their 
emoluments, offers matter for a very nice discussion 
but which shall now be only superficially touched. 

On the one hand, it is not easy to maintain that 
Congress cannot abolish courts which, having been 
once instituted, are found in practice to be incon- 
venient and unnecessary. On the other hand, if it 
may be done, so as to include the annihilation of 
existing judges, it is evident that the measure may 
be used to defeat that clause of the Constitution 
which renders the duration and the emoluments 
of the judicial office coextensive with the good be- 
havior of the officer, an object essential to the inde- 
pendence of the judges, the security of the citizen, 
and the preservation of the government. 

As a medium which may reconcile opposite ideas, 
and obviate opposite inconveniences, it would, per- 
haps, be the best and safest practical construction 
to say that, though Congress may abolish the courts, 

JefFerson's Message 283 

yet shall the actual judges retain their character and 
their emoluments, with the authorities of office, so 
far as they can be exercised elsewhere than in the 
courts. For this construction a precedent exists in 
the last arrangement of the Judiciary. Though the 
number of the judges of the Supreme Court is re- 
duced from six to five, yet the actual reduction is 
wisely deferred to the happening of a vacancy. The 
expense of continuing the salaries of the existing 
incumbents cannot prudently be put in competition 
with the advantage of guarding from invasion one 
of the most precious provisions in the Constitution. 
Nor ought it to be without its weight, that this modi- 
fication will best comport with good faith, on the 
part of government, towards those who had been in- 
vited to accept offices, to be held, not by an uncer- 
tain tenure, but during good behavior. 

Weighing maturely all the very important and 
very delicate considerations which appertain to the 
subject, would a wise or prudent statesman hazard 
the consequences of immediately unmaking, at one 
session, courts and judges, which had only been 
called into being at the one preceding? Delectable 
indeed must be the work of disorganization to a 
mind which can thus rashly advance in its prosecu- 
tion!— Infatuated must that people be who do not 
open their eyes to projects so intemperate — so mis- 
chievous!— Who does not see what is the ultimate 
object? Delenda est Carthago — Ill-fated Constitu- 
tion, which Americans had fondly hoped would con- 
tinue for ages, the guardian of public liberty, the 
source of national prosperity! Lucius Crassus. 

284 Alexander Hamilton 

NO. VII 

January 7, 1802. 

The next most exceptionable feature in the mes- 
sage, is the proposal to abolish all restriction on na- 
turalization, arising from a previous residence. In 
this the President is not more at variance with the 
concurrent maxims of all commentators on popular 
governments, than he is with himself. The Notes 
on Virginia are in direct contradiction to the mes- 
sage, and furnish us with strong reasons against the 
policy now recommended. The passage alluded to 
is here presented. Speaking of the population of 
America, Mr. Jefferson says: ''Here I will beg leave 
to propose a doubt. The present desire of America, 
is to produce rapid population, by as great importa- 
tions of foreigners as possible. But is this founded in 
good policy?''' ''Are there no inconveniences to be 
thrown into the scale, against the advantage ex- 
pected from a multiplication of numbers, by the im- 
portation of foreigners? It is for the happiness of 
those united in society, to harmonize as much as 
possible, in matters which they must of necessity 
transact together. Civil government being the sole 
object of forming societies, its administration must 
be conducted by common consent. Every species 
of government has its specific principles. Ours, per- 
haps, are more peculiar than those of any other in 
the universe. It is a composition of the freest prin- 
ciples of the English Constitution, with others, de- 
rived from natural right and reason. To these, 
nothing can be more opposed than the maxims of 
absolute monarchies. Yet from such, we are to 

Jefferson*s Message 285 

expect the greatest number of emigrants. They will 
bring with them the principles of the governments they 
leave, imbibed in their early youth; or if able to throw 
them off, it will be in exchange for an unbounded 
licentiousness, passing as is usual, from one extreme 
to another. It would be a miracle were they to stop 
precisely at the point of temperate liberty. Their prin- 
ciples with their language, they will transmit to their 
children. In proportion to their numbers, they will 
share with us in the legislation. They will infuse into 
it their spirit, warp and bias its direction, and render 
it a heterogeneous, incoherent, distracted mass. I may 
appeal to experience, during the present contest, for 
a verification of these conjectures ; but if they be not 
certain in event, are they not possible, are they not 
probable ? Is it not safer to wait with patience for the 
attainment of any degree of population desired or ex- 
pected? May not our government be more homo- 
geneous, more peaceable, more durable? Suppose 
twenty millions of republican Americans, thrown all 
of a sudden into France, what would be the condi- 
tion of that kingdom? If it would be more turbu- 
lent, less happy, less strong, we may believe that the 
addition of half a million of foreigners, to our present 
numbers, would produce a similar effect here. " Thus 
wrote Mr. Jefferson in 1781. — Behold the reverse of 
the medal. The message of the President contains 
the following sentiments: ''A denial of citizenship 
under a residence of fourteen years, is a denial to a 
great proportion of those who ask it, and controls a 
policy pursued from their first settlement, by many 
of these States, and still believed of consequence to 

286 Alexander Hamilton 

their prosperity. And shall we refuse to the unhappy 
fugitives from distress, that hospitality which the 
savages of the wilderness extended to our fathers ar- 
riving in this land? Shall oppressed humanity find 
no asylum on this globe? Might not the general 
character and capabilities of a citizen, be safely com- 
municated to every one manifesting a bona-fide pur- 
pose of embarking his life and fortune permanently 
with us?" 

But if gratitude can be allowed to form an excuse 
for inconsistency in a public character — in the man 
of the people — a strong plea of this sort may be urged 
in behalf of our President. It is certain, that had the 
late election been decided entirely by native citizens, 
had foreign aiixiliaries been rejected on both sides, 
the man who ostentatiously vaunts that the doors of 
public honor and confidence have been burst open to 
him, would not now have been at the head of the 
American nation. Such a proof, then, of virtuous 
discernment in the oppressed fugitives had an im- 
perious claim on him to a grateful return, and, with- 
out supposing any very uncommon share of self-love, 
would naturally be a strong reason for a revolution in 
his opinions. 

The pathetic and plaintive exclamations by which 
the sentiment is enforced might be liable to much 
criticism, if we are to consider it in any other light 
than as a flourish of rhetoric. It might be asked in 
return. Does the right to asylum or hospitality carry 
with it the right to suffrage and sovereignty? And 
what, indeed, was the courteous reception which was 
given to our forefathers by the savages of the wild- 

Jefferson's Message 287 

erness? When did these humane and philanthropic 
savages exercise the poHcy of incorporating strangers 
among themselves on their first arrival in the coun- 
try ? When did they admit them into their huts, to 
make part of their families? and when did they dis- 
tinguish them by making them their sachems ? Our 
histories and traditions have been more than apoc- 
ryphal, if any thing like this kind and gentle treat- 
ment was really lavished by the much-belied savages 
upon our thankless forefathers. But the remark ob- 
trudes itself. Had it all been true, prudence re- 
quires us to trace the history further and ask what 
has become of the nations of savages who exercised 
this policy, and who now occupies the territory which 
they then inhabited? Perhaps a lesson is here 
taught which ought not to be despised. 

But we may venture to ask, What does the Presi- 
dent really mean by insinuating that we treat aliens 
coming to this country with inhospitality ? Do we 
not permit them quietly to land on our shores? Do 
we not protect them, equally with our own citizens, 
in their persons and reputation, in the acquisition 
and enjoyment of property? Are not our courts of 
justice open for them to seek redress of injuries ? and 
are they not permitted peaceably to return to their 
own country whenever they please, and to carry 
with themx all their effects ? What, then, means this 
worse than idle declamation? ,^ 

The impolicy of admitting foreigners to an imme- 
diate and unreserved participation in the right of 
suffrage, or in the sovereignty of a republic, is as 
much a received axiom as any thing in the science of 

288 Alexander Hamilton 

politics, and is verified by the experience of all ages. 
Among other instances, it is known that hardly any 
thing contributed more to the downfall of Rome 
than her precipitate communication of the privileges 
of citizenship to the inhabitants of Italy at large. 
And how terribly was Syracuse scourged by per- 
petual seditions, when, after the overthrow of the 
tyrants, a great number of foreigners were suddenly 
admitted to the rights of citizenship ? Not only does 
ancient, but modern, and even domestic, story 
furnish evidence of what may be expected from the 
dispositions of foreigners when they get too early a 
footing in a country. Who wields the sceptre of 
France, and has erected a despotism on the ruins of 
her former government ? A foreigner. Who rules the 
councils of our own ill-fated, unhappy country? and 
who stimulates persecution on the heads of its citi- 
zens for daring to maintain an opinion, and for dar- 
ing to exercise the rights of stiff rage ? A foreigner! ' 
Where, then, is the virtuous pride that once dis- 
tinguished Americans? where the indignant spirit, 
which, in defence of principle, hazarded a revolution 
to attain that independence now insidiously at- 
tacked? Lucius Crassus. 

NO. VIII 

January 12, 1802. 

Resuming the subject of our last paper, we pro- 
ceed to trace still further the consequences that must 

' This would seem to refer to Mr. Gallatin, Secretary of the Treasury, 
and yet the latter part of the question is so unlike Mr. Gallatin that 
we are almost forced to suppose that it is a fling at some one else who 
cannot be now identified. 

JefFerson*s Message 289 

result from a too unqualified admission of foreigners 
to an equal participation in our civil and political 
rights. 

The safety of a republic depends essentially on the 
energy of a common national sentiment; on a uni- 
formity of principles and habits; on the exemption 
of the citizens from foreign bias, and prejudice ; and 
on that love of country which will almost invariably 
be found to be closely connected with birth, educa- 
tion, and family. 

The opinion advanced in the Notes on Virginia is 
undoubtedly correct, that foreigners will generally 
be apt to bring with them attachments to the per- 
sons they have left behind; to the country of their 
nativity, and to its particular customs and manners. 
They will also entertain opinions on government con- 
genial with those under which they have lived; or, 
if they should be led hither from a preference to ours, 
how extremely unlikely is it that they will bring 
with them that temperate love of liberty, so essential 
to real republicanism? There may, as to particular 
individuals, and at particular times, be occasional ex- 
ceptions to these remarks, yet such is the general 
rule. The influx of foreigners must, therefore, tend 
to produce a heterogeneous compound; to change 
and corrupt the national spirit; to complicate 
and confound public opinion; to introduce foreign 
propensities. In the composition of society, the 
harmony of the ingredients is all-important, and 
whatever tends to a discordant intermixture must 
have an injurious tendency. 

The United States have already felt the evils of 

VOL, VIII,— ig. 

290 Alexander Hamilton 

incorporating a large number of foreigners into their 
national mass; by promoting in different classes 
different predilections in favor of particular foreign 
nations, and antipathies against others, it has served 
very much to divide the community and to distract 
our councils. It has been often likely to compromit 
the interests of our own country in favor of another. 
The permanent effect of such a policy will be, that in 
times of great public danger there will be always a 
numerous body of men, of whom there may be just 
grounds of distrust ; the suspicion alone will weaken 
the strength of the nation, but their force may be 
actually employed in assisting an invader. 

In the infancy of the country, with a boundless 
waste to people, it was politic to give a facility to 
naturalization; but our situation is now changed. 
It appears from the last census that we have in- 
creased about one third in ten years ; after allowing 
for what we have gained from abroad, it will be quite 
apparent that the natural progress of our own popu- 
lation is sufficiently rapid for strength, security, and 
settlement. By what has been said, it is not meant 
to contend for a total prohibition of the right of 
citizenship to strangers, nor even for the very long 
residence which is now a prerequisite to naturaliza- 
tion, and which of itself goes far towards a denial 
of that privilege. The present law was merely a 
temporary measure adopted under peculiar circum- 
stances, and perhaps demands revision. But there 
is a wide difference between closing the door alto- 
gether and throwing it entirely open; between a 
postponement of fourteen years, and an immediate 

Jefferson's Message 291 

admission to all the rights of citizenship. Some 
reasonable term ought to be allowed to enable aliens 
to get rid of foreign and acquire American attach- 
ments; to learn the principles and imbibe the spirit 
of our government ; and to admit of a probability at 
least, of their feeling a real interest in our affairs. A 
residence of not less than five years ought to be re- 
quired. 

If the rights of naturalization may be communi- 
cated by parts, and it is not perceived why they may 
not, those peculiar to the conducting of business and 
the acquisition of property, might with propriety be 
at once conferred, upon receiving proof, by certain 
prescribed solemnities, of the intention of the candi- 
dates to become citizens; postponing all political 
privileges to the ultimate term. To admit foreigners 
indiscriminately to the rights of citizens, the moment 
they put foot in our country, as recommended in the 
message, would be nothing less than to admit the 
Grecian horse into the citadel of our liberty and 

sovereignty. 

Lucius Crassus. 

NO. IX 

January i8, 1802. 

The leading points of the message have been 
sufficiently canvassed, and it is believed to have 
been fully demonstrated that this communication is 
chargeable with all the faults which were imputed 
to it on the outset of the examination. We have 
shown that it has made, or attempted to make, 
prodigal sacrifices of constitutional energy, of sound 

292 Alexander Hamilton 

principle, and of public interest. In the doctrine re- 
specting war, there is a senseless abandonment of 
the just and necessary authority of the executive 
department, in a point material to our national 
safety. In the proposal to relinquish the internal 
revenue, there is an attempt to establish a precedent 
ruinous to our public credit; calculated to prolong 
the burden of the debt, and to enfeeble the government, 
by depriving it of resources of great importance to its 
respectability, to the accomplishment of its most 
salutary plans, to the power of being useful. In the 
attack upon the judiciary establishment, there is a 
plain effort to impair that organ of the government: 
one on which its efficiency and success absolutely 
depend. In the recommendation to admit indis- 
criminately foreign emigrants to the privileges of 
American citizens, on their first entrance into our 
country, there is an attempt to break down every 
pale which has been erected for the preservation of 
a national spirit and a national character, and to let 
in the most powerful means of perverting and cor- 
rupting both the one and the other. 

This is more than the moderate opponents of Mr. 
Jefferson's elevation ever feared from his adminis- 
tration; much more than the most wrong-headed of 
his own sect dared to hope ; infinitely more than any 
one who had read the fair professions in his inaugural 
speech could have suspected. Reflecting men must 
be dismayed at the prospect before us. If such 
rapid strides have been hazarded in the very gristle 
of his administration, what may be expected when 
it shall have arrived at manhood? In vain was the 

Jefferson's Message 293 

collected wisdom of America convened at Philadel- 
phia ; in vain were the anxious labors of a Washing- 
ton bestowed. Their works are regarded as nothing 
better than empty bubbles, destined to be blown 
away by the mere breath of a disciple of Turgot; of 
a pupil of Condorcet. 

Though the most prominent features of the mes- 
sage have been portrayed, and their deformity ex- 
hibited in true colors, there remain many less 
important traits not yet touched, which, however, 
will materially assist us in determining its true char- 
acter. To particularize them with minuteness would 
employ more time and labor than the object de- 
serves; yet to pass them by, wholly without re- 
mark, would be to forego valuable materials for 
illustrating the true nature of the performance under 
examination. 

There remains to be cursorily noticed, a disposi- 
tion in our Chief Magistrate, far more partial to the 
State governments, than to our National Govern- 
ment; to pull down rather than to build up our 
federal edifice — to vilify the past administrations of 
the latter — to court for himself popular favor by arti- 
fices not to be approved, either for their dignity, 
their candor, or their patriotism. 

Why are we emphatically and fastidiously told, 
that " the States individually have the principal care 
of our persons, our property and our reputation, con- 
stituting the great field of human concerns''? Was it 
to render the State governments more dear to us, 
more the objects of affectionate solicitude ? Nothing 
surely was necessary on this head ; they are already 

294 Alexander Hamilton 

the favorites of the people, and if they do not forfeit 
the advantage by a most gross abuse of trust, must, 
by the very nature of the objects confided to them, 
continue always to be so. Was it to prevent too 
large a portion of affection being bestowed on the 
General Government? No pains on this score were 
requisite ; not only for the reason just assigned, but 
for the further reason that the more peculiar objects 
of this government, though no less essential to our 
prosperity than those of the State governments, 
oblige it often to act upon the community in a man- 
ner more likely to produce aversion than fondness. 
Accordingly every day furnishes proof, that it is not 
the spoiled child of the many. On this point the high 
example of the President himself is pregnant with 
instruction. Was it to indicate the supreme im- 
portance of the State governments over that of the 
United States? This was as little useful as it was 
correct. Considering the vast variety of humors, 
prepossessions and localities which, in the much 
diversified composition of these States, militate 
against the weight and authority of the General 
Government, if union under that government is ne- 
cessary, it can answer no valuable purpose to de- 
preciate its importance in the eyes of the people. It 
is not correct ; because to the care of the Federal Gov- 
ernment are confided directly, those great, general 
interests on which all particular interests materially 
depend: our safety in respect to foreign nations; 
our tranquillity in respect to each other; the foreign 
and mutual commerce of the States; the establish- 
ment and regulation of the money of the country; 

Jefferson's Message 295 

the management of our national finances ; indirectly, 
the security of liberty by the guaranty of a repub- 
lican form of government to each State ; the security 
of property by interdicting any State from emitting 
paper money or from passing laws impairing the 
obligation of contracts (from both of which causes 
the rights of property had experienced serious 
injury) ; the prosperity of agriculture and manufac- 
tures, as intimately connected with that of com- 
merce, and as depending in a variety of ways upon 
the agency of the General Government. In fine, 
it is the province of the General Government to 
manage the greatest number of those concerns in 
which the provident activity and exertion of govern- 
ment are of most importance to the people ; and we 
have only to compare the state of our country ante- 
cedent to the establishment of the Federal Constitu- 
tion, with what it has been since, to be convinced 
that the most operative causes of public prosperity 
depend upon that Constitution. It is not meant, by 
what has been said, to insinuate that the State gov- 
ernments are not extremely useful in their proper 
spheres; but the object is to guard against the mis- 
chiefs of exaggerating their importance, in deroga- 
tion from that of the general right. Every attempt 
to do this, is, remotely, a stab at the union of these 
States; a blow to our collective existence as one 
people — and to all the blessings which are inter- 
woven with that sacred fraternity. 

If it be true, as insinuated, that " our organization 
is too complicated — too expensive," let it be simpli- 
fied; let this, however, be done in such a manner 

296 Alexander Hamilton 

as not to mutilate, weaken, and eventually destroy, 
our present system, but to increase the energy and 
insure the duration of our National Government — 
THE Rock of our Political Salvation. 

In this insinuation, and in the suggestion that 
'' offices and officers have been unnecessarily multi- 
plied"; in the intimation that appropriations have 
not been sufficiently specific, and that the system of 
accountability to a single department has been dis- 
turbed ; in this, and in other things too minute to be 
particularized, we discover new proofs of the dis- 
position of the present executive, unjustly and in- 
decorously to arraign his predecessors. 

As far as the message undertakes to specify any 
instance of the improper complexity of our organiza- 
tion, namely, in the instance of the judiciary estab- 
lishment, the late administration has been already 
vindicated. 

As to the ''undue multiplication of offices and 
officers," it is substantially a misrepresentation. It 
would be nothing less than a miracle if, in a small 
number of instances, it had not happened that par- 
ticular offices and officers might have been dispensed 
with. For, in the early essays of a new government 
in making the various establishments relative to the 
affairs of a nation, some mistakes in this respect will 
arise, notwithstanding the greatest caution. It must 
happen to every government that, in the hurry of 
a new plan, some agents will occasionally be em- 
ployed who may not be absolutely necessary; and 
this, where there is every inclination to economy. 
Similar things may have happened under our past 

Jefferson's Message 297 

administration, but any competent judge who will 
take the trouble to examine, will be convinced that 
there is no just cause for blame in this particular. 

The President has not pointed out the cases to 
which he applies the charge; but he has communi- 
cated information of some retrenchments which he 
has made, and probably intends that from these the 
truth of the accusation shall be inferred. 

Three instances are particularly presented; these 
shall be briefly examined; it will be seen that they 
do not justify the imputation. They respect certain 
ministers at foreign courts; some navy agents at 
particular ports ; and some inspectors of the revenue 
in particular States. 

As to the first, it is believed to be a pretty just 
idea that we ought not greatly to multiply diplo- 
matic agencies. Three permanent ones may, per- 
haps, be found sufficient in the future progress of our 
affairs: for France, Spain, and England. The ex- 
pediency of having three is recognized by the con- 
duct of our present Chief Magistrate. But others 
must be employed, and during particular seasons it 
may be wise to do it for a considerable length of 
time. Indeed, there is strong ground for an opinion 
entertained by very sensible men, that there ought 
to be a permanent minister at every court with 
which we have extensive commercial relations. 

Two other ministers were employed by both the 
former administrations, one with Portugal, the other 
with Holland; and it is asserted without fear of de- 
nial, that when this was done by the first president, 
it was with the approbation of Mr. Jefferson himself. 

298 Alexander Hamilton 

One other minister was employed by the late Presi- 
dent at the Court of Berlin. 

A commercial treaty with Portugal is admitted on 
all hands to be particularly desirable, as very in- 
teresting branches of our commerce are carried on 
in the Portuguese dominions. We are still without 
any such treaty; to send to that court a diplomatic 
agent to endeavor to effect one, was a measure of 
evident propriety ; to recall him before a treaty had 
been effected, must be of questionable expediency. 
The views and circumstances of nations change ; and 
an opportunity may occur, at som^e particular con- 
juncture, for effecting what was not before possible, 
which may be lost by the want of a fit agent on the 
spot to embrace it. But admitting the experiment 
has now been sufficiently tried to justify its abandon- 
ment, still it does not follow that it was unwise to 
have continued it as long as it was ; and as this must 
at least rest in opinion, the continuance, if upon an 
erroneous calculation in this particular, is no proof 
of a ''disposition to multiply offices or officers." 
And those who consider the nature and extent of 
our commercial relations with Portugal, will not 
cease to think it problematical, whether the ex- 
pense of a diplomatic agent, especially in a situation 
in which nothing has been defined by treaty, ought 
to stand in competition with the benefits which may 
result from the presence of a minister at the court 
of that kingdom. This consideration alone is suf- 
ficient to repel the charge. 

Lucius Crassus. 

Jefferson's Message 299 

NO. X 

January 25, 1802. 

As to Holland — being the second power which 
acknowledged our independence, and made a treaty 
with us, a step which involved her in war with Great 
Britain, it was deemed proper to treat her with a 
marked respect. Besides this, from the time of our 
revolution to the present, we have had large money 
concerns with her people. A trusty and skilful pub- 
lic agent was for a long time necessary to superin- 
tend those concerns; and by the annexation of a 
diplomatic character, a double purpose was an- 
swered. The honorable nature of the station en- 
abled the government to find a competent agent at 
a less expense than would have been requisite to 
procure one merely for the money object. It is not 
meant to deny that the great change which has 
lately happened in the affairs of that country, mak- 
ing it in effect a dependency on France, rendered a 
removal of the minister proper; but it does not fol- 
low that it ought to have been done sooner. It is 
also known that Mr. Murray, the late envoy, has 
been for a considerable time past employed in our 
negotiations with France, which probably was a 
collateral reason for not recalling him sooner. In 
respect to one, if not to both these agents, it may be 
observed that a time of war was not the most eli- 
gible moment for the removal of a minister. 

As to Berlin, the inducements for keeping a minis- 
ter there, have never been fully explained. It is 
only known that our commercial treaty with Prussia 
had expired, and that a renewal has been effected by 

300 Alexander Hamilton 

the envoy sent thither; but influential as was the 
Court of Prussia in the affairs of Europe, during the 
late dreadful storm, it may have been conceived that 
a cultivation of the good-will of the Prussian mon- 
arch was not a matter of indifference to the peace 
and security of this country. If this was the object 
of the mission, though there may have been too far- 
fetched a policy in the case, it offers a defence of the 
measure, which exculpates the executive, at least 
from the charge of a desire to multiply officers im- 
providently. 

On the most unfavorable supposition, then, here 
was one diplomatic agent too many, and two others 
were continued longer than was absolutely necessary. 
This surely is not of magnitude sufficient to consti- 
tute a serious charge, where malevolence does not 
inspire a spirit of accusation. In considering this 
question, it ought to be remembered that it is the 
prevailing policy of governments to keep diplomatic 
agents at all courts where they have important 
relations. 

As to the navy agents, it is sufficient to say that 
they were temporary persons who grew up out of 
our rupture with France; who, when they were 
appointed were useful to accelerate naval prepara- 
tions at as many points as could be advantageously 
occupied, and that it was only proper to discontinue 
them when an accommodation had been effected, 
and after they had had time enough to wind up the 
affairs of their agency. This was not the case pre- 
vious to Mr. Jefferson's administration. Accord- 
ingly, in some early instances of removal, it was only 

Jefferson's Message 301 

done to substitute members of his own sect. And 
though several of the navy agents were afterwards 
discontinued, spleen itself cannot imagine any color 
of blame, either as to the appointment or continu- 
ance of them. 

As to the inspectors of the revenue, the case in 
brief stands thus: When the excise on distilled 
spirits was established, three different descriptions 
of officers were instituted to carry it into effect — 
supervisors, inspectors, and collectors, distributed to 
districts, surveys, and divisions, one to each. A dis- 
trict comprehending an entire State ; a survey, some 
large portions of it or a nimiber of counties ; a divi- 
sion, for the most part a single county. In some of 
the small States there were no distinct officers for 
the surveys — the duties of inspectors being annexed 
to those of supervisor; in larger ones there were 
inspectors; more or less numerous, according to 
their extent. As other internal revenues were estab- 
lished, they were put under the management of the 
same officers. The bare statement of the fact shows 
the necessity of these officers. The revenues of no 
government were perhaps ever collected under a 
more simple organization, or through a smaller num- 
ber of channels. It is not alleged that the first and 
last classes of officers were unnecessary. It is only 
to the middle class that any specious objection can 
be made. Let us conjecture the reasons for em- 
ploying them. 

In some of the States great opposition was 
expected, and was actually experienced. In such 
States especially, it was evidently useful to have the 

302 Alexander Hamilton 

exertions of some men of weight and character 
in spheres of moderate extent, to reconcile the dis- 
contented; to arrange the details of business, and to 
give energy to the measures for collection. In others 
similar officers were probably useful in the early 
stages, for the purpose of establishing the details 
simply. The subdivision was in all cases favorable 
to an active and vigilant superintendence. Nor does 
it require extraordinary penetration to discern that 
the policy was wise at the time when the measure 
was adopted. It is possible that upon the complete 
establishment of the plan, when all opposition had 
been vanquished, and when the collection had 
become an affair of mere routine, that this inter- 
mediate class may have ceased to be essential. But 
till this had become perfectly evident, it would have 
been premature to alter the original plan. Though 
it be true that some years have elapsed since the 
excise law was passed, it is not very long since it 
has been in full and uninturrupted operation. Other 
laws introducing other branches of internal revenue 
have been subsequently passed from time to time, 
and the agency of the same officers has probably 
been found useful on their first introduction and 
execution. Hence it is easily accounted for, that the 
inspectors were not before discontinued, if indeed 
experience has shown that they are not still neces- 
sary, which is itself problematical. Nothing is more 
easy than to reduce the number of agents employed 
in any business, and yet for the business to go on 
with the reduced number. But before the reduction 
is applauded, it ought to be ascertained that the 

Jefferson's Message 303 

business is as well done as it was before. There is a 
wide difference between merely getting along with 
business and doing it well and effectually. 

These observations sufficiently show, that in the 
instances which have been cited there is no evidence 
of a disposition, in the preceding administrations, 
improperly to multiply offices and officers. Acting 
under different circumstances, they conducted as 
those circumstances dictated, and in all probability 
in a manner the best adapted to the advancement of 
the public service. A change of circumstances may, 
in some instances, have rendered a continuance of 
some of the agents thus employed unnecessary ; and 
the present Chief Magistrate may even be right in 
discontinuing them; but it is not therefore right 
to attempt to derive from this any plea of peculiar 
merit with the people ; and it is very far from right 
to make it a topic of slander on predecessors. Per- 
haps, however, this is too rigorous a construction, 
and that nothing more was intended than to set off 
to the best advantage the petty services of petty 
talents. 

If this was the true aim, it is to be regretted that 
it was not so managed as to avoid the appearance 
of a design to depreciate in the public estimation 
those who went before. Had this delicacy been 
observed, the attempt would have attracted neither 
notice nor comment. At most it would have been 
said, 

" Commas and points he sets exactly right, 
And 't were a sin to rob him of his mite." 

Lucius Crassus. 

304 Alexander Hamilton 

NO. XI 

February 3, 1802. 

The message observes, ''that in our care of the 
public contributions intrusted to our direction, it 
would be prudent to multiply barriers against the 
dissipation of public money by appropriating spe- 
cific sums to every specific purpose, susceptible of 
definition; by disallowing all applications of money 
varying from the appropriation in object or tran- 
scending it in amount, by reducing the undefined 
field of contingencies, and thereby circumscribing 
discretionary powers over money, and by bringing 
back to a single department all accountabilities for 
money where the examination may be prompt, effi- 
cacious, and uniform." In this recommendation, we 
can be at no loss to discover additional proof of a 
deliberate design in the present Chief Magistrate to 
arraign the former administrations. All these sug- 
gestions imply, on their part, either a neglect of, or 
a defective attention to, the objects recommended. 
Some of them go further, and insinuate that there | 
had been a departure from correct plans which had 
before been adopted. The censure intended to be 
conveyed is as unjust as the conceptions which have 
dictated it are crude and chimerical. In all matters 
of this nature, the question turns upon the proper 
boundaries of the precautions to be observed; how 
far they ought to go ; where they should stop ; how 
much is necessary for security and order ; what quali- 
fications of general rules are to be admitted to adapt 
them to practice and to attain the ends of the public 
service. It is certainly possible to do too much as 

Jefferson's Message 305 

well as too little; to embarrass, if not defeat the end 
intended, by attempting more than is practicable; 
or to overbalance the good by evils accruing from an 
excess of regulation. Men of business know this to 
be the case in the ordinary affairs of life. How 
much more must it be so in the extensive and com- 
plicated concerns of an empire? To reach and not 
to pass the salutary medium is the province of sound 
judgment. To miss the point will ever be the lot 
of those, who, enveloped all their lives in the midst 
of theory, are constantly seeking for an ideal perfec- 
tion, which never was and never will be attainable 
in reality. It is about this medium — not about 
general principles — that those in power in our gov- 
ernment have differed ; and to experience, not to the 
malevolent insinuations of rivals, must be the appeal, 
whether the one or the other description of persons 
has judged most accurately. Yet, discerning men 
may form no imperfect opinion of the merits of the 
controversy between them by even a cursory view of 
the distinctions on which it has turned. 

Nothing, for instance, is more just or proper than 
the position that the Legislature ought to appropriate 
specific sums, for specific purposes; but nothing is 
more wild or of more inconvenient tendency, than to 
attempt to appropriate ''a specific sum for each 
specific purpose, susceptible of definition,'' as the 
message preposterously recommends. Thus (to take 
a familiar example) in providing for the transporta- 
tion of an army, oats and hay for the subsistence of 
horses, are each susceptible of a definition, and an 
estimate, and a precise sum may be appropriated 

VOL. VIII. — ao. 

3o6 Alexander Hamilton 

for each separately; yet in the operations of an 
army, it will often happen that more than a sufficient 
quantity of the one article may be obtained, and not 
a sufficient quantity of the other. If the appropria- 
tions be distinct, and the officer who is to make the 
provision be not at liberty to divert the fund from 
one of these objects to the other (as the doctrine of 
the message implies), the horses of the army may in 
such a case starve and its movements be arrested — 
in some situations, even the army itself may likewise 
be starved, by a failure of the means of transportation. 
If it be said that the inconvenience here suggested 
may be avoided, by making the appropriations for 
forage generally, and not for the items which com- 
pose it separately — the answer is, first, that this, by 
uniting and blending different things, susceptible 
each of a precise definition, is an abandonment of 
the principle of the message ; secondly, that it would 
only be a partial cure for the mischiefs incident to 
that rigorous principle. It might happen that the 
badness of roads would injure the wagons of the 
army more than was anticipated, and so much more, 
as to exhaust the specific fund appropriated for their 
repairs; it might also have happened, from various 
causes, that at an earlier period of the campaign, the 
consumption of forage had been less than was calcu- 
lated, so that there would be a surplus of the fund 
destined for this object; if, in such a case, the public 
agent could not transfer that surplus to the repairs 
of the wagons, the motions of the army might, in this 
way, be suspended, and in the event, famine and 
ruin produced. 

Jefferson's Message 307 

This analysis might be pursued, so as to prove 
that similar evils are inseparable from a much more 
qualified application of the principle in the message, 
and to demonstrate that nothing more can safely or 
reasonably be attempted, than to distribute the pub- 
lic expenses, into a certain number of convenient 
subdivisions or departments; to require from the 
proper officers, estimates of the items, which are to 
compose each head of expense ; and after examining 
these with due care, to adapt the appropriations to 
the respective aggregates, — applying a specific sum 
to the amount of each great subdivision : the pay of 
the army; military stores; quartermaster stores, etc., 
etc. This, with even more detail than could be well 
executed, has been uniformly done under the past 
administrations of the present government from the 
very beginning of its proceedings. More will, in the 
experiment, be found impracticable and injurious; 
especially in seasons and situations when the public 
service demands activity and exertion. 

In like manner, the former practice of the govern- 
ment has corresponded with the rule, taken in its 
true and just sense, of '' disallowing all applications 
of money, varying fiom the appropriation in object, 
or transcending it in amount. " It is confidently be- 
lieved, that whoever shall allege or insinuate to the 
contrary, may be challenged to point out the in- 
stance in which money has been issued from the 
Treasury for any purpose which was not sanctioned 
by a regular appropriation, or which exceeded the 
appropriated amount; or where there was an ex- 
penditure of money allowed, that was not strictly 

3o8 Alexander Hamilton 

within the limits of such an appropriation; except, 
indeed, upon the impracticable idea of minutely 
separating, and distinguishing the items, which form 
the aggregate of some general head of expenditure. 
It is likewise material to have it well understood 
that, generally speaking, the distinction between 
the appropriations for different objects can only be 
strictly observed at the Treasury itself, which can 
easily take care that more money shall not go out 
for any purpose than is authorized by law; and can 
see that this money is fairly expended by the proper 
officer in conformity with the general spirit of the 
appropriation prescribed by the law. But it is in 
most cases impossible for the officer, charged with a 
particular branch of the public service, to separate 
nicely in the details of expenditure, the different 
funds which may have been placed in his hands. 
Thus (still drawing our examples from the military 
department, where the danger of misapplication is 
always the greatest) if several sums be placed in the 
hands of the Quartermaster-General, for different ob- 
jects, he must, of necessity, distribute a large pro- 
portion of them among his principal deputies, and 
these again among subordinate agents. Unless this 
distribution be pursued through the remotest rami- 
fications, down to the moment of final expenditure, 
it is evident that it must fail throughout; and it is 
no less evident that it cannot be so far pursued. But 
to this, the accountantship only would be an in- 
superable obstacle; it would require in every, the 
most inferior, agent, a profound knowledge of ac- 
counts, and would impose, both on principals and 

Jefferson's Message 309 

subordinates, the duty of keeping such a multipHcity 
of them, as, if even practicable, would exhaust the 
fund issued for the public service, in mere clerkship. 
Another most mischievous consequence would ensue. 
The exigencies of the public service are often so vari- 
able, that a public agent would frequently find him- 
self full-handed for one purpose, empty-handed for 
another; and if forbidden to make a transfer, not 
only the service would suffer, but an opportunity, 
with very strong temptation, would be given, to 
traffic with the public money for private gain ; while 
the business of the government would be stagnated 
by the injudicious and absurd impediments of an 
over-driven caution. Happily, it is not very ma- 
terial that the principle of distinct appropriations for 
separate objects, should be carried through all the 
details. The essential ends of it are answered, if it 
be strictly pursued, in the issuing of money from the 
Treasury, and if this department be careful that the 
principal lines of discrimination are not transgressed. 
The theory of the message plainly contemplates 
that in no case shall the actual money appertaining 
to one fund be expended for the purpose of another, 
though each fund may be sufficient for its object, 
and though there may be an appropriation for each 
object. This is another excess of theory, which, 
with a full treasury, would often disable the govern- 
ment from fulfilling its engagements, and from carry- 
ing on the public business. To execute this plan 
consistently with the exigencies of national expendi- 
ture would probably require, in ordinary, a triplica- 
tion of the revenues, or a capital necessary for the 

3IO Alexander Hamilton 

whole amount of that expenditure, and would very 
often lock up from circulation large sums which 
might be of great importance to the activity of trade 
and industry. Such are the endless blessings to be 
expected from the notable schemes of a philosophic 
projector! Strict to a fault where relaxation is neces- 
sary; lax to a vice where strictness is essential! 

As to " reducing the undefined field of contingen- 
cies, and circumscribing discretionary powers over 
money," observations similar to those which have 
been already made occur. The term reducing im- 
plies that the thing must exist in a degree; and in- 
deed it is manifest that all the minute casualties of 
expenditure, especially in the naval and military 
departments, cannot be foreseen and defined. The 
question then must be, Have not the limits been 
sufficiently narrow for the situation of the govern- 
ment in the scenes through which it has passed, com- 
prehending for a great part of the time Indian wars 
and foreign hostilities? Certainly, if veiwed on a 
proportionable scale, the extent appears to have 
been as moderate as could have been desired, and no 
blame can justly attach to the administration on 
this account. 

As to ''bringing hack to a single department all 
accountabilities for money," there never has been a 
deviation from that system. The department of the 
Treasury has uniformly preserved a vigilant superin- 
tendence over all accountabilities for public money. 
A particular accountant, indeed, has been appointed 
in the War and Navy departments, but he has been 
subordinate to the Treasury Department, which has 

Jefferson's Message 311 

prescribed regulations for his conduct, and has con- 
stantly revised his proceedings. It is true that by 
his connection with the particular department for 
which he is accountant, there are cases in which he 
is to be guided by the directions of the head of that 
department; but though these directions, if not 
plainly contrary to the rules prescribed by the Treas- 
ury, would exempt him from responsibility, the 
directions themselves pass under the review of the 
Treasury, as a check upon the head of the depart- 
ment to which he is attached, and in case of abuse 
they would serve to establish a responsibility of the 
principal. To say that this interferes with a prompt 
examination of accounts, is to affirm that a division 
of labor is injurious to dispatch, a position contrary 
to all experience. The fact, without doubt, is that 
it essentially contributes to dispatch, and that what- 
ever new modification may be adopted, either the 
accounts of other departments will never keep pace 
with the current of business in times of activity, or 
that modification must adhere to the principle of 
employing distinct organs. 

If it be the design to exclude in every case, the 
intervention of the head of the particular depart- 
ments, some or all of these evils will follow: The 
service of that department will suffer by unduly re- 
stricting its head, in cases in which he must be the 
most competent judge ; and by obliging him, in order 
to avoid eventual difficulties, to resort, in the first 
instance, to another department, less alive than him- 
self to the exigencies of his own, for a cautious and 
slow, perhaps a reluctant acquiescence in arrange- 

312 Alexander Hamilton 

ments which require promptness. If in the spirit of 
confidence and accommodation, the officers of the 
Treasury yield a ready compliance with the wishes 
of the head of such department, they may inad- 
vertently co-operate in measures which they would 
have disapproved and corrected on a deliberate and 
impartial revision. If this spirit be not shown, not 
only the immediate service of the department may 
be improperly impeded, but sensations unfriendly to 
the due harmony of the different members of the 
administration may be engendered. On one side of 
the dilemma stands collusion, on the other discord. 
The existing plan steers a middle and a prudent 
course ; neither fettering too much the heads of the 
other departments nor relinquishing too far the 
requisite control of the Treasury. Its opposite sup- 
poses all trust may be placed in one department — 
none in the others. The extravagant jealousy of the 
overbearing influence of the Treasury Department, 
which was so conspicuous in the times of the two 
former secretaries, has of a sudden given way to un- 
limited confidence! The intention seems to be to 
surround the brow of their immaculate successor 
with the collected rays of legislative and executive 
favor. But vain will be the attempt to add lustre 
to the dim luminary of a benighted administration! 

Lucius Crassus. 

NO. XII 

February 23, 1802. 

From the manner in which the subject was treated 
in the fifth and sixth numbers of the Examination, it 

Jefferson's Message 313 

has been doubted whether the writer did or did not 
entertain a decided opinion as to the power of Con- 
gress to aboHsh the offices and compensations of 
judges, once instituted and appointed, pursuant to a 
law of the United States. In a matter of such high 
constitutional moment, it is a sacred duty to be ex- 
plicit. The progress of a bill lately brought into the 
Senate for repealing the law of the last session, en- 
titled, *'An act to provide for the more convenient 
organization of the courts of the United States," with 
the avowed design of superseding the judges who 
were appointed under it, has rendered the question 
far more serious than it was while it rested merely on 
the obscure suggestion in the Presidential Message. 
Till the experiment had proved the fact, it was 
hardly to have been imagined that a majority of 
either House of Congress, whether from design or 
error, would have lent its sanction to a glaring viola- 
tion of our national compact, in that article which, 
of all others, is the most essential to the efficiency 
and stability of the government; to the security of 
property; to the safety and liberty of person. This 
portentous and frightful phenomenon has, never- 
theless, appeared. It frowns with malignant and 
deadly aspect upon our Constitution. Probably be- 
fore these remarks shall be read, that Constitution will 
be no more! It will be numbered among the nu- 
merous victims of Democratic frenzy ; and will have 
given another and an awful lesson to mankind — the 
prelude perhaps of calamities to this country, at the 
contemplation of which imagination shudders! 
With such a prospect before us, nothing ought to 

3^4 Alexander Hamilton 

be left unessayed to open the eyes of thinking men 
to the destructive projects of those mountebank 
politicians, who have been too successful in pervert- 
ing public opinion, and in cheating the people out 
of their confidence; who are advancing with rapid 
strides in the work of disorganization — the sure fore- 
runner of tyranny ; and who, if they are not arrested 
in their mad career, will, erelong, precipitate our 
nation into all the horrors of anarchy. 

It would be vanity to expect to throw much ad- 
ditional light upon a subject which has already ex- 
hausted the logic and eloquence of some of the 
ablest men of our country ; yet it often happens that 
the same arguments placed in a new attitude and 
accompanied with illustrations, which may have 
escaped the ardor of a first research, serve both to 
fortify and extend conviction. In the hope that 
this may be the case, the discussion shall be pursued 
with as much perspicuity and brevity as can be 
attained. 

The words of the Constitution are, ''The judges 
both of the supreme and inferior courts shall hold 
their offices during good behavior, and shall at stated 
times receive for their services a compensation which 
shall not be diminished during their continuance in 
officer 

Taking the literal import of the terms as a criterion 
of their true meaning, it is clear that the tenure or 
duration of the office is limited by no other condi- 
tion than the good behavior of the inctmibent. The 
words are imperative, simple, and unqualified: '' The 
judges shall hold their offices during good behavior,'' 

Jefferson's Message 315 

Independent therefore of any artificial reasoning to 
vary the natural and obvious sense of the words, the 
provision must be understood to vest in the judge a 
right to the office, indefeasible but by his own mis- 
conduct. 

It is, consequently, the duty of those who deny 
this right to show, either that there are certain pre- 
sumptions of intention, deducible from other parts 
of the constitutional instrument, or certain general 
principles of constitutional law or policy, which 
ought to control the literal and substitute a different 
meaning. 

As to presumptions of intention, different from the 
import of the terms, there is not a syllable in the 
instrument from which they can be inferred; on 
the contrary, the latter member of the clause cited 
affords a very strong presumption the other way. 

From the injunction, that the compensation of the 
judges shall not be diminished, it is manifest that 
the Constitution intends to guard the independence 
of those officers against the Legislative Department ; 
because, to this department alone would have be- 
longed the power of diminishing their compensations. 

When the Constitution is thus careful to tie up the 
Legislature from taking away part of the compensa- 
tion, is it possible to suppose that it can mean to 
leave that body at full liberty to take away the 
whole? The affirmative imputes to the Constitution 
the manifest absurdity of holding to the Legislature 
this language: " You shall not weaken the independ- 
ence of the judicial character by exercising the power 
of lessening his emolument, but you may destroy it 

3i6 Alexander Hamilton 

altogether, by exercising the greater power of anni- 
hilating the recompense with the office." No mortal 
can be so blind as not to see that, by such a con- 
struction, the restraint intended to be laid upon the 
Legislature by the injunction not to lessen the com- 
pensation, becomes absolutely nugatory. 

In vain is a justification sought in that part of the 
article which provides that '' the judicial power of the 
United States shall be vested in one supreme court, 
and in such inferior courts as the Congress may from 
time to time ordain and establish." The position 
that a discretionary power to institute inferior 
courts includes virtually a power to abolish them, if 
true, is nothing to the purpose. The abolition of a 
court does not necessarily imply that of its judges. 
In contemplation of law, the court and the judge are 
distinct things. The court may have a legal exist- 
ence, though there may be no judge to exercise its 
powers. This may be the case either at the original 
creation of a court, previous to the appointment of a 
judge, or subsequently, by his death, resignation, or 
removal. In the last case, it could not be pretended 
that the court had become extinct by the event. In 
like manner the office of the judge may subsist, 
though the court in which he is to officiate may be 
suspended or destroyed. The duties of a judge, as 
the office is defined in our jurisprudence, are two- 
fold— judicial and ministerial. The latter may be 
performed out of court, and often without reference 
to it. As conservator of the peace, which every 
judge is, ex officio, many things are done, not con- 
nected with a judicial controversy, or to speak tech- 

Jefferson's Message 317 

nically, with a lis pendens. This serves to illustrate 
the idea that the office is something different from 
the court; which is the place or situation for its 
principal action, yet not altogether essential to its 
activity. Besides, a judge is not the less a judge 
when out of court than when in court. The law does 
not suppose him to be always in court, yet it does 
suppose him to be always in office; in vacation as 
well as in term. He has also a property or interest 
in his office, which entitles him to civil actions and 
recompense in damages for injuries that affect him 
in relation to his office ; but he cannot be said to 
have a property or interest in the court of which 
he is a member. All these considerations confirm 
the hypothesis that the court and the judge are 
distinct legal entities, and therefore may exist, the 
one independently of the other. 

If it be replied that the office is an incident to the 
court, and that the abolition of the principal includes 
that of the incidents, the answer to this is, that the 
argimient may be well founded as to all subsequent 
appointments, but not as to those previously made. 
Though there be no office to be filled in future, it 
will not follow that one already vested in an individ- 
ual, by a regular appointment and commission, is 
thereby vacated and divested. Whether this shall 
or shall not happen must depend on what the Con- 
stitution or the law has declared with regard to the 
tenure of the office. Having pronounced that this 
shall be during good behavior, it will preserve the 
office to give effect to that tenure for the benefit of 
the possessor. To be consistent with itself it will 

3i8 Alexander Hamilton 

require and prescribe such a modification and con- 
struction of its own acts as will reconcile its power 
over the future with the rights which have been con- 
ferred as to the past. 

Let it not be said that an office is a mere trust for 
public benefit, and excludes the idea of a property or 
a vested interest in the individual. The first part 
of the proposition is true — the last false. Every office 
combines the two ingredients of an interest in the 
possessor and a trust for the public. Hence it is 
that the law allows the officer redress, by a civil ac- 
tion, for an injury in relation to his office which pre- 
supposes property or interest. This interest may be 
defeasible at the pleasure of the government, or it 
may have a fixed duration, according to the con- 
stitution of the office. The idea of a vested interest 
holden even by a permanent tenure, so far from 
being incompatible with the principle that the pri- 
mary and essential end of every office is the public 
good, may be conducive to that very end, by pro- 
moting a diligent, faithful, energetic, and independ- 
ent execution of the office. 

But admitting, as seems to have been admitted by 
the speakers on both sides of the question, that the 
judge must fall with the court, then the only conse- 
quence will be that Congress cannot abolish a court 
once established. There is no rule of interpretation 
better settled than that different provisions in the 
same instrument, on the same subject, ought to be 
so construed as, if possible, to comport with each 
other, and give a reasonable effect to all. 

The provision that ''the judiciary power shall be 

Jefferson's Message 319 

vested in one supreme court, and in such inferior 
courts as the Congress may from time to time or- 
dain and estabUsh," is immediately followed by this 
other provision, '' the judges, both of the supreme and 
inferior courts, shall hold their offices during good 
behavior." 

The proposition that a power to do includes, virtu- 
ally, a power to undo, as applied to a legislative body, 
is generally but not universally true. All vested 
rights form an exception to the rule. In strict 
theory there is no lawful or moral power to divest 
by a subsequent statute a right vested in an individ- 
ual by a prior. And accordingly it is familiar to 
persons conversant with legal studies that the repeal 
of a law does not always work the revocation or di- 
vestiture of such rights. 

If it be replied that though a legislature might act 
immorally and wickedly in abrogating a vested right, 
yet the legal validity of its act for such a purpose 
could not be disputed, it may be answered that this 
odious position, in any application of it, is liable 
to question in every limited constitution (that 
is, in every constitution, which, in its theory, does 
not suppose the whole power of the nation to be 
lodged in the legislative body ') ; and that it is cer- 
tainly false, in its application to a legislature, the 
authorities of which are defined by a positive written 
Constitution, as to every thing which is contrary to 
the actual provisions of that Constitution. To deny 
this, is to affirm that the delegated is paramount to 
the constituent power. It is, in fact, to affirm that 

^ As in the Parliament of Great Britain. 

320 Alexander Hamilton 

there are no constitutional limits to the legislative 
authority. 

The inquiry, then, must be whether the power to 
abolish inferior courts, if implied in that of creating 
them, is not abridged by the clause which regulates 
the tenure of judicial office. 

The first thing which occurs in this investigation 
is, that the power to abolish is, at most, an implied 
or incidental power, and, as such, will the more read- 
ily yield to any express provision with which it may 
be inconsistent. 

The circumstance of giving to Congress a discre- 
tionary power to establish inferior courts, instead of 
establishing them specifically in the Constitution, 
has, with great reason, been ascribed to the imprac- 
ticability of ascertaining beforehand the number and 
variety of courts which the development of our na- 
tional affairs might indicate to be proper ; especially 
in relation to the progress of new settlements and 
the creation of new States. This rendered a discre- 
tionary power to institute courts indispensable, but 
it did not alike render indispensable a power to 
abolish those which were once instituted. It was 
conceivable that with intelligence, caution, and care, 
a plan might be pursued in the institution of courts 
which would render abolitions unnecessary. In- 
deed, it is not presumable, with regard to establish- 
ments of such solemnity and importance, making 
part of the organization of a principal department of 
the government, that a fluctuation of plans was an- 
ticipated. It is therefore not essential to suppose 
that the power to destroy was intended to be in- 

Jefferson's Message 321 

eluded in the power to create. Thus the words, 
*'to ordain and estabUsh," may be satisfied by at- 
tributing to them only the latter effect. Consequently, 
when the grant of the power to institute courts is 
immediately succeeded by the declaration that the 
judges of those courts shall hold their offices during 
good behavior, if the exercise of the power to abolish 
the courts cannot be reconciled with the actual hold- 
ing or enjoyment of the office, according to the pre- 
scribed tenure, it will follow that the power to abolish 
is interdicted. The implied or hypothetical power 
to destroy the office must give way to the express and 
positive right of holding it during good behavior. 
This is agreeable to the soundest rules of construc- 
tion; the contrary is in subversion of them. 

Difference of origin is a justification of the con- 
struction, adopted by the advocates of the repeal, at- 
tempted to be derived from a distinction between 
the supreme and inferior courts. The argument, 
that, as the former is established by the Constitution, 
it cannot be annulled by a legislative act, though the 
latter, which must owe their existence to such an act, 
may by the same authority be extinguished, can 
afford no greater stability to the office of a judge of 
the supreme court than to that of a judge of an in- 
ferior court. The Constitution does, indeed, estab- 
lish the supreme court; but it is altogether silent as 
to the number of judges. This is as fully left to 
legislative discretion as the institution of inferior 
courts ; and the rule that a power to undo is implied 
in the power to do, is therefore no less applicable to 
the reduction of the number of the judges of the 

VOL. VIII. — 21. 

322 Alexander Hamilton 

supreme court than to the abolition of the inferior 
courts. If the former are not protected by the 
clause which fixes the tenure of office, they are no less 
at the mercy of the Legislature than the latter. And 
if that clause does protect them, its protection must 
be equally effectual for the judges of the inferior 
courts. Its efficacy, in either case, must be founded 
on the principle that it operates as a restraint upon 
the legislative discretion; and, if so, there is the like 
restraint in both cases, because the very same words 
in the very same sentence define conjunctly the ten- 
ure of office of the two classes of judges. No soph- 
istry can elude this conclusion. 

It is therefore plain to a demonstration, that the 
doctrine which affirms the right of Congress to abolish 
the judges of the inferior courts is absolutely fatal to 
the independence of the judiciary department. The 
observation that so gross an abuse of power, as would 
be implied in the abolition of the judges of the Su- 
preme Court, ought not to be supposed, can afford 
no consolation against the extreme danger of the 
doctrine. The terrible examples before us forbid 
our placing the least confidence in that delusive ob- 
servation. Experience, sad experience, warns us 
to dread every extremity — to be prepared for the 
worst catastrophe that can happen. 

Lucius Crassus. 

NO. XIII 

February 27, 1802. 

The advocates of the power of Congress to abolish 
the judges endeavor to induce a presumption of in- 

Jefferson's Message 323 

tention favorable to their doctrine from this argu- 
ment. The provision concerning the tenure of office 
(say they) ought to be viewed as a restraint upon the 
Executive Department, because, to this department 
belongs the power of removal ; in like manner as the 
provision concerning the diminution of compensa- 
tion ought to be regarded as a restraint upon the 
legislative department, because, to this department 
belongs the power of regulating compensations. The 
different members of the clause ought to be taken 
distributively, in conformity with the distribution 
of power to the respective departments. 

This is certainly the most specious of the argu- 
ments which have been used on that side. It has 
received several pertinent and forcible answers. But 
it is believed to be susceptible of one still more direct 
and satisfactory, which is not recollected to have 
been yet given. 

If, in the theory of the Constitution, there was but 
one way of defeating the tenure of office, and that ex- 
clusively appertaining to the executive authority, it 
would be a natural and correct inference that this 
authority was solely contemplated in a constitu- 
tional provision upon the subject. But the fact is 
clearly otherwise. There are two modes known to 
the Constitution in which the tenure of office may be 
affected — one, the abolition of the office ; the other, the 
removal of the officer. The first is a legislative act, 
and operates by removing the office from the person ; 
the last is an executive act, and operates by removing 
the person from the office. Both equally cause the 
tenure, enjoyment, or holding of the office to cease. 

324 Alexander Hamilton 

This being the case, the inference which has been 
drawn fails. There is no ground for the presump- 
tion that the Constitution, in establishing the tenure 
of an office, had an exclusive eye to one only of the 
two modes in which it might be affected. The more 
rational supposition is, that it intended to reach and 
exclude both; because this alone can fulfil the pur- 
pose which it appears to have in view : and it ought 
neither to be understood to aim at less than its lan- 
guage imports, nor to employ inadequate means for 
accomplishing the end which it professes. Or, the 
better to elucidate the idea, by placing it in another 
form, it may be said that since in the nature of things 
the legislative, equally with the executive organ, 
may by different modes of action affect the tenure 
of office, when the Constitution undertakes to pre- 
scribe what that tenure shall be, it ought to be 
presumed to intend to guard that which shall have 
been prescribed against the interference of either 
department. 

In an instrument abounding with examples of 
restrictions on the legislative discretion, there is 
no difficulty in supposing that one was intended in 
every case in which it may be fairly inferred, either 
from the words used or from the object to be effected. 

While the reason which has been stated refers the 
provision respecting the tenure of judicial officers as 
well to the executive as to the legislative department, 
were it necessary to examine to which, if to either of 
them, it ought to be deemed most appropriate, there 
could be no difficulty in selecting the latter rather 
than the former. The tenure of an office is one of its 

Jefferson's Message 325 

essential qualities. A provision, therefore, which is 
destined to prescribe or define this quahty, may be 
supposed to have a more pecuHar reference to that 
department which is empowered to constitute the 
office, either as directory to it in the exercise of its 
power, or as fixing what otherwise would be left to 
its discretion. 

It is constantly to be recollected, that the terms of 
the provision do not look particularly to either de- 
partment. They are general, " the judges shall hold 
their office during good behavior." 'T is not from 
the terms, therefore, that an exclusive applicability 
to the executive organ can be inferred. On the con- 
trary, they must be narrowed, to give them only 
this effect. 

It is different as to the provision concerning com- 
pensations. Though equally general in the terms, 
this can have no relation but to the legislative depart- 
ment; because, as before observed, that department 
alone would have had power to diminish the com- 
pensations. But this reason for confining that pro- 
vision to one department, namely, the power of 
affecting the compensations, so far from dictating a 
similar appropriation of the other provision, looks a 
different way, and requires by analogy that the latter 
should be applied to both the departments, each 
having a power of affecting the tenure of office in a 
way peculiar to itself. Nor can it be too often re- 
peated, because it is a consideration of great force, 
that the design, so conspicuous in the former of these 
two provisions, to secure the independence of the 
judges against legislative influence, is a powerful 

326 Alexander Hamilton 

reason for understanding the latter in a sense cal- 
culated to advance the same important end, rather 
than in one which must entirely frustrate it. 

A rule of constitutional law opposed to our con- 
struction is attempted to be derived from the maxim, 
that the power of legislation is always equal, and 
that a preceding can never bind or control a suc- 
ceeding Legislature by its acts, which therefore must 
always be liable to repeal at the discretion of the 
successor. 

The misapplication or too extensive application of 
general maxims or propositions, true in their genuine 
sense, is one of the most common and fruitful sources 
of false reasoning. This is strongly exemplified in 
the present instance. The maxim relied upon can 
mean nothing more than that as to all those matters 
which a preceding Legislature was free to establish 
and revoke, a succeeding Legislature will be equally 
free. The latter may do what the former could have 
done, or it may undo what the former could have 
undone. But unless it can be maintained, that the 
power of ordinary legislation is in itself illimitable, 
incontroUable, incapable of being bound either by 
its own acts or by the injunctions or prohibitions of 
a constitution, it will follow, that the body invested 
with that power may bind itself, and may bind its 
successor ; so that neither itself nor its succsesor can, 
of right, revoke acts which may have been once done. 
To say that a Legislature may bind itself, but not 
its successor, is to affirm that the latter has not 
merely an equal but a greater power than the former, 
else it could not do what the former was unable to 

Jefferson*s Message 327 

do. Equality of power only will not suffice for the 
argument. On the other hand, to affirm that a 
Legislature cannot bind itself, is to assert, that there 
can be no valid pledge of the public faith, that no 
right can be vested in an individual or collection of 
individuals, whether of property, or of any other 
description, which may not be resumed at pleasure. 

Without doubt, a Legislature binds itself, by all 
those acts which engage the public faith; which 
confer on individuals permanent rights, either gratu- 
itously or for valuable consideration ; and in all these 
instances a succeeding one is not less bound. As to 
a right which may have been conferred by an ex- 
press provision of the Constitution defining the con- 
dition of the enjoyment, or as to an institution or 
matter, in its nature permanent, which the Con- 
stitution may have confided to an act of the Legis- 
lature, its authority terminates with the act that 
vests the right or makes the establishment. A case 
of the first sort is exemplified in the office of a judge ; 
of the last, in the creation of a new State, which has 
been very pertinently mentioned as a decisive in- 
stance of power in a Legislature to do a thing which 
being done is irrevocable. 

But whatever may be the latitude we assign to the 
power of a Legislature over the acts of a predecessor, 
it is nothing to the purpose,, so long as it shall be 
admitted that the Constitution may bind and con- 
trol the Legislature. With this admission, the sim- 
ple inquiry must always be — has or has not the 
Constitution, in the particular instance, bound the 
Legislature? And the solution must be sought in 

328 Alexander Hamilton 

the language, nature, and end of the provision. If 
these warrant the conclusion, that the Legislature 
was intended to be bound, it is perfect nonsense to 
reply, that this cannot be so, because a Legislature 
cannot bind itself by its own acts, or because the 
power of one Legislature is equal to that of another. 
What signifies this proposition, if the Constitution 
has power to bind the Legislature, and has in fact 
bound it in a given case? Can a general rule dis- 
prove the fact of an exception which it is admitted 
may exist ? If so, the argument is always ready, and 
equally valid to disprove any limitation of the legis- 
lative discretion. 

Compelled, as they must be, to desist from the use 
of the argument in the extensive sense in which it 
has been employed, if its inventors should content 
themselves with saying, that at least the principle 
adduced by them ought to have so much of force as 
to make the exception to it depend on an express pro- 
vision, it may be answered, that in the case under 
consideration there is an express provision. No 
language can be more precise or peremptory than 
this: ''The judges, both of the Supreme and Inferior 
Courts, shall hold their offices during good behavior. " 
If this be not an express provision, it is impossible to 
devise one. But the position, that an express pro- 
vision is necessary to form an exception, is itself 
unfounded. Wherever it is clear, whether by a cir- 
cumstance expressed, or by one so implied as to leave 
no reasonable doubt, that a limitation of the author- 
ity of the Legislature was designed by the Constitu- 
tion, the intention ought to prevail. 

Jefferson's Message 329 

A very strong confirmation of the true intent of 
the provision respecting the tenure of judicial office, 
results from an argument by analogy. In each of 
the articles which establishes any branch of the gov- 
ernment, the duration of office is a prominent feature. 
Two years for the House of Representatives, six for 
the Senate, four for the President and Vice-Presi- 
dent, are the respective terms of duration; and for 
the judges, the term of good behavior is allotted. It 
is presumable, that each was established in the same 
spirit, as a point material in the organization of the 
government and of a nature to be properly funda- 
mental. It will not be pretended that the duration 
of office prescribed as to any other department, is 
within the reach of legislative discretion. And why 
shall that of judicial officers form an exception? 
Why shall the Constitution be supposed less tena- 
cious of securing to this organ of the sovereign 
power a fixed duration than to any other? If there 
be any thing which ought to be supposed to be pe- 
culiarly excepted out of the power of the ordinary 
Legislature, it is emphatically the organization of the 
several constituent departments of the government ; 
which in our system are the Legislative, Executive, 
and Judicial. Reasons of the most cogent nature 
recommend that the stability and independence of 
the last of these three branches should be guarded 
with particular circtimspection and care. 

Lucius Crassus. 

330 Alexander Hamilton 

NO. XIV 

March 2, 1802. 

In the course of the debate in the Senate, much i 
verbal criticism has been indulged : many important 
inferences have been attempted to be drawn from 
distinctions between the words shall and may. This 
species of discussion will not be imitated, because 
it is seldom very instructive or satisfactory. These 
terms, in particular cases, are frequently synony- | 
mous, and are imperative or permissive, directing or 
enabling, according to the relations in which they 
stand to other words. It is, however, certain, that | 
the arguments even from this source, greatly pre- 
ponderate against the right of Congress to abolish 
the judges. 

But there has been one argument, rather of a ver- 
bal nature, upon which some stress has been laid, 
which shall be analyzed; principally to furnish a 
specimen of the wretched expedients to which the 
supporters of the repeal are driven. It is this : " The 
tenure of an office is not synonymous with its ex- 
istence. Though Congress may not annul the tenure 
of a judicial office while the office itself continues, 
yet it does not follow that they may not destroy its 
existence." 

The constituent parts of an office are its au- 
thorities, duties, and duration. These may be de- 
nominated the elements of which it is composed. 
Together they form its essence or existence.^ It is 
impossible to separate, even in idea, the duration 

' The remuneration or recompense is not added, because it is most 
properly an accessory. 

Jefferson's Message 331 

from the existence. The office must cease to exist 
when it ceases to have duration. Hence, let it be 
observed that the word tenure is not used in the 
Constitution, and that in the debate it has been the 
substitute for duration. The words: *'The judges 
shall hold their offices during good behavior," are 
equivalent to these other words: The offices of the 
judges shall endure or last so long as they behave 
well. 

The conclusions from these principles are that ex- 
istence is a whole, which includes tenure and dura- 
tion as a part; that it is impossible to annul the 
existence of an office without destroying its tenure; 
and, consequently, that a prohibition to destroy the 
tenure is virtually and substantially a prohibition 
to abolish the office. How contemptible, then, the 
sophism that Congress may not destroy the tenure, 
but may annihilate the office! 

It has now been seen that this power of annihila- 
tion is not reconcilable with the language of the 
constitutional instrument, and that no rule of consti- 
tutional law, which has been relied upon, will afford 
it support. Can it be better defended by any princi- 
ple of constitutional policy? 

To establish the affirmative of this question, it has 
been argued that if the judges hold their offices by a 
title absolutely independent of the legislative will, 
the judicial department becomes a colossal and over- 
bearing power, capable of degenerating into a per- 
manent tyranny ; at liberty, if audacious and corrupt 
enough, to render the authority of the Legislature 
nugatory by expounding away the laws, and to 

33^ Alexander Hamilton 

assume a despotic control over the rights of person 
and property. 

To this argument (which supposes the case of a 
palpable abuse of power) a plain and conclusive an- 
swer is, that the Constitution has provided a com- 
plete safeguard in the authority of the House of 
Representatives to impeach, of the Senate to condemn. 
The judges are in this way amenable to public jus- 
tice for misconduct, and, upon conviction, remov- 
able from office. In the hands of the Legislature 
itself is placed the weapon by which they may be 
put down and the other branches of the government 
protected. The pretended danger, therefore, is evi- 
dently imaginary — the security perfect. 

Reverse the medal. Concede to the Legislature 
a legal discretion to abolish the judges, where is 
the defence? where the security for the judicial de- 
partment? There is absolutely none. This most 
valuable member of the government, when rightly 
constituted the surest guardian of person and 
property, of which stability is a prime characteristic, 
losing at once its most essential attributes, and 
doomed to fluctuate with the variable tide of fac- 
tion, degenerates into a disgusting mirror of all the 
various malignant and turbulent humors of party 
spirit. 

Let us not be deceived. The real danger is on the 
side of that foul and fatal doctrine, which emboldens 
its votaries, with daring front and unhallowed step, 
to enter the holy temple of justice and pluck from 
their seats the venerable personages, who, under the 
solemn sanction of the Constitution, are commis- 

Jefferson's Message ^^^ 

sioned to officiate there — to guard that sacred com- 
pact with jealous vigilance — to dispense the laws 
with a steady and impartial hand — unmoved by the 
storms of faction, unawed by its powers, unseduced 
by its favors — shielding right and innocence from 
every attack — resisting and repressing violence from 
every quarter. 'T is from the triumph of that exe- 
crable doctrine that we may have to date the down- 
fall of our government, and, with it, of the whole 
fabric of republican liberty. Who will have the folly 
to deny that the definition of despotism is the con- 
centration of all the powers of government in one 
person or in one body? Who is so blind as not to 
see that the right of the Legislature to abolish the 
judges at pleasure, destroys the independence of the 
judicial department, and swallows it up in the im- 
petuous vortex of legislative influence? Who is so 
weak as to hope that the Executive, deprived of so 
powerful an auxiliary, will long survive? What dis- 
passionate man can withstand the conviction that 
the boundaries between the departments will be 
thenceforth nominal, and that there will be no longer 
more than one active and efficient department? 

It is a fundamental maxim of free government, 
that the three great departments of power, legisla- 
tive, executive, and judiciary, shall be essentially dis- 
tinct and independent, the one of the other. This 
principle, very influential in most of our State con- 
stitutions, has been particularly attended to in the 
Constitution of the United States; which, in order 
to give effect to it, has adopted a precaution peculiar 
to itself, in the provisions that forbid the Legislature 

334 Alexander Hamilton 

to vary in any way the compensation of the Presi- 
dent, or to diminish that of a judge. 

It is a principle equally sound, that though in a 
government like that of Great Britain, having an 
hereditary chief with vast prerogatives, the danger 
to liberty, by the predominance of one department 
over the other, is on the side of the executive; yet 
in popular forms of government, this danger is 
chiefly to be apprehended from the legislative branch. 

The power of legislation is, in its own nature, the 
most comprehensive and potent of the three great 
subdivisions of sovereignty. It is the will of the 
government; it prescribes universally the rule of 
action, and the sanctions which are to enforce it. It 
creates and regulates the public force, and it com- 
mands the public purse. If deposited in an elective 
representative of the people, it has, in most cases, 
the body of the nation for its auxiliary, and gener- 
ally acts with all the momentum of popular favor. 
In every such government it is consequently an organ 
of immense strength. But when there is an hered- 
itary chief magistrate, clothed with dazzling pre- 
rogatives and a great patronage, there is a powerful 
counterpoise, which, in most cases, is sufficient to 
preserve the equilibrium of the government ; in some 
cases, to incline the scale too much to its own side. 

In governments wholly popular or representative, 
there is no adequate counterpoise. Confidence in the 
most numerous, or legislative department, and jeal- 
ousy of the executive chief, form the genius of every 
such government. That jealousy, operating in the 
constitution of the executive, causes this organ to be 

Jefferson's Message 335 

intrinsically feeble ; and withholding in the course of 
administration accessory means of force and influ- 
ence, is for the most part vigilant to continue it in 
a state of impotence. The result is that the legis- 
lative body, in this species of government, possesses 
additional resources of power and weight; while the 
executive is rendered much too weak for competi- 
tion; almost too weak for self-defence. 

A third principle, not less well founded than the 
other two, is that the judiciary department is natu- 
rally the weakest of the three. The sources of 
strength to the legislative branches have been briefly 
delineated. The executive, by means of its several 
active powers, of the dispensation of honors and 
emoluments, and of the direction of the public force, 
is evidently the second in strength. The judiciary, 
on the other hand, can ordain nothing. It commands 
neither the purse nor the sword. It has scarcely any 
patronage. Its functions are not active but delib- 
erative. Its main province is to declare the mean- 
ing of the laws; and, in extraordinary cases, it must 
even look up to the executive aid for the execution 
of its decisions. Its chief strength is in the venera- 
tion which it is able to inspire by the wisdom and 
rectitude of its judgments. 

This character of the judiciary clearly indicates 
that it is not only the weakest, of the three depart- 
ments of power, but, also, as it regards the security 
and preservation of civil liberty, by far the safest. 
In a conflict with the other departments, it will be 
happy if it can defend itself — to annoy them is be- 
yond its power. In vain would it singly attempt 

Z?>^ Alexander Hamilton 

enterprises against the rights of the citizen. The 
other departments could quickly arrest its arm and 
punish its temerity. It can only, then, become an 
effectual instrument of oppression, when it is com- 
bined with one of the more active and powerful 
organs; and against a combination of this sort, the 
true and best guard is a complete independence of 
each and both of them. Its dependence on either 
will imply and involve a subserviency to the views 
of the department on which it shall depend. Its 
independence of both will render it a powerful check 
upon the others, and a precious shield to the rights 
of persons and property. Safety, liberty, are there- 
fore inseparably connected with the real and sub- 
stantial independence of the courts and judges. 

It is plainly to be inferred from the instrument 
itself, that these were governing principles in the 
formation of our Constitution: that they were in 
fact so, will hereafter be proved by the contemporary 
exposition of persons who, having been themselves 
members of the body that framed it, must be sup- 
posed to have understood the views with which it 
was framed. Those principles suggest the highest 
motives of constitutional policy against that con- 
struction which places the existence of the judges 
at the mercy of the Legislature. They instruct us, 
that to prevent a concentration of powers, the essence 
of despotism, it is essential, that the departments 
among which they shall be distributed, should be 
effectually independent of each other; and that, it 
being impossible to reconcile this independence with 
a right in any one or two of them to annihilate at 

Jefferson's Message 337 

discretion the organs of the other, it is contrary to 
all just reasoning to imply or infer such a right. So 
far from its being correct, that an express interdic- 
tion is requisite to deprive the Legislature of the 
power to abolish the judges, the very reverse is the 
true position. It would require a more express pro- 
vision susceptible of no other interpretation, to con- 
fer on that branch of the government an authority 
so dangerous to the others, in opposition to the 
strong presumptions, which arise from the care taken 
in the Constitution, in conformity with the funda- 
mental maxims of free governments, to establish and 
preserve the reciprocal and complete independence 
of the respective branches, first by a separate or- 
ganization of the departments, next by a precise 
definition of the powers of each, lastly by precau- 
tions to secure to each a permanent support. 

Lucius Crassus. 

NO. XV 

March 9, 1802. 

It is generally understood that the Essays under 
the title of the Federalist, which were published at 
New York, while the plan of our present Federal 
Constitution was under the consideration of the 
people, were principally written by two persons ' 
who had been members of the convention which 
devised that plan, and whose names are subscribed 
to the instrument containing it. In these essays "" 

^ James Madison, now Secretary of State. Alexander Hamilton, 

formerly Secretary of Treasury. [Note by A. H.] 

* Partictilarly, Nos. xlvii. to li. inclusive, and Nos. Ixxviii. to Ixxxii. 

inclusive. 

vou vui.— aa. 

33^ Alexander Hamilton 

the principles advanced in the last number of this 
examination are particularly stated and strongly re- 
lied upon, in defence of the proposed Constitution ; 
from which it is a natural inference that they had 
influenced the views with which the plan was di- 
gested. The full force of this observation will be 
best perceived by a recurrence to the work itself; 
but it will appear clearly enough from the following 
detached passages. 

'' One of the principal objections inculcated by the 
more respectable adversaries to the Constitution, is 
its supposed violation of the political maxim, that 
the legislative, executive, and judicial departments 
ought to be separate and distinct. No political truth 
is certainly of greater intrinsic value, or is stamped 
with the authority of more enlightened patrons of 
liberty, than that on which the objection is founded. 
The accumulation of all power, legislative, executive, 
and judicial, in the same hands, whether of one, a 
few, or many ; whether hereditary, self-appointed, or 
elective, may justly be pronounced the very defini- 
tion of tyranny ^ Neither of the three departments 
ought to possess directly or indirectly an overruling 
influence over the others in the administration of 
their respective powers." ''But the most difficult 
task is to provide some practical security for each, 
against the invasion of the others. Experience as- 
sures us that the efficacy of parchment harriers has 
been greatly overrated, and that some more adequate 
defence is indispensably necessary for the more feeble 
against the more powerful members of the govern- 

' No. xlvii. 

Jefferson's Message 339 

ment. The legislative department is everywhere 
extending the sphere of its activity, and drawing all 
power into its impetuous vortex." '* In a represent- 
ative republic, where the executive magistracy is 
carefully limited, both in the extent and the dura- 
tion of its power, and where the legislative power is 
exercised by an assembly, which is inspired by a 
supposed influence over the people with an intrepid 
confidence in its own strength; which is sufficiently 
numerous to feel all the passions which actuate a 
multitude, yet not so numerous as to be incapable of 
pursuing the objects of its passions by means which 
reason prescribes ; it is against the enterprising ambi- 
tion of this department, that the people ought to indulge 
all their jealousy and exhaust all their precaution.'" 
Again: ''The tendency of republican governments is 
to an aggrandizement of the legislative at the expense 
of the other departments.'' 

These passages recognize, as a fundamental maxim 
of free government, that the three departments of 
power ought to be separate and distinct; conse- 
quently that neither of them ought to be able to 
exercise, either directly or indirectly, an overruling 
influence over any other. They also recognize as a 
truth, indicated by the nature of the system and 
verified by experience, that in a representative re- 
public, the legislative department is the "Aaron's 
ROD ' ' most likely to swallow up the rest, and there- 
fore to be guarded against with particular care and 
caution : and they inculcate that parchment barriers 
(or the formal provisions of a Constitution designat- 
ing the respective boundaries of authority) having 

340 Alexander Hamilton 

been found ineffectual for protecting the more feeble 
against the more powerful members of the govern- 
ment, some more adequate defence, some practical 
security, is necessary. What this was intended to 
be, will appear from subsequent passages. 

"To what expedient shall we finally resort for 
maintaining in practice the necessary partition of 
power among the several departments as laid down 
in the Constitution?" ''As all exterior provisions 
are found to be inadequate, the defect must be sup- 
plied by so contriving the interior structure of the 
government, as that its several constituent depart- 
ments may, by their mutual relations, be the means 
of keeping each other in their proper places." ' 

These passages intimate the ''practical security'' 
which ought to be adopted for the preservation of 
the weaker against the stronger members of the gov- 
ernment. It is so to be contrived in its interior 
structure that the constituent organs may be able to 
keep each other in their proper places; an idea essen- 
tially incompatible with that of making the existence 
of one dependent on the will of another. It will 
be seen afterwards how this structure is to be so 
contrived. 

'' In order to lay a foundation for that separate and 
distinct exercise of the different powers of govern- 
ment, which, to a certain extent, is admitted on all 
hands to be essential to the preservation of liberty, 
it is evident that each department should have a 
will of its own ; and consequently should be so con- 
stituted, that the members of each should have as 

I No. li. 

Jefferson's Message 341 

little agency as possible in the appointment of the 
members of the others. This principle, rigorously 
adhered to, would require that all the appointments 
for the several departments should be drawn from 
the same fountain of authority, the people." But in 
the constitution of the judiciary department, it might 
be inexpedient to insist rigorously on the principle: 
first, because peculiar qualifications being essential 
in the members, the primary consideration ought to 
be to select that mode of choice which best secures 
these qualifications; secondly, because the perma- 
nent tenure by which the appointments are held in 
that department, must soon destroy all sense of 
dependence on the authority conferring them. 

** It is equally evident that the members of each 
department should be as little dependent as possible 
on those of the others for the emoluments annexed 
to their offices. Were the Executive Magistrate or 
the judges not independent of the Legislature in this 
particular, their independence in every other would be 
merely nominal." "The great security against a 
concentration of the several powers in the same 
department consists in giving to those who admin- 
ister each department the necessary constitutional 
means and personal motives to resist encroachments 
of the others." ''But it is not possible to give to 
each department an equal power of self-defence. In 
republican governments the legislative authority 
necessarily predominates." 

The means held out as proper to be employed for 
enabling the several departments to keep each other 
in their proper places are: i. To give to each such 

342 Alexander Hamilton 

an organization as will render them essentially inde- 
pendent of one another. 2 . To secure to each a sup- 
port which shall not be at the discretionary disposal 
of any other. 3. To establish between them such 
mutual relations of authority as will make one a 
check upon another, and enable them reciprocally to 
resist encroachments, and confine one another within 
their proper spheres. 

To accomplish the first end, it is deemed material 
that they should have as little agency as possible 
in the appointment of one another, and should all 
emanate directly from the same fountain of author- 
ity— the people. And that it being expedient to 
relax the principle, in respect to the judiciary depart- 
ment, with a view to a more select choice of its 
organs, this defect in the creation ought to be reme- 
died by a permanent tenure of office ; which certainly 
becomes nominal and nugatory if the existence of 
the office rests on the pleasure of the Legislature. 
The principle that the several organs should have as 
little agency as possible in the appointment of each 
other, is directly opposed to the claim in favor of one 
of a discretionary agency to destroy another. The 
second of the proposed ends is designed to be effected 
by the provisions for fixing the compensations of the 
executive and judicial departments. The third, by 
the qualified negative of the executive on the acts 
of the two houses of Congress; by the right of one 
of these houses to accuse, of the other to try and 
punish, the executive and judicial officers; and 
lastly, by the right of the judges, as interpreters of 
the laws, to pronounce unconstitutional acts void. 

Jefferson's Message 343 

These are the means contemplated by the Consti- 
tution for maintaining the Umits assigned to itself, 
and for enabling the respective organs of the govern- 
ment to keep each other in their proper places, so 
that they may not have it in their power to domineer 
the one over the other, and thereby in effect, though 
not in form, to concentrate the powers in one de- 
partment, overturn the government, and establish 
a tyranny. Unfortunate, if these powerful precau- 
tions shall prove insufficient to accomplish the end 
and stem the torrent of the impostor Innovation, 
disguised in the specious garb of patriotism! 

The views which prevailed in the formation of the 
Constitution are further illustrated by these addi- 
tional comments from the same source.' 

''As liberty can have nothing to fear from the 
judiciary alone, but would have every thing to fear 
from its union with either of the other departments ; 
as all the effects of such a union must ensue from a 
dependence of the former on the latter, notwithstand- 
ing a nominal and apparent separation ; as from the 
natural feebleness of the judiciary it is in continual 
jeopardy of being overpowered, awed, or influenced 
by its co-ordinate branches ; and as nothing can con- 
tribute so much to its firmness and independence as 
permanency in office, this quality may therefore be 
justly regarded as an indispensable ingredient in its 
constitution ; and, in a great measure, as the citadel 
of the public justice and the public security." 

" The complete independence of the courts of jus- 
tice is peculiarly essential in a limited constitution. 

' No. Ixxviii. 

344 Alexander Hamilton 

Limitations can be preserved in practice no other 
way than through the meditim of the courts of jus- 
tice, whose duty it must be to declare all acts con- 
trary to the manifest tenor of the Constitution void." 

Then follows a particular discussion of the posi- 
tion, that it is the right and the duty of the courts to 
exercise such an authority: to repeat which, would 
swell this number to an improper size. 

The essence of the argument is, that every act of 
a delegated authority, contrary to the tenor of the 
commission under which it is exercised, is void ; con- 
sequently that no Legislative act, inconsistent with 
the Constitution, can be valid. That it is not a 
natural presumption that the Constitution intended 
to make the legislative body the final and exclusive 
judges of their own powers; but more rational to 
suppose that the courts were designed to be an in- 
termediate body between the people and the Legis- 
lature, in order, among other things, to keep the 
latter within the bounds assigned to its authority: 
that the interpretation of the laws being the peculiar 
province of the courts, and a Constitution being in 
fact a fundamental law, superior in obligation to a 
statute, if the Constitution and the statute are at 
variance, the former ought to prevail against the 
latter; the will of the people against the will of the 
agents ; and the judges ought in their quality of in- 
terpreters of the laws, to pronounce and adjudge the 
truth, namely, that the imauthorized statute is a 
nullity. 

" Nor (continues the commentor) does this conclu- 
sion by any means suppose a superiority of the ju- 

Jefferson's Message 345 

dicial to the legislative power. It only supposes 
that the power of the people is superior to both ; and 
that where the will of the Legislature declared in its 
statute, stands in opposition to that of the people 
declared in the Constitution, the judges ought to be 
governed by the latter, rather than the former. They 
ought to regulate their decisions by the funda- 
mental laws, rather than by those which are not 
fundamental.'' 

'' If, then, the courts of justice are to be considered 
as the bulwarks of a limited Constitution against legis- 
lative encroachments, this consideration will afford a 
strong argument for the permanent tenure of judicial 
offices." 

But no proposition can be more manifest than 
that this permanency of tenure must be nominal, if 
made defeasible at the pleasure of the Legislature; 
and that it is ridiculous to consider it as an obstacle 
to encroachments of the legislative department, if this 
department has a discretion to vacate or abolish it 
directly or indirectly. 

In recurring to the comments which have been 
cited, it is not meant to consider them as evidence 
of any thing but of the views with which the Con- 
stitution was framed. After all, the instrument 
must speak for itself. Yet, to candid minds, the 
contemporary explanation of it, by men who had 
had a perfect opportunity of knowing the views of 
its framers, must operate as a weighty collateral 
reason for believing the construction agreeing with 
this explanation to be right, rather than the op- 
posite one. It is too cardinal a point, to admit readily 

34^ Alexander Hamilton 

the supposition that there was misapprehension ; and 
whatever motives may have subsequently occurred 
to bias the impressions of the one or the other of the 
persons alluded to, the situation in which they wrote 
exempts both from the suspicion of an intention to 
misrepresent in this particular. Indeed a course of 
argument more accommodating to the objections of 
the adversaries of the Constitution would probably 
have been preferred as most politic, if the truth, as 
conceived at the time, would have permitted a modi- 
fication. Much trouble would have been avoided by 
saying: "The Legislature will have a complete con- 
trol over the judges, by the discretionary power of 
reducing the number of those of the supreme court, 
and of abolishing the existing judges of the inferior 
courts, by the abolition of the courts themselves." 
But this pretension is a novelty reserved for the 
crooked ingenuity of after discoveries. 

Lucius Crassus. 

NO. XVI 

March 19, 1802, 

The President, as a politician, is in one sense 
particularly unfortunate. He furnishes frequent 
opportunities of arraying him against himself — of 
combating his opinions at one period by his opinions 
at another. Without doubt, a wise and good man 
may, on proper grounds, relinquish an opinion which 
he has once entertained, and the change may even 
serve as a proof of candor and integrity. But with 
such a man, changes of this sort, especially in mat- 
ters of high public importance, must be rare. The 

Jefferson's Message 347 

contrary is always a mark, either of a weak and 
versatile mind, or of an artificial and designing 
character; which, accommodating its creed to cir- 
cumstances, takes up or lays down an article of 
faith, just as may suit a present convenience. 

The question in agitation, respecting the judiciary 
department, calls up another instance of opposition 
between the former ideas of Mr. Jefferson and his 
recent conduct. The leading positions which have 
been advanced as explanatory of the policy of the 
Constitution in the structure of the different depart- 
ments and as proper to direct the interpretation of 
the provisions, which were contrived to secure the 
independence and firmness of the judges, are to be 
seen in a very emphatical and distinct form, in the 
Notes on Virginia. The passage in which they ap- 
pear deserves to be cited at length, as well for its 
intrinsic merit, as by way of comment upon the true 
character of its author; presenting an interesting 
contrast between the maxims, which experience had 
taught him while Governor of Virginia, and those 
which now guide him as the official head of a great 
party in the United States. It is in these words: — 

'' All the powers of government, legislative, execu- 
tive, and judiciary, result to the legislative body. 
The concentrating these in the same hands is pre- 
cisely the definition of despotic government. It will 
be no alleviation that these powers will be exercised 
by a plurality of hands, and not by a single one. 
One hundred and seventy-three despots would surely he 
as oppressive as one. Let those who doubt it turn 
their eyes on the republic of Venice. As little will 


it avail us that they are chosen by ourselves. An 
elective despotism was not the government we 
fought for; but one which should not only be 
founded on free principles, but in which the powers 
of government should be so divided and balanced 
among several bodies of magistracy, as that no one 
could transcend their legal limits without being ef- 
fectually checked and restrained by the others. For 
this reason, that convention which passed the or- 
dinance of government, laid its foundation on this 
basis, that the legislative, executive, and judiciary 
departments should be separate and distinct, so that 
no person should exercise the powers of more than 
one of them at the same time. But no harrier was 
provided between these several powers. The judiciary 
and executive members were left dependent on the 
legislative for their subsistence in office, and some of 
them for their continuance in it. If, therefore, the 
Legislature assumes executive and judiciary powers, 
no opposition is likely to be made, — nor if made, can 
be effectual; because, in that case, they may put 
their proceedings into the form of an act of assembly, 
which will render them obligatory on the other 
branches. They have accordingly in many instances 
decided rights which should have been left to judiciary 
controversy; and the direction of the Executive, during 
the whole time of their session, is becoming habitual 
and familiar.'" 

This passage fully recognizes these several im- 
portant truths: that the tendency of our govern- 
ments is towards a concentration of the powers 
of the different departments in the legislative 

Jefferson's Message 349 

body; that such a concentration is precisely the 
DEFINITION of DESPOTISM, and that an effectual 
harrier between the respective departments ought 
to exist. It also, by a strong implication, admits 
that officers during good behavior are independent of 
their Legislature for their continuance in office. This 
implication seems to be contained in the following 
sentence: ''The judiciary and executive members 
were left dependent on the Legislature for their sub- 
sistence in office, and some of them for their continu- 
ance in it,'' The word ''some''' implies that others 
were not left thus dependent; and to what descrip- 
tion of officers can the exception be better applied 
than to the judges, the tenure of whose offices was 
during good behavior? 

The sentiments of the President, delivered at a 
period when he can be supposed to have been under 
no improper bias, must be regarded by all those who 
respect his judgment, as no light evidence of the 
truth of the doctrine for which we contend. Let 
us, however, resume and pursue the subject on its 
merits, without relying upon the aid of so variable 
and fallible an authority. 

At an early part of the discussion in this examina- 
tion, a construction of the Constitution was sug- 
gested, to which it may not be amiss to return. It 
amounts to this, that Congress, have power to new- 
model, or even to abrogate, an inferior court, but not 
to abolish the office or emoluments of a judge of such 
court previously appointed. In the Congressional 
debates, some of the speakers against the repealing 
law appear to have taken it for granted, that the 

350 Alexander Hamilton 

abrogation of the court must draw with it the abolition 
of the judges, and therefore have denied in totaHty 
the power of abrogation. In the course of these 
papers, too, it has been admitted, that if the pre- 
servation of the judges cannot be reconciled with 
the power to annul the court, then the existence of 
this power is rightly denied. But in an affair of such 
vast magnitude, it is all important to survey with the 
utmost caution the ground to be taken, and then to 
take and maintain it with inflexible fortitude and 
preseverance. Truth will be most likely to prevail, 
when the arguments which support it stop at a tem- 
perate mean, consistent with practical convenience. 
Excess is always error. There is hardly any theo- 
retic hypothesis which, carried to a certain extreme, 
does not become practically false. In construing a 
Constitution, it is wise, as far as possible, to pursue a 
course, which will reconcile essential principles with 
convenient modifications. If guided by this spirit, 
in the great question which seems destined to decide 
the fate of our government, it is believed that the 
result will accord with the construction, that Con- 
gress have a right to change or abolish inferior courtSy 
but not to abolish the actual judges. 

Towards the support of this construction, it has 
been shown in another place, that the courts and the 
judges are distinct legal entities, which, in contem- 
plation of law, may exist, independently the one of 
the other — mutually related, but not inseparable. 
The act proposed to be repealed exemplifies this 
idea in practice. It abolishes the District Courts of 
Tennessee and Kentucky, and transfers their judges 

Jefferson's Message 351 

to one of the Circuit Courts. Though the authori- 
ties and jurisdiction of those courts are vested in the 
Circuit Court, to which the judges are transferred; 
yet the identity of the courts ceases. It cannot be 
maintained that courts, so different in their organ- 
ization and jurisdiction, are the same; nor could a 
legislative transfer of the judges have been con- 
stitutional, but upon the hypothesis, that the office 
of a judge may survive the court of which he is a 
member. A new appointment by the Executive, of 
two additional judges, for the Circuit Court, would 
otherwise have been necessary. 

This precedent in all its points is correct, and ex- 
hibits a rational operation of the construction which 
regards the office of the judge as distinct from the 
court; as one of the elements, or constituent parts, 
of which it is composed; not as a mere incident 
that must perish with its principal. 

It will not be disputed, that the Constitution 
might have provided in terms, and with effect, that 
an inferior court which had been established by law 
might by law be abolished, so, nevertheless, that 
the judges of such court should retain the offices of 
judges of the United States with the emoluments 
before attached to their offices. The operation of 
such a provision would be, that when the court was 
abolished, all the functions to be executed in that 
court would be suspended, and the judge could only 
continue to exert the authorities and perform the 
duties, which might before have been performed, 
without reference to causes pending in court; but he 
would have the capacity to be annexed to another 

352 Alexander Hamilton 

court, without the intervention of a new appoint- 
ment, and by that annexation, simply to renew the 
exercise of the authorities and duties which had 
been suspended. 

If this might have been the effect of positive and 
explicit provision, why may it not likewise be the 
result of provisions which, presenting opposite con- 
siderations, point to the same conclusion: as a com- 
promise calculated to reconcile those considerations 
with each other and to unite different objects of 
public utility? Surely the affirmative infringes no 
principle of legal construction; transgresses no rule 
of good sense. 

Let us then inquire, whether there are not in 
this case opposite and conflicting considerations, de- 
manding a compromise of this nature? On the one 
hand, it is evident, that if an inferior court once, 
instituted, though found inconvenient, cannot be 
abolished, this is to entail upon the community the 
mischief, be it more or less, of a first error in the ad- 
ministration of the government; on the other hand, 
it is no less evident, that if the judges hold their 
offices at the discretion of the Legislature, they 
cease to be co-ordinate, and become a dependent 
branch of the government; from which dependence, 
mischiefs infinitely greater are to be expected. 

All these mischiefs, the lesser as well as the greater, 
are avoided by saying: ''Congress may abolish the 
courts, hut the judges shall retain their offices with the 
appertinent emoluments.'' The only remaining in- 
convenience then will be one too insignificant to 
weigh in a national scale, that is, the expense of the 

JefFerson*s Message 353 

compensations of the incumbents during their Hves. 
The future and permanent expense will be done 
away. 

But will this construction secure the benefits in- 
tended by the Constitution to be derived from the 
INDEPENDENT TENURE OF JUDICIAL OFFICE? Sub- 
stantially it will. The main object is to preserve 
the judges from being influenced by an apprehension 
of the loss of the advantages of office. As this loss 
could not be incurred, that influence would not exist. 
Their firmness could not be assailed by the danger of 
being superseded, and perhaps consigned to want. 
Let it be added, that when it was once understood 
not to be in the power of the Legislature to deprive 
the judges of their offices and emoluments, it would 
be a great restraint upon the factious motives which 
might induce the abolition of a court. This would be 
much less likely to happen unless for genuine reasons 
of public utility; and of course there would be a 
much better prospect of the stability of judiciary 

establishments. 

Lucius Crassus. 

NO. XVII 

March 20, 1802. 

It was intended to have concluded the argument 
respecting the judiciary department with the last 
number. But a speech ' lately delivered in the 
House of Representatives having since appeared, 
which brings forward one new position, and reiterates 
some others in a form well calculated to excite 

I By Mr. Giles. 

VOL. Vlll. — 23. 

354 Alexander Hamilton 

prejudice, it may not be useless to devote some 
further attention to the subject. 

The new position is, that the clause of the Con- 
stitution enabling the judges to hold their offices 
during good behavior, ought to be understood to 
have reference to the Executive only, because all 

OFFICES ARE HOLDEN OF THE PRESIDENT!! 

This is the second example of a doctrine contrary 
to every republican idea, broached in the course of 
this debate by the advocates of the repealing law.' 
Had a Federalist uttered the sentiment, the cry of 
monarchy would have resounded from one extremity 
of the United States to the other. It would have 
been loudly proclaimed that the mask was thrown 
aside, by a glaring attempt to transform the servants 
of the people into the supple tools of Presidential 
ambition. But now, to justify a plain violation of 
the Constitution, and serve a party purpose, this bold 
and dangerous position is avowed without hesita- 
tion or scruple, from a quarter remarkable, chiefly, 
for the noisy promulgation of popular tenets. 

The position is not correct; and it is of a nature 
to demand the indignant reprobation of every real 
republican. In the theory of all the American Con- 
stitutions, offices are holden of the government, in 
other words, of the People through the Govern- 
ment. The appointment is indeed confided to a 
particular organ, and in instances in which it is not 
otherwise provided by the Constitution or the laws, 

* The other is the denial of the right of the courts to keep the Legis- 
lature within its constitutional bounds by pronouncing laws which 
transgress them inoperative. 

Jefferson's Message 355 

the removal of the officer is left to the pleasure or 
discretion of that organ. But both these acts sup- 
pose merely an instrumentality of the organ, from 
the necessity or expediency of the people's acting in 
such case by an agent. They do not suppose the 
substitution of the agent to the people, as the object 
of the fealty or allegiance of the officer. 

It is said that the word holden is a technical term 
denoting tenure, and implying that there is one who 
holds; another of whom the thing is holden. This 
assertion is, indeed, agreeable to the common use of 
the word in our law books. But it is hardly to be 
presumed that it was employed in the Constitution 
in so artificial a sense. It is more likely that it was 
designed to be the equivalent of the words possess, 
enjoy. Yet, let the assertion be supposed correct. 
In this case it must also be remembered that the term 
in this technical sense includes two things — the quan- 
tity of interest in the subject holden and the merit- 
orious consideration upon which the grant is made ; 
which in many cases includes service or rent, in all 
fealty ; this last forming emphatically the link or tie 
between the lord and the tenant, the sovereign and 
the officer. Will any one dare to say that fealty 
or allegiance, as applied to the government of the 
United States, is due from the officer to the Presi- 
dent? Certainly it is not. It is due to the people in 
their political capacity. If so, it will follow that the 
office is holden not of the President, but of the Na- 
tion, State, or Government. 

It is remarkable that the Constitution has every- 
where used the language, ''Officers of the United 

35^ Alexander Hamilton 

States," as if to denote the relation between the 
officer and the sovereignty; as if to exclude the 
dangerous pretension that he is the mere creature 
of the Executive ; accordingly, he is to take an oath 
to support the ''Constitution"; that is, an oath of 
fidelity to the government ; but no oath of any kind ^ 
to the President. { 

In the theory of the British Government it is en- 
tirely different; there the majesty of the nation is 
understood to reside in the prince. He is deemed 
the real sovereign. He is, emphatically, the fount- 
ain of honor. Allegiance is due to him; and, con- 
sequently, public offices are, in the true notion of 
tenure, holden of him. But in our Constitution the 
President is not the sovereign; the sovereignty is 
vested in the government, collectively; and it is of 
the sovereignty, strictly and technically speaking, 
that a public officer holds his office. 

If this view of the matter be just, the basis of the 
argument, in point of fact, fails ; and the principle of 
it suggests an opposite conclusion, namely, that the 
condition of good behavior is obligatory on the whole 
government, and ought to operate as a barrier against 
any authority by which the displacement of the 
judges may be directly or indirectly effected. 

In the same speech much stress has been laid on 
the words, ''during their continuance in office," as 
implying that the compensation of the judge was 
liable to cease by a legislative discontinuance of the 
office. If the words had been, during the continu- 
ance of the o-fflce, the argument would have been per- 
tinent— but as they stand, a different inference, if 

Jefferson's Message 357 

any, is to be drawn from them. They seem rather 
to relate to the continuance of the officer than to that 
of the office. But, in truth, an inference either way 
is a pitiful subtilty. The clause is neutral ; its plain 
and simple meaning being that the compensation 
shall not be diminished while the judge retains the 
office. It throws no light whatever on the question 
how he may lawfully cease to possess it. 

Another point is pressed with great earnestness 
and with greater plausibility. It is this: that the 
Constitution must have intended to attach recom- 
pense to service, and cannot be supposed to have 
meant to bestow compensation where, in the opinion 
of the Legislature, no service was necessary. With- 
out doubt, the Constitution does contemplate serv- 
ice as the ground of compensation; but it likewise 
takes it for granted that the Legislature will be cir- 
cumspect in the institution of offices ; and especially 
that it will be careful to establish none of a permanent 
nature which will not be permanently useful. With 
this general presumption the Constitution antici- 
pates no material inconvenience from the perman- 
ency of judicial offices connected with permanent 
emoluments. And though it should have foreseen 
that cases might happen in which the service was 
not needed, yet there is no difficulty whatever in the 
supposition that it was willing to encounter the 
trivial contingent evil of having to maintain a few 
superfluous officers, in order to obtain the immense 
good of establishing and securing the independence 
of the courts of justice. The readiness of the officer 
to render service at the will of the government is the 


consideration, as to him, for continuing the compen- 
sation. But the essential inducement is the public 
utility incident to the independency of the judicial 
character. As to the supposition of an enormous 
abuse of power by creating a long list of sinecures 
and a numerous host of pensioners, whenever such a 
thing shall happen, it will constitute one of those ex- 
treme cases which, on the principle of necessity, may 
authorize extra-constitutional remedies. But these 
are cases which can never be appealed to for the in- 
terpretation of a Constitution, which, in meting out 
the powers of the government, must be supposed to 
adjust them on the presumption of a fair execution. 
A further topic of argument is, that our doctrine 
would equally restrain the Legislature from abolish- 
ing offices held during pleasure. But this is not 
true. The two things stand on different ground. 
First, the Executive has such an agency in the enact- 
ing of laws, that, as a general rule, the displacement 
of the officer cannot happen against his pleasure. 
Second, the pleasure of the President, in all cases 
not particularly excepted, is understood to be sub- 
ject to the direction of the law. Third, an officer 
during pleasure, having merely a revocable interest, 
the abolition of his office is no infringement of his 
right. In substance, he is a tenant at the will of the 
government, liable to be discontinued by the execu- 
tive organ, in the form of a removal ; by the legis- 
lative, in the form of an abolition of the office. These 
different considerations reconcile the legislative au- 
thority to abolish, with the prerogative of the Chief 
Magistrate to remove, and with the temporary right 

Jefferson's Message 359 

of individuals to hold. And therefore there is no 
reason against the exercise of such an authority; 
nothing to form an exception to the general competency 
of the legislative power to provide for the public wel- 
fare. Very different is the case as to the judges. 
The most persuasive motives of public policy, the 
safety of liberty itself, require that the judges shall 
be independent of the legislative body; in order 
to maintain effectually the separation between the 
several departments. The provision that their com- 
pensation shall not be diminished, is a clear con- 
stitutional indication that their independence was 
intended to be guarded against the Legislature. 
The express declaration that they shall hold their 
offices during good behavior — that is, upon a condi- 
tion dependent on themselves, is repugnant to the 
hypothesis that they shall hold at the mere pleasure 
of others. Provisions which profess to confer rights 
on individuals, are always entitled to a liberal in- 
terpretation in support of the rights, and ought 
not, without necessity, to receive an interpretation 
subversive of them. Provisions which respect the 
organization of a co-ordinate branch of the govern- 
ment, ought to be construed in such a manner as to 
procure for it stability and efficiency, rather than 
in such a manner as to render it weak, precarious, 
and dependent. These various and weighty reasons 
serve to establish strong lines of discrimination be- 
tween judicial and other officers; and to prove that 
no inference can be drawn from the power of the 
Legislature as to the latter, which will be applicable 
to the former. 

3^0 Alexander Hamilton 

One more defence of this formidable claim is at- 
tempted to be drawn from the example of the judici- 
ary establishment of Great Britain. It is observed 
that this establishment, the theme of copious eulogy 
on account of the independence of the judges, places 
those officers upon a footing far less firm than will be 
that of the judges of the United States, even admit- 
ting the right of Congress to abolish their offices by 
abolishing the courts of which they are members. 
And as one proof of the assertion, it is mentioned, 
that the English judges are removable by the king, 
on the address of the two houses of Parliament. 

All this might be very true, and yet would prove 
nothing as to what is or ought to be the construction 
of our Constitution on this point. It is plain from 
the provisions respecting compensation, that the 
framers of that Constitution intended to prop the 
independence of our judges, beyond the precautions 
which have been adopted in England in respect to 
the judges of that country; and the intention ap- 
parent in this particular is an argument that the 
same spirit may have governed other provisions. 
Cogent reasons have been assigned, applicable to our 
system, and not applicable to the British system, 
for securing the independence of our judges against 
the legislative as well as against the executive 
power. 

It is alleged that the statute of Great Britain of 
the 13 of William III. was the model from which the 
framers of our Constitution copied the provisions for 
the independence of our judiciary. It is certainly 
true, that the idea of the tenure of office during good 

Jefferson's Message 361 

behavior, found in several of our constitutions, is 
borrowed from that source. But it is evident that 
the framers of our federal system did not mean to 
confine themselves to that model. Hence the re- 
straint of the legislative discretion, as to compensa- 
tion; hence the omission of the provision for the 
removal of the judges by the Executive, on the ap- 
plication of the two branches of the Legislature — a 
provision which has been imitated in some of the 
State governments. 

This very omission affords no light inference, that 
it was the intention to depart from the principle of 
making the judges removable from office, by the 
co-operation or interposition of the legislative body. 
Why else was this qualification of the permanent 
tenure of the office, which forms a conspicuous 
feature in the British statute, and in some of the 
State constitutions, dropped in the plan of the fed- 
eral government? 

The insertion of it in the British statute may also 
be supposed to have been indicated by the opinion 
that without a special reservation, the words during 
good behavior would have imported an irrevocable 
tenure. If so, the precaution will serve to fortify 
our construction. 

But, however it may seem in theory, in fact the 
difference in the genius of the two governments 
would tend to render the independence of the 
judges more secure under the British statute than it 
would be in this country, upon the construction 
which allows to Congress the right to abolish. The 
reason is this: From the Constitution of the British 

1^2 Alexander Hamilton 

monarchy, the thing chiefly to be apprehended is an 
overbearing influence of the crown upon the judges. 
The jealousy of executive influence resting upon more 
powerful motives in that country than in this, it may 
be expected to operate as a stronger obstacle there 
than here to an improper combination between the 
executive and legislative departments to invade the 
judiciary. Moreover, the British Executive has 
greater means of resisting parliamentary control 
than an American Executive has of resisting the 
control of an American Legislature; consequently 
the former would be in less danger than the latter, of 
being driven to a concurrence in measures hostile to 
the independence of the judges. And in both these 
ways, there would be greater security for the British 
than for the American judges. 

Thus is it manifest, that in every attitude in which 
the subject has been placed, the argument is vic- 
torious against the power of Congress to abolish the 
judges. But what, alas! avails the demonstration 
of this important truth? The fatal blow has been 
struck! It is no longer possible to arrest the rash 
and daring arm of power! Can the proof that it 
has acted without right, without warrant, can this 
heal the wound ? can this renovate the perishing Con- 
stitution ? Yes, let us hope that this will be the case. 
Let us trust that the monitory voice of true patriot- 
ism will at length reach the ears of a considerate 
people, and will rouse them to a imited and vigorous 
exertion for the restoration of their violated char- 
ter; not by means, either disorderly or guilty, but 
by means which the Constitution will sanction and 

Jefferson's Message 363 

reason approve. Surely this will be so. A people 
who, descrying tyranny at a distance, and guided only 
by the light of just principles, before they had yet 
felt the scourge of oppression, could nobly hazard all 
in defence of their rights; a people who, sacrificing 
their prejudices on the altar of experience, and spum- 
ing the artifices of insidious demagogues, could, as a 
deliberate act of national reason, adopt and establish 
for themselves a Constitution which bid fair to im- 
mortalize their glory and their happiness: such a 
people, though misled for a period, will not be the 
final victims of a delusion, alike inauspicious to their 
reputation and to their welfare. They will not long 
forget the fame they have so justly merited, nor give 
the world occasion to ascribe to accident what has 
hitherto been imputed to wisdom. They will dis- 
dain to herd with the too long list of degraded na- 
tions, who have bowed their necks to unworthy idols 
of their own creating — who, immolating their best 
friends at the shrine of falsehood, have sunk under 
the yoke of sycophants and betrayers. They will 
open their eyes and see the precipice on which they 
stand! They will look around and select from 
among the throng, the men who have heretofore 
established a claim to their confidence on the solid 
basis of able and faithful service ; and they will, with 
indignation and scorn, banish from their favor the 
wretched impostors who, with honeyed lips and 
guileful hearts, are luring them to destruction ! Ad- 
monished by the past, and listening again to the 
counsels of real friends, they will make a timely re- 
treat from the danger which threatens; they will 

3^4 Alexander Hamilton 

once more arrange themselves under the banners of 
the Constitution; with anxious care will repair the 
breaches that have been made, and will raise new 
mounds against the future assaults of open or secret 
enemies! 

Lucius Crassus. 

NO. XVIII 

April 8, 1802. 

In order to cajole the people, the message abounds 
with all the commonplace of popular harangue, and 
prefers claims of merit, for circumstances of equi- 
vocal or of trivial value. With pompous absurdity 
are we told of the ''multiplication of men, susceptible 
of happiness'' (as if this susceptibility were a privi- 
lege peculiar to our climate), ''habituated to self- 
government, and valuing its blessings above all price. ' ' 
Fortunate it will be, if the present favorites of the 
people do not, before their reign is at an end, trans- 
form those blessings into curses, so serious and 
heavy, as to make even despotism a desirable refuge 
from the elysium of democracy. 

In a country, the propensities of which are op- 
posed even to necessary burdens, an alarm is at- 
tempted to be excited about the general tendency of 
government, " to leave to labor the smallest portion 
of its earnings on which it can subsist, and to con- 
sume the residue of what it was instituted to guard." 
It might have been well to have explained whether 
it is the whole of the earnings of labor which govern- 
ment is instituted to guard, or only the residue after 
deducting what is necessary to enable it to fulfil the 

Jefferson^s Message 365 

duty of protection. Representatives who share with 
their constituents in an excessive jealousy of executive 
abuses, are cantingly admonished to " circumscribe 
discretionary powers over money," though they are 
known to be already so limited, as that the Execu- 
tive, even on the prospect of a rupture with a foreign 
power, would not possess the means of obtaining in- 
telligence the most necessary for the proper direction 
of its measures. That the new administration has 
not boldly invaded the laws and withheld the funds 
applicable to the payment of the principal and in- 
terest of the public debt, is fastidiously proclaimed 
as evidence that '' the public faith has been exactly 
maintained." The praise of a spirit of economy is 
attempted to be gained by the suppression of a 
trifling number of officers (a majority of whom had 
become unnecessary by the mere change of circum- 
stances), and by declaiming, with affectation, against 
''the multiplication of officers and the increase of ex- 
pense.'' The proposition to reduce our insignificant 
military establishment (the actual number of troops 
probably not exceeding that which is intended to be 
retained) cannot be suggested, without tickling our 
ears with the trite but favorite maxim, that "a 
standing army ought not to he kept up in time of peace.'' 
To make a display of concern for their prosperity, 
agriculture, manufactures, commerce, and navigation 
are introduced among the pageants of the piece; 
but, except as ''to protection from casual embarrass- 
ments," we are sagaciously informed that these 
*' GREAT PILLARS of our prosperity ought to be left to 
take care of themselves. ' ' The carrying trade, however, 

3^6 Alexander Hamilton 

seems to engage more solicitude; no doubt that 
we may be terrified by the expectation of future 
evils, from a much-traduced instrument,' which in 
time past has done nothing but good, in spite of the 
gloomy predictions of patriotic seers. 

Such are the minor features of this curious per- 
formance. Had these been its only blemishes, a re- 
gard to national reputation would have forbidden a 
comment; but connected as they are with schemes 
of innovation replete with great present mischief, 
and still greater future danger ; designed as they are 
to varnish over projects which threaten to precipitate 
our nation from an enviable height of prosperity to 
that low and abject state from which it was raised by 
the establishment and wise administration of our 
present government, they become entitled to notice 
as additional indications of character and disposi- 
tion. 

The merits of the message have now been pretty 
fully discussed ; but before it is dismissed it may be 
useful to take a view of it in another and a different 
light — as one link in a chain of testimony which the 
force of circumstances, at every step of the new ad- 
ministration, extorts from them, in favor of their 
predecessors. 

The President, on the threshold of office, at the 
first opportunity, of speaking to his constituents, in 
his very inaugural speech, full of a truth which the 
most rancorous prejudice cannot obscure, and not 
sufficiently reflecting on the inferences which would 
be drawn, proclaims aloud to the world, that a gov- 

* The treaty with Great Britain. 

Jefferson's Message 367 

ernment which he had disapproved in its institution, 
and virulently opposed in its progress, was in the 

FULL TIDE OF SUCCESSFUL EXPERIMENT. In the last 

address he again unconsciously becomes the pane- 
gyrist of those whom he seeks to depreciate. The 
situation in which (humanly speaking) we have been 
preserved by the prudent and firm councils of the 
preceding administrations, amidst the revolutionary 
and convulsive throes, amidst the desolating con- 
flicts, of Europe, is there a theme of emphatic gratu- 
lation. It shall not be forgotten, as the solitary 
merit of the address, that we are reminded of the 
gratitude due to Heaven for the blessings of this situa- 
tion. Amidst the spurious symptoms of a spirit of 
reform, it is consoling to observe one which, in char- 
ity, ought to be supposed genuine. But it would 
not have diminished oiu* conviction of its sincerity, 
if the instruments of Providence, in the accomplish- 
ment of the happy work, had not been entirely 
overlooked ; since this would have been evidence of 
a willingness to acknowledge and retract error — to 
make reparation for injury. But though they have 
been overlooked by the message, the American peo- 
ple ought never for a moment to forget them. Their 
efforts and their struggles, their moderation and 
their energy, their care and their foresight; the mad 
and malignant opposition of their political adver- 
saries ; the charges of pusillanimity and perfidy lav- 
ished on the declaration of neutrality ; the resistance 
to measures for avoiding a rupture with Great Brit- 
ain; the attempt to rush at once into reprisals; the 
cry for war with the enemies of France, as the enemies 

368 Alexander Hamilton 

of republican liberty; — all these things should be 
forever imprinted on the memory of a just and 
vigilant nation. And in recollecting them, they 
should equally recollect that the opposers of the 
salutary plans to which they are so much indebted, 
were and are the zealous partisans of the present 
head of our government ; who have at all times sub- 
mitted to his influence and implicitly obeyed his 
nod; who never would have pursued with so much 
vehemence the course they did, had they known it to 
be contrary to the views of their chief : nor should it 
be forgotten that this chief, in the negotiation with 
the British minister, conducted by him as Secretary 
of State, acted precisely as if it had been his design 
to widen, not to heal, the breach between the two 
countries ; that he at first objected to the declaration 
of neutrality; was afterwards reluctantly dragged 
into the measures connected with it; was believed 
by his friends not to approve the system of conduct 
of which he was the official organ ; was publicly and 
openly accused by the then agent of the French re- 
public with duplicity and deception, with having 
been the first to inflame his mind with ill impres- 
sions of the principles and views of leading characters 
in our government, not excepting the revered 
Washington; that this chief, at a very critical pe- 
riod of our affairs in reference to the war of Europe, 
withdrew from the direction of that department 
peculiarly charged with the management of our 
foreign relations, evidently to avoid being more 
deeply implicated in the consequences of the position 
which had been assumed by the administration, but 

JefFerson*s Message 369 

on the hollow pretence of a dislike to public life and 
a love of philosophic retirement. Citizens of Amer- 
ica, mark the sequel and learn from it instruction! 
You have been since agitated to the centre, to raise 
to the first station in your government the very man 
who, at a conjuncture when your safety and your 
welfare demanded his stay, early relinquished a 
subordinate but exalted and very influential post, 
on a pretence as frivolous as it has proved to be 
insincere! Was he, like the virtuous Washington, 
forced from a beloved retreat by the unanimous and 
urgent call of his country ? No ; he stalked forth the 
champion of faction — having never ceased in the 
shade of his retreat, by all the arts of intrigue, to 
prepare the way to that elevation for which a rest- 
less ambition impatiently panted. 

The undesigned eulogy of the men who have been 
slandered out of the confidence of their fellow-citizens, 
has not been confined to the situation of the country 
as connected with the war of Europe. In the view 
given of the very flourishing state of our finances, the 
worst of the calumnies against those men is refuted, 
and it is admitted, that in this article of vital im- 
portance to the public welfare, their measures have 
been provident and effectual beyond example. To 
the charge of a design to saddle the nation with a 
perpetual debt, a plain contradiction is given by the 
concession, that the provisions which have been 
made for it are so ample, as even to justify the re- 
linquishment of a part no less considerable than 
the whole of the internal revenue. The same proposal 
testifies the brilliant success of our fiscal system 

VOL. VIII.— 24. 

370 Alexander Hamilton 

generally ; and that it is more than equal to all that 
has been undertaken, to all that has been promised 
to the nation. 

The report of the Secretary of the Treasury, as 
published, confirms this high commendation of the 
conduct of the former administrations. After reliev- 
ing each State from the burden of its particular debt, 
by assuming the payment of it on account of the 
United States, in addition to the general debt of 
the nation ; after settling the accounts between the 
States relatively to their exertions for the common 
defence in our revolutionary war, and providing for 
the bala,nces found due to such of them as were 
creditors; after maintaining, with complete success, 
an obstinate and expensive war with the Indian 
tribes; after making large disbursements for the 
suppression of two insurrections against the govern- 
ment; after liberal contributions to the Barbary 
powers, to induce them to open to our merchants 
the trade of the Mediterranean; after incurring a 
responsibility for indemnities to a large amount, due 
to British merchants, in consequence of infractions 
of the treaty of peace by some of the States; after 
heavy expenditures for creating and supporting a 
navy, and for other preparations, to guard our in- 
dependence and territory against the hostilities of 
a foreign nation; — after the accomplishment of all 
these very important objects, it is now declared to 
the United States, by the present head of the Treas- 
ury, by the confidential minister of the present Chief 
Magistrate, by the most subtle and implacable of 
the enemies of the former administrations, '' That the 

Jefferson's Message 371 

actual revenues of the Union are sufficient to defray 
all the expenses, civil and military^ of government, to 
the extent authorized by existing laws; to meet all 

THE ENGAGEMENTS OF THE UNITED STATES ; and tO 

discharge in fifteen years and a half the whole of 
OUR public debt" — foreign as well as domestic, 
new as well as old. Let it be understood, that the 
revenues spoken of were all provided under the two 
first administrations; and that the ''existing laws" 
alluded to were all passed under the same adminis- 
trations; consequently, that the revenues had not been 
increased, nor the expenses diminished, by the men 
who now hold the reins; and then let it be asked, 
whether so splendid a result does not reflect the high- 
est credit on those who in time past have managed 
the affairs of the nation? Does not the picture fur- 
nish matter not only for consolation, but even for 
exultation, to every true friend of his country? 
And amidst the joy which he must feel in the con- 
templation, can he be so unjust as to refuse the 
tribute of commendation to those by whose labors 
his country has been placed on so fair an eminence ? 
Will he endure to see any part of the fruits of those 
labors blasted or hazarded, by a voluntary surrender 
of any portion of the means which are to insure the 
advantages of so bright a prospect? 

In vain will envy or malevolence reply: "The 
happy situation in which we are placed is to be 
attributed, not to the labors of those who have here- 
tofore conducted our affairs, but to an unforeseen 
and unexpected progress of our country." Candor 
and truth will answer : Praise is always due to public 

372 Alexander Hamilton 

men who take their measures in such a manner 
as to derive to the nation the benefit of favorable 
circumstances which are possible, as well as of those 
which are foreseen. If proportionate provision had 
not been made, concurrently with the progress of 
our national resources, the effect of them would not 
have been felt as to the past, and would not have 
been matured as to the future. 

But why should it be pretended that the progress 
was not anticipated? In past experience, there 
were many data for calculation. The ratio of the 
increase of our population had been observed and 
stated ; the extent and riches of our soil were known ; 
the materials for commercial enterprise were no 
secret; the probable effect of the measures of the 
government, to foster and encourage navigation, 
trade, and industry, was well understood; and espe- 
cially, the influence of the means which were adapted 
to augment our active capital, and to supply a fit 
and adequate medium of circulation, towards the 
increase of national wealth, was declared and insisted 
upon, in official reports. Though adventitious cir- 
cumstances may have aided the result, it is certain, 
that a penetrating and comprehensive mind could 
be at no loss to foresee a progress to our affairs, 
similar to what has been experienced. Upon this 
anticipation, the assumption of the State debts, 
and other apparently bold measures of the govern- 
ment, were avowedly predicated, in opposition to the 
feeble and contracted views of the little politi- 
cians, who now triumph in the success of their arts, 
and enjoy the benefits of a policy, which they had 

Lansing or Burr 373 

neither the wisdom to plan nor the spirit to adopt; 
idly imagining that the cunning of a demagogue and 
the talents of a statesman are synonymous. Con- 
summate in the paltry science of courting and win- 
ning popular favor, they falsely infer that they have 
the capacity to govern, and they will be the last to 
discover their error. But let them be assured that 
the people will not long continue the dupes of their 
pernicious sorceries. Already the cause of truth has 
derived this advantage from the crude essays of their 
chief, that the film has been removed from many an 
eye. The credit of great abilities was allowed him 
by a considerable portion of those who disapproved 
his principles; but the short space of nine months 
has been amply sufficient to dispel that illusion ; and 
even some of his most partial votaries begin to sus- 
pect that they have been mistaken in the object 

OF THEIR IDOLATRY. 

Lucius Crassus. 

LANSING OR BURR ' 

reasons why it is desirable that MR. LANSING 
RATHER THAN COL. BURR SHOULD SUCCEED 

": , 1804. 
I. Col. Burr has steadily pursued the track of 
democratic politics. This he has done either from 

^ Burr was in the midst of his fight with Jefferson, and Lansing re- 
ceived the regular Democratic nomination for Governor. Burr made 
a split, also received a nomination, and looked to the Federalists for 
support. Five days before Burr was nominated a meeting of leading 
Federalists was held in Albany, and Hamilton then read this paper. 
Lansing declined to run and Lewis was then nominated. The tendency 
of the Federalists was towards Burr, but Hamilton by his attitude 
divided them and Lewis was elected. 

374 Alexander Hamilton 

principle or from calculation. If the former, he is 
not likely now to change his plan, when the Federal- 
ists are prostrate, and their enemies predominant. 
If the latter, he will certainly not at this time relin- 
quish the ladder of his ambition, and espouse the 
cause or views of the weaker party. 

2. Though detested by some of the leading Clin- 
tonians, he is certainly not personally disagreeable to 
the great body of them, and it will be no difficult 
task for a man of talents, intrigue, and address, pos- 
sessing the chair of government, to rally the great 
body of them under his standard, and thereby to 
consolidate for personal purposes, the mass of the 
Clintonians, his own adherents among the Demo- 
crats, and such Federalists as, from personal good- 
will or interested motives, may give him support. 

3. The effect of his elevation will be to reunite 
under a more adroit, able, and daring chief, the now 
scattered fragments of the Democratic party, and 
to reinforce it by a strong detachment from the 
Federalists. For though virtuous Federalists, who, 
from miscalculation, may support him, would after- 
wards relinquish his standard, a large number from 
various motives would continue attached to it. 

4. A farther effect of his elevation by aid of the 
Federalists will be, to present to the confidence of 
New England, a man, already the man of the Demo- 
cratic leaders of that country, and towards whom the 
mass of the people have no weak predilection, as 
their countryman, as the grandson of President 
Edwards, and the son of President Burr. In vain 
will certain men resist this predilection, when it can 

Lansing or Burr 375 

be said, that he was chosen governor of this State, in 
which he was best known, principally, or in a great 
degree, by the aid of the Federalists. 

5. This will give him fair play to disorganize New 
England, if so disposed; a thing not very difficult, 
when the strength of the Democratic party in each 
of the New England States is considered, and the 
natural tendency of our civil institutions is duly 
weighed. 

6. The ill opinion of Jefferson, and jealousy of the 
ambition of Virginia, is no inconsiderable prop of 
good principles in that country. But these causes 
are leading to an opinion, that a dismemberment of 
the Union is expedient. It would probably suit Mr. 
Burr's views to promote this result, to be the chief of 
the Northern portion ; and placed at the head of the 
State of New York, no man would be more likely to 
succeed. 

7. If he be truly, as the Federalists have believed, 
a man of irregular and unsatiable ambition, if his 
plan has been to rise to power on the ladder of Jaco- 
binic principles, it is natural to conclude that he 
will endeavor to fix himself in power by the same 
instrument; that he will not lean on a fallen and 
failing party, generally speaking, of a character not 
to favor usurpation and the ascendancy of a despotic 
chief. Every day shows, more and more, the much 
to be regretted tendency of governments entirely 
popular, to dissolution and disorder. Is it rational 
to expect that a man, who had the sagacity to foresee 
this tendency, and whose temper would permit him 
to bottom his aggrandizement on popular prejudices 

37^ Alexander Hamilton 

and vices, would desert the system at a time when, 
more than ever, the state of things invites him to ad- 
here to it? 

8. If Lansing is governor, his personal character 
affords some security against pernicious extremes, 
and at the same time renders it morally certain, that 
the democratic party, already much divided and 
weakened, will moulder and break asunder more and 
more. This is certainly a state of things favorable 
to the future ascendancy of the wise and good. May 
it not lead to a recasting of parties, by which the 
Federalists will gain a great accession of force from 
former opponents? At any rate is it not wiser in 
them to promote a course of things, by which schism 
among the Democrats will be fostered and increased, 
than on fair calculation to give them a chief, better 
able than any they have yet had, to unite and direct 
them; and in a situation to infer rottenness in the 
only part of our country which still remains sound, 
the Federal States of New England? 

LAW BRIEFS 

VALIDITY OF CERTAIN BRITISH ACTS 

Question. Will the acts (particularly judgments 
and executions) of courts, exercising jurisdiction un- 
der the authority of Great Britain, subsequent to the 
time when by the treaty of peace the Western posts 
ought to have been delivered up, within the districts 
comprehending those posts, be recognized as valid by 
the courts of the United States? 

Law Briefs 377 

This question is both new and difficult. The argu- 
ment for the negative is — that the treaty of peace 
having admitted those territories to be within the 
United States, the detention of them after the time 
when they ought to have been surrendered, and all 
exercise of inspection over them by Great Britain 
after that time, to be wrongful and unlawful; espe- 
cially as not sanctioned by the jus belli, there being 
a state of peace, consequently the tribunals of Great 
Britain are illegal and incompetent, interfering with 
those of the United States, and their acts as nullities. 

The argument for the affirmative is — that Great 
Britain being antecedently in the possession of those 
posts (jure belli) and not having actually restored 
them to the jurisdiction of the United States after 
the peace, her anterior jurisdiction must be supposed 
to have continued, and that of the United States in 
virtue of territorial right, suspended by the adverse 
possession of a foreign sovereign power ; that, there- 
fore, there was no interference of jurisdiction, espe- 
cially as the United States had not within the districts 
in question any competent organs to exercise juris- 
diction. That the treaty of peace having only 
stipulated that the posts should be delivered up as 
soon as conveniently might be, there was no judicial 
epoch from which to date the cessation of British 
jurisdiction and the commencement of American. 

That the wrongful detention was a question be- 
tween the two governments foreign to the fact of 
jurisdiction, as it respected individuals and the effects 
of it. That with regard to those who were under 
the coercion of the jurisdiction in facty and whose 

2,7^ Alexander Hamilton 

mutual dealings had reference to it, the legal effects 
ought to be according to the fact. That convenience 
and legal justice will both be promoted by this prin- 
ciple and extremely infringed by its opposite. 

It is impossible to foresee with certainty what will 
be the determination of the courts of the United 
States on the point ; but it is conceived that the ar- 
gument for the affirmative, on great principles of 
policy, convenience, and right, ought to prevail, and 
it is presumed that it will. 

„ j,^^.^3 CARRIAGE TAX' 

^ ^ February 24, 1795. 

What is the distinction between direct and indirect 
taxes ? It is a matter of regret that terms so uncer- 
tain and vague in so important a point are to be 
found in the Constitution. We shall seek in vain 

* Hamilton, when Secretary of the Treasury, recommended a tax on 
pleasure carriages and Madison opposed it in the House on the ground 
that it was a direct tax, and therefore unconstitutional. The bill laying 
the tax became a law, and certain persons in Virginia refused to pay the 
tax, taking Madison's position as to its unconstitutionality. The case 
came before the Supreme Court, and Hamilton appeared for the gov- 
ernment with the Attorney-General of the United States. One of the 
newspapers said next day (Feb. 25th): "Yesterday, in the Supreme 
Court of the United States, Mr. Hamilton, late Secretary of the 
Treasury, made a most eloquent speech in support of the constitution- 
ality of the carriage tax. He spoke for three hours, and the whole of 
his argument was clear, impressive, and classical. The audience, which 
was very numerous, and among whom were many foreigners of dis- 
tinction and many of the Members of Congress, testified the effect pro- 
duced by the talents of this great orator and statesman." 

All that now remains of the argument is the fragment of a brief given 
above. The case was Hylton vs. the United States, and is reported 
I Dallas, 171. The court sustained Hamilton's view, and held unani- 
mously that the tax was not direct and therefore constitutional. 

Carriage Tax 379 

for any antecedent settled legal meaning to the re- 
spective terms — there is none. 

We shall be as much at a loss to find any disposi- 
tion of either which can satisfactorily determine the 
point. 

Shall we call an indirect tax, a tax which is ulti- 
mately paid by a person, different from the one who 
pays it in the first instance? 

Truly speaking, there is no such tax — those on 
imported articles best claim the character. But in 
many instances the merchant cannot transfer the 
tax to the buyer ; in numerous cases it falls on him- 
self, partly or wholly. Besides, if the same article 
which is imported by a merchant for sale, is imported 
by a merchant for his own use, or by a lawyer, a phy- 
sician, or mechanic, for his own use, there can be no 
question about the transfer of the tax. It remains 
upon him who pays it. 

According to that rule, then, the same tax may be 
both a direct and indirect tax, which is an absurdity. 
To urge that a man may either buy an article already 
imported, or import it himself, amounts to nothing; 
sometimes he could not have that option. 

But the option of an individual cannot alter the 
nature of a thing. In like manner he might avoid 
the tax on carriages by hiring occasionally instead of 
buying. 

The subject of taxation, not the contingent optional 
conduct of individuals, must be the criterion of 
direct or indirect taxation. Shall it be said that an 
indirect tax is that of which a man is not conscious 
when he pays? Neither is there any such tax. The 

380 Alexander Hamilton 

ignorant may not see the tax in the enhanced price 
of the commodity — but the man of reflection knows 
it is there. Besides, when any but a merchant pays, 
as in the case of the lawyer, etc., who imports for 
himself, he cannot but be conscious that it falls upon 
himself. 

By this rule, also, then a tax would be both direct 
and indirect — and it will be equally impracticable to 
find any other precise or satisfactory criterion. 

In such a case no construction ought to prevail 
calculated to defeat the express and necessary au- 
thority of the government. 

It would be contrary to reason, and to every rule 
of sound construction, to adopt a principle for regu- 
lating the exercise of a clear constitutional power 
which would defeat the exercise of the power. 

It cannot be contested that a duty on carriages 
specifically is as much within the authority of the 
government as a duty on lands or buildings. 

Now, if a duty on carriages is to be considered as 
a direct tax, to be apportioned according to the rates 
of representation, very absurd consequences must 
ensue. 

'T is possible that a particular State may have no 
carriages of the description intended to be taxed, or 
a very small number. 

But each State would have to pay a proportion of 
the sum to be laid, according to its relative numbers ; 
yet, while the State would have to pay a quota, it 
might have no carriages upon which its quota could 
be assessed, or so few, as to render it ruinous to the 
owners to pay the tax. To consider then a duty on 

Carriage Tax 381 

carriages as a direct tax, may be to defeat the power 
of laying such a duty. This is a consequence which 
ought not to ensue from construction. 

Further: If the tax on carriages be a direct tax, 
that on ships according to their tonnage must be so 
Hkewise. Here is not a consumable article. Here 
the tax is paid by the owner of the thing taxed, 
from time to time, as would be the tax on carriages. 

If it be said that the tax is indirect because it is 
alternately paid by the freighter of the vessel, the 
answer is, that sometimes the owner is himself the 
freighter, and at other times the tonnage accrues 
when there is no freight, and is a dead charge on the 
owner of the vessel. 

Moreover, a tax on a hackney or stage-coach or 
other carriage, or on a dray or cart employed in 
transporting commodities for hire, would be as much 
a charge on the freight as a tax upon vessels; so 
that, if the latter be an indirect tax, the former can- 
not be a direct tax. 

And it would be too great a refinement for a rule 
of practice in government to say, that a tax on a 
hackney or stage-coach, and upon a dray or cart, is 
an indirect one, and yet a tax upon a coach or wagon 
ordinarily used for the purposes of its owner, is a 
direct one. 

The only known source of the distinction between 
direct and indirect taxes is in the doctrine of the 
French Economists — Locke and other speculative 
writers — who affirm that all taxes fall ultimately 
upon land, and are paid out of its produce, whether 
laid immediately upon itself, or upon any other thing. 

382 Alexander Hamilton 

Hence, taxes upon lands are in that system called 
direct taxes ; those on all other articles indirect taxes. 

According to this, land taxes only would be direct 
taxes, but it is apparent that something more was 
intended by the Constitution. In one case, a capita- 
tion is spoken of as a direct tax. 

But how is the meaning of the Constitution to 
be determined? It has been affirmed, and so it will 
be found, that there is no general principle which 
can indicate the boundary between the two. That 
boundary, then, must be fixed by a species of arbitra- 
tion, and ought to be such as will involve neither 
absurdity nor inconvenience. 

The following are presumed to be the only direct 
taxes. 

Capitation or poll taxes. 

Taxes on lands and buildings. 

General assessments, whether on the whole prop- 
erty of individuals, or on their whole real or personal 
estate; all else must of necessity be considered as 
indirect taxes. 

To apply a rule of apportionment according to 
numbers to taxes of the above description, has some 
rationale in it; but to extend an apportionment of 
that kind to other cases, would, in many instances, 
produce, as has been seen, preposterous conse- 
quences, and would greatly embarrass the opera- 
tions of the government. Nothing could be more 
capricious or outre, than the application of quotas 
in such cases. 

The Constitution gives power to Congress to lay 
and collect the taxes, duties, imposts, and excises, 

The Law of Libel 2>^^ 

requiring that all duties, imposts, and excises shall 
be uniform throughout the United States. 

Here duties, imposts, and excises appear to be con- 
tradistinguished from taxes, and while the latter is 
left to apportionment, the former are enjoined to be 
uniform. 

But, unfortunately, there is equally here a want of 
criterion to distinguish duties, imposts, and excises 
from taxes. 

If the meaning of the word excise is to be sought 
in the British statutes, it will be found to include 
the duty on carriages, which is there considered as 
an excise, and then must necessarily be uniform and 
not liable to apportionment; consequently not a 
direct tax. 

An argument results from this, though not per- 
haps a conclusive one : yet where so important a dis- 
tinction in the Constitution is to be realized, it is 
fair to seek the meaning of terms in the statutory 
language of that country from which our jurispru- 
dence is derived. 

THE LAW OF LIBEL ^ 

1804. 

I. — The liberty of the press consists in the right to 
publish with impunity truth, with good motives, for 
justifiable ends, though reflecting on government, 
magistracy, or individuals. 

II. — That the allowance of this right is essential to 

^ This is the brief in the Croswell case, and the argument as reported 
follows. 

384 Alexander Hamilton 

the preservation of free government — the disallow- 
ance of it, fatal. 

III. — That its abuse is to be guarded against by 
subjecting the exercise of it to the animadversion and 
control of the tribunals of justice ; but that this con- 
trol cannot safely be intrusted to a permanent body 
of magistracy, and requires the effectual co-opera- 
tion of court and jury. 

IV. — That to confine the jury to the mere ques- 
tion of publication and the application of terms, 
without the right of inquiry into the intent or 
tendency, referring to the court the exclusive right 
of pronouncing upon the construction, tendency, and 
intent of the alleged libel, is calculated to render 
nugatory the function of the jury; enabling the 
court to make a libel of any writing whatsoever, the 
most innocent or commendable. 

V. — That it is the general rule of criminal law, that 
the intent constitutes the crime, and that it is equally 
a general rule that the intent, mind, or quo animo, is 
an inference of fact to be drawn by the jury. 

VL — That if there are exceptions to this rule, they 
are confined to cases in which not only the principal 
fact, but its circumstances can be and are specifically 
defined by statute or judicial precedent. 

VII. — That in respect to libel there is no such 
specific and precise definition of facts and circum- 
stances to be found, that consequently it is difficult, 
if not impossible, to pronounce that any writing is 
per se and exclusive of all circumstances libellous; 
that its libellous character must depend on intent and 
tendency, the one and the other being matter of fact. 

The Law of Libel 385 

VI IL — That the definitions or descriptions of 
Hbels to be found in the books predicate them upon 
some mahcious or mischievous intent or tendency, to 
expose individuals to hatred or contempt, or to occa- 
sion a disturbance or breach of the peace. 

IX. — That in determining the character of a Hbel, 
the truth or falsehood is in the nature of things a 
material ingredient, though the truth may not al- 
ways be decisive, but being abused, may still admit 1 
of a malicious and mischievous intent which may 
constitute a libel. 

X. — That in the Roman law, one source of the 
doctrine of libel, the truth in cases interesting to the 
public, may be given in evidence. That the ancient 
statutes probably declaratory of the common law, 
make the falsehood an ingredient of the crime. That 
ancient precedents in the courts of justice corre- 
spond, and that these precedents to this day charge 
a malicious intent. 

XI. — That the doctrine of excluding the truth as 
immaterial originated in a tyrannical and polluted 
source, the court of Star Chamber, and that though 
it prevailed a considerable length of time, yet 
there are leading precedents down to the Revolu- 
tion, and even since, in which a contrary practice 
prevailed. 

XII. — That this doctrine being against reason and ' 
natural justice, and contrary to the original prin- 
ciples of the common law enforced by statutory pro- 
visions, precedents which support it deserve to be 
considered in no better light than as mains usus 
which ought to be abolished. 

VOL. VIII. — 25. 

386 Alexander Hamilton 

XIII. — That in the general distribution of powers 
in our system of jurisprudence, the cognizance of law- 
belongs to the court, of fact to the jury; that as 
often as they are not blended, the power of the court 
is absolute and exclusive. That in civil cases it is 
always so, and may rightfully be so exerted. That 
in criminal cases the law and fact being always 
blended, the jury, for reasons of a political and pe- 
culiar nature, for the security of life and liberty, is 
intrusted with the power of deciding both law and 
fact. 

XIV. — That this distinction results: i, from the 
ancient forms of pleading in civil cases, none but 
special pleas being allowed in matter of law; in 
criminal, none but the general issue; 2, from the 
liability of the jury to attaint in civil cases, and the 
general power of the court as its substitute in grant- 
ing new trials, and from the exemption of the jury 
from attaint in criminal cases, and the defect of 
power to control their verdicts by new trials, the test 
of ever}^ legal power being its capacity to produce 
a definitive effect liable neither to punishment nor 
control. 

XV. — That in criminal cases, nevertheless, the 
court are the constitutional advisers of the jury in 
matter of law ; who may compromit their conscience 
by lightly or rashly disregarding that advice, but 
may still more compromit their consciences by fol- 
lowing it, if exercising their judgments with discre- 
tion and honesty they have a clear conviction that 
the charge of the court is wrong. x r 

Speech 387 

SPEECH IN THE CASE OF HARRY CROSWELL' 

May it please the Court: 

In rising to address your honors at so late a period 
of the day, and after your attention has been so 
much fatigued, and the cause has been so ably 
handled, I may say, so exhausted, I feel a degree of 
embarrassment which it is with difficulty I can sur- 
mount. I fear lest it should not be possible for me 
to interest the attention of the court on the subject 
on which I have to speak. Nevertheless, I have a 
duty to perform, of which I cannot acquit myself, 
but by its execution. I have, however, this con- 
solation, that though I may fail in the attempt, I 

^ This speech in the celebrated case of the People against Harry 
Croswell, on an indictment for libel on Thomas Jefferson, President of 
the United States, was delivered before the Supreme Court of the State 
of New York, in the year 1804, by Mr. Hamilton, for the defendant, 
on a motion for a new trial. 

The indictment in this case charged that Harry Croswell, late of the 
city of Hudson, in the county of Columbia, New York, printer, being a 
malicious and seditious man, of a depraved mind, and wicked and 
diabolical disposition; and also deceitfully, wickedly, and maliciously 
devising, contriving, and intending Thomas Jefferson, Esq., President 
of the United States of America, to detract from, scandalize, traduce, 
vilify, and to represent him, the said Thomas Jefferson, as unworthy 
of the confidence, respect, and attachment of the people of the said 
United States, and to alienate and withdraw from the said Thomas 
Jefferson, Esq., President as aforesaid, the obedience, fidelity, and 
allegiance of the citizens of the State of New York, and also of the said 
United States; and wickedly and seditiously to disturb the peace and 
tranquillity, as well of the people of the State of New York, as of the 
United States; and also to bring the said Thomas Jefferson, Esq. (as 
much as in him, the said Harry Croswell, lay), into great hatred, con- 
tempt, and disgrace, not only with the people of the State of New York, 
and the said people of the United States of America, but also with the 
citizens and subjects of other nations, and for that purpose the said 
Harry Croswell did, on the ninth of September, in the year of our Lord 
1802, with force and arms, at the said city of Hudson, in the said 

3^^ Alexander Hamilton 

shall be justified by the importance of the question. 
I feel that it is of the utmost magnitude; of the 
highest importance viewed in every light. First, as 
it regards the character of the head of our nation; 
for, if indeed the truth can be given in evidence, and ' 
that truth can, as stated in the indictment, be estab- 
lished, it will be a serious truth, the effect of which 
it will be impossible to foresee. It is important also 
as it regards the boundaries of power between the 
constituent parts of our constitutional tribunals, to 
which we are, for the law and the fact, to resort^— 
our judges and our juries. It is important, as it 
regards settling the right principles that may be 
applied to the case, in giving to either the one or the 
other the authority destined to it by the spirit and 

county of Columbia, wickedly, maliciously, and seditiously print and 
publish, and cause and procure to be printed and published, a certain | 
scandalous, malicious, and seditious libel, in a certain paper or publica- 
tion entitled The Wasp; containing therein, among other things, cer- 
tain scandalous, malicious, inflammatory, and seditious matters of 
and concerning the said Thomas Jefferson, Esq., then and yet being i 
President of the United States of America; that is to say, in one part ■ 
thereof according to the tenor and effect following, that is to say 
Jefferson (the said Thomas Jefferson, Esq., meaning) paid Callendar 
(meaning one James Thompson Callendar) for calling Washington 
(meaning George Washington, Esq., deceased, late President of the 
United States) a traitor, a robber, and a perjurer; for calling Adams 
(meaning John Adams, Esq., late President of the United States) a 
hoary-headed incendiary, and for most grossly slandering the private 
characters of men whom he (meaning the said Thomas Jefferson) well 
knew to be virtuous, to the great scandal and infamy of the said 
Thomas Jefferson, Esq., in contempt of the people of the State of New 
York, in open violation of the laws of the said State, to the evil exam- 
ple of all others in like case offending, and against the peace of the 
people of the State of New York, and their dignity. 

All that need be said in addition is that Hamilton won the case, which 
attracted great attention, both from its political bearings and the 
important principles of law which it involved. 

speech 389 

letter of our law. It is important on account of the 
influence it must have on the rights of our citizens. 
Viewing it, therefore, in these lights, I hope I shall, 
in the arduous attempt, be supported by its import- 
ance, and if any doubt hangs on the mind of the 
court, I shall, I trust, be able to satisfy them that 
a new trial ought to be had. 

The question branches itself into two divisions. 
The first as to the truth — whether, under a general 
issue of not guilty, it ought to be given in evidence. 
The other, as to the power of the court — whether it 
has a right, exclusively, over the intent, or whether 
that and the law do not constitute one complicated 
fact, for the cognizance of the jury, under the direc- 
tion of the judge. The last, I trust, can be made to 
appear, on the principle of our jurisprudence, as 
plainly as it is possible to evince anything to a 
court; and that, in fact, there are no precedents 
which embrace the doctrines of the other side, or 
rather that they are so diverse and contrarient that 
nothing can arise from them to make an application 
to this case. 

After these preliminary observations, and before I 
advance to the full discussion of this question, it may 
be necessary for the safety and accuracy of investiga- . 
tion, a little to define what this liberty of the press is, 
for which we contend, and which the present doc- 
trines of those opposed to us, are, in our opinions, 
calculated to destroy. 

The liberty of the press consists, in my idea, in • 
publishing the truth, from good motives and for jus- 
tifiable ends, though it reflect on the government, on 

390 Alexander Hamilton 

I magistrates, or individuals. If it be not allowed, it 
excludes the privilege of canvassing men, and our 
rulers. It is in vain to say, you may canvass meas- 
ures. This is impossible without the right of looking 
to men. To say that measures can be discussed, and 

f that there shall be no bearing on those who are the 
authors of those measures, cannot be done. The very 
end and reason of discussion would be destroyed. 
Of what consequence to show its object? Why is it 
to be thus demonstrated, if not to show, too, who is 
the author ? It is essential to say, not only that the 
measure is bad and deleterious, but to hold up to 
the people who is the author, that, in this our free 
and elective government, he may be removed from 
the seat of power. If this be not to be done, then in 
vain will the voice of the people be raised against the 
inroads of tyranny. For, let a party but get into 
power, they may go on from step to step, and, in 
spite of canvassing their measures, fix themselves 
firmly in their seats, especially as they are never to 
be reproached for what they have done. This ab- 
stract mode, in practice, can never be carried into 
effect. But if, under the qualifications I have men- 
tioned, the power be allowed, the liberty for which I 
contend will operate as a salutary check. In speak- 
ing thus for the freedom of the press, I do not say 

^ there ought to be an unbridled license; or that the 
characters of men who are good will naturally tend 
eternally to support themselves. I do not stand 
here to say that no shackles are to be laid on this 
license. 

I consider this spirit of abuse and calumny as the 

Speech 391 

pest of society. I know the best of men are not 
exempt from the attacks of slander. Though it 
pleased God to bless us with the first of characters, 
and though it has pleased God to take him from us 
and this band of calumniators, I say that falsehood 
eternally repeated w^ould have affected even his 
name. Drops of water, in long and continued suc- 
cession, will wear out adamant. This, therefore, 
cannot be endured. It would be to put the best and 
the worst on the same level. 

I contend for the liberty of publishing truth, with 
good motives and for justifiable ends, even though 
it reflect on government, magistrates, or private per- 
sons. I contend for it under the restraint of our 
tribunals. When this is exceeded, let them inter- 
pose and punish. From this will follow none of 
those consequences so ably depicted. When, how- 
ever, we do look at consequences, let me ask whether 
it is right that a permanent body of men, appointed 
by the executive, and, in some degree, always con- 
nected with it, should exclusively have the power of 
deciding on what shall constitute a libel on our 
rulers, or that they shall share it, united with a 
changeable body of men chosen by the people. Let 
our juries still be selected, as they now are, by lot. 
But it cannot be denied, that every body of men is, 
more or less, liable to be influenced by the spirit of 
the existing administration; that such a body may 
be liable to corruption, and that they may be in- 
clined to lean over towards party modes. No man 
can think more highly of our judges, and I may say 
personally so of those who now preside, than myself; 

392 Alexander Hamilton 

but I must forget what human nature is, and how 
her history has taught us that permanent bodies 
may be so corrupted, before I can venture to assert 
that it cannot be. As then it may be, I do not 
think it safe thus to compromise our independence. 
For though, as individuals, the judges may be in- 
terested in the general welfare, yet, if once they 
enter into these views of government, their power 
may be converted into the engine of oppression. It 
is in vain to say that allowing them this exclusive 
right to declare the law, on what the jury has found, 
can work no ill; for, by this privilege, they can 
assume and modify the fact, so as to make the most 
innocent publication libellous. It is therefore not a 
security to say, that this exclusive power will but 
follow the law. It must be with the jury to decide 
on the intent; they must in certain cases be per- 
mitted to judge of the law, and pronounce on the 
combined matter of law and of fact. Passages have 
been adduced from Lord Mansfield's declarations to 
show that judges cannot be under the influence of 
an administration. Yet still it would be contrary to 
our own experience, to say that they could not. I 
do not think that even as to our own country it may 
not be. There are always motives and reasons that 
may be held up. It is therefore still more necessary, 
here, to mingle this power, than in England. The 
person who appoints there, is hereditary. That per- 
son cannot alone attack the judiciary; he must be 
united with the two Houses of Lords and of Com- 
mons, in assailing the judges. But, with us, it is 
the vibration of party. As one side or the other 

Speech 393 

prevails, so of that class and temperament will be 
the judges of their nomination. Ask any man, how- 
ever ignorant of principles of government, who con- 
stitute the judiciary, he will tell you the favorites of 
those at the head of affairs. According then to the 
theory of this our free government, the independ- 
ence of our judges is not so well secured as in Eng- 
land. We have here reasons for apprehension not 
applicable to them. We are not, however, to be 
now influenced by the preference to one side or the 
other. But of which side soever a man may be, it ? 
interests all, to have the question settled, and to \ 
uphold the power of the jury, consistently however 
with liberty, and also with legal and judicial prin- 
ciples, fairly and rightly understood. None of these 
impair that for which we contend — the right of pub- 
lishing the truth, from good motives and justifiable 
ends, though it reflect on government, on magis- 
trates, or individuals. 

Some observations have, however, been made in 
opposition to these principles. It is said, that as no 
man rises at once high into office, every opportunity 
of canvassing his qualities and qualifications is af- 
forded, without recourse to the press; that his first 
election ought to stamp the seal of merit on his name. 
This, however, is to forget how often the hypocrite 
goes from stage to stage of public fame, under false 
array, and how often, when men obtain the last ob- 
ject of their wishes, they change from that which 
they seemed to be; that men, the most zealous 
reverers of the people's rights, have, when placed on 
the highest seat of power, become their most deadly 

394 Alexander Hamilton 

oppressors. It becomes, therefore, necessary to ob- 
serve the actual conduct of those who are thus 
raised up. 

I have already shown that, though libelling shall 
continue to be a crime, it ought to be so only when 
under a restraint, in which the court and the jury 
shall co-operate. What is a libel that it should be 
otherwise ? Why take it out of the rule that allows, 
in all criminal cases, when the issue is general, the 
jury to determine upon the whole? What is then 
a libel to produce this? That great and venerable 
man. Lord Camden, already cited with so much well- 
deserved eulogy, says that he has never yet been 
able to form a satisfactory definition. All essays 
made towards it are neither accurate nor satisfac- 
tory; yet, such as they are, I shall cite them and 
animadvert. 

Blackstone and Hawkins declare that it is any 
malicious defamation, with an intent to blacken the 
reputation of any one, dead or alive. 

The criminal quality is its maliciousness. The 
next ingredient is, that it shall have an intent to 
defame. I ask, then, if the intent be not the very 
essence of the crime. It is admitted that the word 
falsity, when the proceedings are on the statute, 
must be proved to the jury, because it makes the 
offence. Why not then the malice, when, to consti- 
tute the crime, it must necessarily be implied? In 
reason there can be no difference. 

A libel is, then, a complicated matter of fact and 
law, with certain things and circimistances to give 
them a character. If so, then the malice is to be 

Speech 395 

proved. The tendency to provoke is its constitu- 
ent. Must it not be shown how and in what manner ? 
If this is not to be the case, must every one who does 
not panegyrize be said to be a Hbeller? Unless the 
court are disposed to go to that extreme length, it is 
necessary that the malice and intent must be proved. 
To this it is certain the definition of Lord Coke may, 
in some degree, be opposed. He does seem to super- 
add ''the breach of the peace." Lord Coke, how- 
ever, does not give this as a specific definition; and 
even then the defamatory writing, which he par- 
ticularizes, includes the question both of intent and 
malice. The breach of the peace, therefore, is not 
made the sole, but only one of the qualities. The 
question is not on the breaking of the peace, but de- 
pends on time, manner, and circumstances, which 
must ever be questions of fact for jury determina- 
tion. I do not advocate breaking the peace; ob- 
servations may be made on public men, which are 
calculated merely to excite the attention of the com- 
munity to them; to make the people exercise their 
own functions, which may have no tendency to a 
breach of the peace, but only to inspection. For 
surely a man may go far in the way of reflecting 
on public characters, without the least design of ex- 
citing tumult. He may only have it in view to rouse 
the nation to vigilance and a due exertion of their 
right to change their rulers. This, then, being a mere 
matter of opinion, can it be not a matter for them to 
judge of to whom it is addressed? The court, to 
be sure, may, like a jury, and in common with them, 
have the legal power and moral discernment to 

396 Alexander Hamilton 

determine on this ; yet it does not arise out of the 
writing, but by adverting to the state of things and 
circumstances. It, therefore, answers no purpose to 
say it has a tendency to a breach of the peace. 

Lord Loughborough, in the Pari. Chron., 644, 657, 
instances that passages from holy writ may be turned 
into libels. 

Lord Thurlow admits that this may happen, and 
that time and circumstances may enter into the ques- 
tion. He, it is true, sanctioned the doctrines of our 
opponents, but allowed time and circumstances to be 
ingredients; and, strange to say, though these are 
extrinsic to the record, was of opinion for the old 
law. Lord Thurlow says, however, that it might be 
something more than a bare libel — intimating here 
that it may be even treason; and is it not, then, to 
confess that intent is a matter of fact? If so, who 
or where shall be the forum but the jury ? 

My definition of a libel is, and I give it with all 
difiidence after the words of Lord Camden — my de- 
finition, then, is this: I would call it a slanderous or 
ridiculous writing, picture, or sign, with a malicious 
or mischievous design or intent, towards govern- 
ment, magistrates, or individuals. If this definition 
does not embrace all that may be so called, does it 
not cover enough for every beneficial purpose of jus- 
tice? If it have a good intent, it ought not to be a 
libel, for it then is an innocent transaction; and it 
ought to have this intent, against which the jury 
have, in their discretion, to pronounce. It shows it- 
self to us as a sentence of fact. Crime is a matter of 
fact by the code of our jurisprudence. In my opin- 

Speech 397 

ion, every specific case is a matter of fact, for the law 
gives the definition. It is some act in violation of 
law. When we come to investigate, every crime in- 
cludes an intent. Murder consists in killing a man 
with malice prepense. Manslaughter, in doing it 
without malice, and at the moment of an impulse 
of passion. Killing may even be justifiable, if not 
praiseworthy, as in defence of chastity about to be 
violated. In these cases the crime is defined, and 
the intent is always the necessary ingredient. The 
crime is matter of law, as far as definition is con- 
cerned; fact, as far as we are to determine its 
existence. 

But it is said the judges have the right, on this 
fact, to infer the criminal intent, that being matter 
of law. This is true ; but what do we mean by these 
words, unless the act dependent on and united with 
its accessories, such as the law has defined, and 
which when proved constitute the crime? But 
whether the jury are to find it so with all its quali- 
ties, is said to be a question; no act, separate from 
circumstances, can be criminal, for without these 
qualities it is not a crime. Thus, as I have before 
instanced, murder is characterized by being with 
malice prepense; manslaughter, by being involun- 
tary; justifiable homicide, by having some excuse. 
Killing, therefore, is not a crime; but it becomes so 
in consequence of the circumstances annexed. In 
cases that are, in the general opinion of mankind, 
exceptions to the explanations I have given, the law 
contemplates the intent. In duelling, the malice is ( 
supposed, from the deliberate acts of reflecting, send- 

39^ Alexander Hamilton 

ing a challenge, and appointing the time and place of 
meeting. Here, it is true, the law implies the intent; 
but then, let it be remembered that it is in conse- 
quence of its having previously defined the act, and 
forbidden its commission. This too is on the prin- 
ciple of natural justice, that no man shall be the 
avenger of his own wrongs, especially by a deed alike 
interdicted by the laws of God and of man. That, 
therefore, the intent shall in this case constitute the 
crime, is because the law has declared it shall be so. 
It is impossible to separate a crime from the intent. 
I call on those opposed to us to say what is a libel. 
To be sure they have told us that it is any scandalous 
publication, etc., which has a tendency to a breach 
of the peace. This, indeed, is a broad definition, 
which must, for the purpose of safety, be reduced to 
a positive fact, with a criminal intent. In this there 
is no violation of law: it is a settled maxim, that 
mens jacit reum; non reuSy nisi sit mens rea. 

When a man breaks into a house it is the intent 
that makes him a felon. It must be proved to the 
jury that it was his intention to steal; they are the 
judges of whether the intent was such, or whether it 
was innocent. Then so, I say, should it be here; let 
the jury determine, as they have the right to do, in 
all other cases, on the complicated circumstances of 
fact and intent. It may, as a general and universal 
rule, be asserted that the intention is never excluded 
in the consideration of the crime. The only case re- 
sorted to, and which is relied on by the opposite side 
(for all the others are built upon it), to show a con- 
trary doctrine, was a star-chamber decision. To 

Speech 399 

prove how plainly the intent goes to the constituting 
the crime of libel, the authority cited by the counsel 
associated with me, is fully in point. In that, the 
letter written to the father, though (as far as words 
were concerned) perfectly a libel, yet having been 
written for the purpose of reformation, and not with 
an intent to injure, was held not to amount to a libel. 
Suppose persons were suspected of forging public 
papers, and this communicated by letter to the Sec- 
retary of State, with a good design, still if the doc- 
trines contended for were to prevail, it would be 
libellous and punishable, though the party not only 
did it with the best of motives, but actually saved the 
State. In madness and idiocy, crimes may be per- 
petrated, nay, the same malicious intent may exist, 
but the crime does not. These things tend to show 
that the criminality of an act is a matter of fact and 
law combined, and on which it cannot belong to the 
exclusive jurisdiction of the court to decide the in- 
tent ; for the question is forever a question of fact. 

The criminal intent, says Lord Mansfield, in the 
Dean of St. Asaph's case, is what makes the crime. 

Here, that truly great man — for great he was, and 
no one more fully estimates him than I do, yet he 
might have some biases on his mind not extremely 
favorable to liberty, — here, then, he seems to favor 
the doctrine contended for; but he will be found to 
be at times contradictory, nay, even opposed to him- 
self. '*A criminal intent in doing a thing in itself 
criminal, without a lawful excuse, is an inference of 
law." How can that be in itself criminal which ad- 
mits of a lawful excuse ? Homicide is not in itself a 

400 Alexander Hamilton 

crime, therefore it is not correct to say a criminal in- 
tent can be inferred, because a lawful excuse may be 
set up. A thing cannot be criminal which has a law- 
ful excuse, but as it may have a certain quality which 
constitutes the crime. To be sure you may go on to 
say that where the intent bestows the character of 
criminality on an act indifferent, then it is a matter 
of fact, and not where the act is bad in itself. But 
this is begging the question. We contend that no 
act is criminal, abstracted and divested of its intent. 
Trespass is not in itself innocent. No man has a 
right to enter another's land or house. Yet it be- 
comes in this latter case felony only in one point of 
view, and whether it shall be holden in that point is 
a subject of jury determination. Suppose a man 
should enter the apartments of a king; this, in itself, 
is harmless, but if he do it with intent to assassinate, 
it is treason. To whom must this be made to appear 
in order to induce conviction? To the jury. Let it 
rather be said that crime depends on intent, and in- 
tent is one parcel of the fact. Unless, therefore, it 
can be shown that there is some specific character of 
libel that will apply in all cases, intent, tendency, and 
quality must all be matters of fact for a jury. There 
is therefore, nothing which can be libel, independent 
of circumstances; nothing which can be so called in 
opposition to time and circumstances. Lord Lough- 
borough, indeed, in the parliamentary debates on 
this very subject, to which I have referred the court, 
admits this to be the case. Lord Mansfield, em- 
barrassed with the truth and strength of the doc- 
trine, endeavors to contrast meaning with intent. 

Speech 401 

He says that the truth may be given in evidence to 
show the meaning, but not the intent. If this can 
be done to show the apphcation where the person is 
imperfectly described, why not to prove the intent, 
without which the crime cannot be committed? 
Whatever is done collaterally must show this, and in 
all cases collateral facts are for the jury. The intent 
here has been likened to the construction of a deed, 
or any unwritten instrument, in all of which the in- 
tent is for the court. But the comparison will not 
hold; for even there the intent may be inquired 
aliunde. When you go to quality and explain, what 
is this but to decide on the intent by matters of fact ? 
Lord Mansfield is driven into this contradiction when, 
on one occasion, he says it is a matter on which the 
jury may exercise their judgment, and in another 
that it is not. I am free to confess, that in all diffi- 
cult cases, it is the duty of a jury to hearken to the 
directions of a judge with very great deference. But 
if the meaning must be either on the face of the libel 
or from any thing aliunde, then it must be a matter 
of fact for the jury. That the quo animo affects the 
constitution of libel, cannot be disputed, and must 
be inquired of by somebody. Now, imless this is 
tried by the jury, by whom is it to be determined? 
Will any man say, that in the case of the star cham- . 
ber, respecting the letter written to the child's father, 
the intent was not the reason why it was held inno- 
cent, and the quo animo not gone into? Did they 
not then endeavor to prove the guilt by the intent? 
Now, if you are to show things malicious aliunde, you 
may defend by the same means. The mens is the 

VOL. VIII.— 26. 

402 Alexander Hamilton 

question, and in common parlance it is that to which 
we resort to show guilt. II. Mod., the Queen vs. 
Brown, will explain how it is to be found. Nay, in 
this very case, when the counsel for the defendant 
objected to the attorney-general reading passages 
from the prospectus of the Wasp, and from other 
numbers, he expressly avowed that he thus acted in 
order that the jury might see it to be '* manifest that 
the intent of the defendant was malicious." This, 
I here observe, is a mistake that law officers would 
not be very apt to slide into. Yet, on this very in- 
tent, this malicious intent thus proved to the jury, 
and on which they founded their verdict, is the court 
now asked to proceed to judgment. To demonstrate 
how fully this matter of intent is by our law a subject 
of jury determination, suppose the grand jury had, 
in the present case, returned to the bill ignoramus; 
on what would they have founded their return? Is 
not this, then, a precedent that the quo ammo is for 
a jury? If it be necessary only to find the publica- 
tion, why is not the grand jury competent for the 
whole ? For if the supposition is that the grand jury 
may decide on the finding of the bill, surely the petit 
jury may acquit. If so, then is the case I have men- 
tioned an important precedent. In Rex vs. Home, 
an authority that has been justly urged, the prin- 
ciple is allowed. It appears there that the jury are 
to exercise their judgment from the nature of the act, 
what is its intent. Into a confession of this is Lord 
Mansfield himself driven. Regina vs. Fuller, we are 
told from the other side, was a case on the statute for 
scandalum magnatum. Of this, however, I can find 

Speech 403 

no trace in the books, and there Lord Holt, repeatedly 
interrogated as to the truth, would have allowed it 
to be given in evidence, and directed the jury that if 
they did not believe the allegations false, they were 
not to find the defendant guilty. This, then, is a 
decision, as we contend, that not only the intent, but 
the truth is important to constitute the crime, and 
nothing has been shown against it. Nay, Lord Holt 
goes on still further; he bids the jury consider 
whether the papers have not a tendency to beget 
sedition, riot, and disturbance. Surely this author- 
ity of that great man demonstrates that intent and 
tendency are matters of fact for a jury. This argu- 
ment will be further strengthened when I enimierate 
those cases where truth has been permitted to be 
shown. But before I do that, I must examine how 
far truth is to be given in evidence. This depends 
on the intent being a crime. Its being a truth is a 
reason to infer that there was no design to injure an- 
other. Thus, not to decide on it would be injustice, 
as it may be material in ascertaining the intent. It 
is impossible to say that to judge of the quality and 
nature of an act, the truth is immaterial. It is in- 
herent in the nature of things, that the assertion of 
truth cannot be a crime. In all systems of law this 
is a general axiom, but this single instance, it is at- 
tempted to assert, creates an exception, and is there- 
fore an anomaly. If, however, we go on to examine 
what may be the case that shall be so considered, we 
cannot find it to be this. If we advert to the Roman 
Law, we shall find that Paulus and Pereizius take 
a distinction between those truths which relate to 

404 Alexander Hamilton 

private persons and those in which the public are 
interested. Vinnius lays it down in the doctrine 
cited by the associate counsel who last spoke. If, 
then, we are to consider this a doctrine to be adopted 
in all that relates to public men, it ought now to be 
received. When we advert to the statutes they con- 
firm our positions. Those statutes are indisputably 
declaratory of the early law. We know that a great 
part of the common law has been, for certainty, re- 
duced to statutes. Can we suppose that the com- 
mon law did not notice that no punishment was to 
be inflicted for speaking the truth, when we see a 
statute thus enacting? 

Therefore, the fair reasoning is, that they are de- 
claratory of the common law. That, by our code, 
falsehood must be the evidence of the libel. If we 

I apply to precedents, they are decidedly for us. In 
the case cited from 7 D. and E. this is admitted, for 
there it is allowed that the word false is contained in 

; all the ancient forms. This, then, is a strong argu- 
ment for saying that the falsity was, by the common 
law, considered a necessary ingredient. It is no 
answer to say that in declarations for assaults we 
use the words ''sticks," "staves," etc. When in- 
struments are named, this imports only one or the 
other which might be used ; but when a word by way 
of epithet, that it means a precise idea, and we are 
to take it as if introduced for the purpose of explain- 
ing the crime. As to the practice on this occasion, 
we must take various epochs of the English his- 
tory into consideration. At one time, that the law 
was as we have shown, is proved by the statutes. 

Speech 405 

At that time the truth was clearly drawn into ques- 
tion, and that since the period of Lord Raymond 
a different practice has prevailed, is no argument 
against the common law. The authority from the 
third institute is conclusive, at least satisfactory, to 
show that it was then necessary to show the words 
were true. Et quid, etc., qucB liter a in se continet 
nullum veritatem ideo, etc. It is to be supposed that 
the truth in this case was not inquired into, when the 
want of it is the reason of the judgment. Unless 
this had been gone into, the court would not nor 
could not have spoken to it. The insertion of that, 
then, is a strong argument that this was the old law, 
and it shows us what that law was. In the case of 
the seven bishops, they were allowed to go into 
all the evidence they wanted. The court permitted 
them to read every thing to show it. 

On that occasion Halloway and all agreed as to the 
admissibility of the truth. But this case is import- 
ant in another view, as it shows the intent ought to 
be inquired into, for the bishops might have done it 
either with a seditious or an innocent motive. They 
declare that by the law they could not do the act 
required. They exculpated themselves by an ap- 
peal to their consciences. This shows the necessity 
of inquiring into the intent of the act. 

In Rex vs. Fuller, this very atrocious offender was 
indicted for a most infamous libel, and yet Lord 
Holt at every breath asked him. Can you prove the 
truth? At the time, then, when this was done, there 
were some things in favor of the truth. It stands, 
then, a precedent for what we contend. I shall now 

4o6 Alexander Hamilton 

notice some intermediate authorities between that 
day and those in which a contrary principle has been 
endeavored to be supported. It is true that the 
doctrine originated in one of the most oppressive 
institutions that ever existed ; in a court whose op- 
pressions roused the people to demand its abolition, 
whose horrid judgments cannot be read without 
freezing the blood in one's veins. This is not used 
as declamation, but as argument. If doctrine tends 
to trample on the liberty of the press, and if we see 
it coming from a foul source, it is enough to warn us 
against polluting the stream of our own jurispru- 
dence. It is not true that it was abolished merely 
for not using the intervention of juries, or because 
it proceeded ex parte, though that, God knows, 
would have been reason enough, or because its func- 
tions were discharged by the court of king's bench. 
It was because its decisions were cruel and tyran- 
nical ; because it bore down the liberties of the people, 
and inflictedthe most sanguinary punishments. It is 
impossible to read its sentences without feeling indig- 
nation against it. This will prove why there should not 
be a paramount tribunal to judge of these matters. 
Want's case is the first we find on this subject ; but 
even then we do not meet the broad definition of 
Lord Coke, in the case of de famosts lihellis. I do 
not deny this doctrine of the immateriality of the 
truth as a universal negative to a publication's being 
libellous, though true. But still I do say, that in no 
case may you not show the intent ; for, whether the 
truth be a justification will depend on the motives 
with which it was published. 

speech 407 

Personal defects can be made public only to make 
a man disliked. Here, then, it will not be excused; 
it might, however, be given in evidence to show the 
libellous degree. Still, however, it is a subject of in- 
quiry. There may be a fair and honest exposure. 
But if he uses the weapon of truth wantonly ; if for 
the purpose of disturbing the peace of families; if 
for relating that which does not appertain to official 
conduct, so far we say the doctrine of our opponents 
is correct. If their expressions are, that libellers 
may be punished though the matter contained in the 
libel be true, in these I agree. I confess that the 
truth is not material as a broad proposition respect- 
ing libels. But that the truth cannot be material 
in any respect, is contrary to the nature of things. 
No tribunal, no codes, no systems can repeal or im- 
pair this law of God, for by his eternal laws it is in- 
herent in the nature of things. We first find this 
large and broad position to the contrary in 5 Rep. 
And here it is to be noticed that when Lord Coke 
himself was in office, when he was attorney-general, 
and allowed to give his own opinion, he determines 
the truth to be material. But when he gets into 
that court, and on that bench, which had pronounced 
against it, when he occupies a star-chamber seat, 
then he declares it is immaterial. I do not mention 
this as derogating from Lord Coke, for, to be sure, he 
may be said to have yielded; but this, I say, is the 
first case on this point in which he seems to be of a 
contrary opinion. We do not, in every respect, con- 
tend even against his last ideas, we only assert that 
the truth may be given in evidence. But this we 

4o8 Alexander Hamilton 

allow is against the subsequent authorities, which, 
in this respect, overturn the former precedents. 
These latter, however, are contrary to the common 
law; to the principles of justice and of truth. The 
doctrine, that juries shall not judge on the whole 
matter of law and fact, or the intent and tendency 
of the publication, is not to be found in the cases 
before the time of Lord Raymond; and it is con- 
trary to the spirit of our law, because it may prevent 
them from determining on what may, perhaps, be 
within their own knowledge. It was only by Lord 
Raymond that this was first set up and acted upon, 
and this has been followed by Lord Mansfield and 
his successors. Here, then, have been a series of 
precedents against us. Blackstone, too, says that 
the truth may not be given in evidence so as to just- 
ify; and so, with the qualifications I have before 
mentioned, do we. Prior, indeed, to his time. Lord 
Holt had laid down the law, in one or two cases, in 
conformity to that of the other side, and later times 
have given this a currency by a coincidence of pre- 
cedents in its favor. A reflection may, perhaps, be 
here indulged, that, from what I have before re- 
marked on Lord Coke, it is frequent for men to forget 
sound principles, and condemn the points for which 
they have contended. Of this, the very case of the 
seven bishops is an example, when those, who there 
maintained the principles for which we contend, 
supplanted the persons then in power, they were 
ready to go the whole length of the doctrine that the 
truth could not be given in evidence on a libel. This 
is an admonition that ought at all times to be at- 

speech 409 

tended to; that at all times men are disposed to \ 
forward principles to support themselves. The au- 
thority of Paley had been adduced, if indeed he may 
be called an authority. That moral philosopher 
considers every thing as slanderous libels whether 
true or false, if published with motives of malice. 

In these cases he does not consider the truth a 
justification. Nor do we; we do not say that it is, 
alone, always a justification of the act; and this we 
say, consistent with sound morality, is good law and 
good sense. On what ought a court to decide on 
such an occasion as this? Shall they be shackled 
by precedents, weakened in that very country where 
they were formed? Or rather, shall they not say, 
that we will trace the law up to its source ? We con- 
sider, they might say, these precedents as only some 
extraneous bodies engrafted on the old trunk; and 
as such I believe they ought to be considered. I am f 
inclined to think courts may go thus far, for it is 
absolutely essential to right and security that the 
truth should be admitted. To be sure, this may 
lead to the purposes suggested. But my reply is, 
that government is to be thus treated, if it furnish 
reasons for calumny. I affirm that, in the general 
course of things, the disclosure of truth is right and 
prudent, when liable to the checks I have been willing 
it should receive as an object of animadversion. | 

It cannot be dangerous to government, though it 
may work partial difficulties. If it be not allowed, 
they will stand liable to encroachments on their 
rights. It is evident that if you cannot apply this 
mitigated doctrine, for which I speak, to the cases 

/ 

4IO Alexander Hamilton 

of libels here, you must forever remain ignorant of 
what your rulers do. I never can think this ought 
to be ; I never did think the truth was a crime ; I am 
glad the day is come in which it is to be decided, for 
my soul has ever abhorred the thought that a free 
man dared not speak the truth; I have forever re- 
joiced when this question has been brought forward. 
I I come now to examine the second branch of this 
' inquiry — the different provinces of the court and the 
jury. I will introduce this subject by observing that 
the trial by jury has been considered, in the system 
of English jurisprudence, as the palladium of public 
and private liberty. In all the political disputes of 
that coimtry, this has been deemed the barrier to 
secure the subjects from oppression. If, in that 
country, juries are to answer this end, if they are to 
protect from the weight of state prosecutions, they 
must have this power of judging of the intent, in 
order to perform their functions; they could not 
otherwise answer the ends of their institution. For, 
under this dangerous refinement of leaving them to 
decide only the fact of composing and publishing, 
any thing on which they may decide, may be made 
a libel. I do not deny the well-known maxim — that 
to matters of fact the jury, and to matters of law 
the judges, shall answer. I do not deny this, be- 
cause it is not necessary, for the purpose of this or 
any other case, that it should be denied. I say, 
with this complicated explanation, I have before 
given of the manner in which the intent is neces- 
sarily interwoven in the fact, the court has the gen- 
eral cognizance of the law. In all cases of ancient 

speech 411 

proceedings the question of law must have been 
presented. 

It was in civil cases alone that an attaint would 
lie. They have, it is said, the power to decide in 
criminal cases, on the law and the fact. They have 
then the right, because they cannot be restricted in 
its exercise; and, in politics, power and right are 
equivalent. To prove it, what shall we say to this 
case? Suppose the Legislature to have laid a tax, 
which, by the Constitution, they certainly are en- 
titled to impose, yet still the Legislature may be 
guilty of oppression; but who can prevent them, or 
say they have not authority to raise taxes? Legal 
power, then, is the decisive effect of certain acts 
without control. It is agreed that the jury may 
decide against the direction of the court, and that 
their verdict of acquittal cannot be impeached, but 
must have its effect. This, then, I take to be the 
criterion, that the Constitution has lodged the power 
with them, and they have the right to exercise it. 
For this I could cite authorities. It is nothing to 
say, in opposition to this, that they, if they act 
wrong, are to answer between God and their con- 
sciences. This may be said of the Legislature, and 
yet, nevertheless, they have the power and the right 
of taxation. I do not mean to admit that it would 
be proper for jurors thus to conduct themselves, but 
only to show that the jury do possess the legal right 
of determining on the law and the fact. What, then, 
do I conceive to be true doctrine ? That in the gen- 
eral distribution of power in our Constitution, it is 
the province of the jury to speak to fact, yet, in 

412 Alexander Hamilton 

criminal cases, the consequences and tendency of 
acts, the law and the fact are always blended. As 
far as the safety of the citizen is concerned, it is 
necessary that the jury shall be permitted to speak 
to both. How, then, does the question stand? Cer- 
tainly not without hazard; because, inasmuch as 
in the general distribution of power, the jury are to 
? be confined to fact, they ought not wantonly to de- 
depart from the advice of the court; they ought to 
receive it, if there be not strong and valid reasons to 
the contrary; if there be, they should reject. To go 
beyond this is to go too far. Because, it is to say, 
when they are obliged to decide, by their oath, ac- 
cording to the evidence, they are bound to follow the 
words of the judge. After they are satisfied from 
him what the law is, they have a right to apply the 
definition. It is convenient that it should be so. 
If they are convinced that the law is as stated, let 
them pronounce him guilty; but never let them 
leave that guilt for the judge; because, if they do, 
the victim may be offered up, and the defendant 
gone. Will any one say, that under forms of law 
we may commit homicide? Will any directions 
from any judge excuse them? I am free to say, I 
would die on the rack, were I to sit as a juror, rather 
than confirm such a doctrine, by condemning the 
man I thought deserved to be acquitted; and yet I 
would respect the opinion of the judge, from which, 
however, I should deem myself at liberty to depart, 
and this I believe to be the theory of our law. 

These are the propositions I shall endeavor to 
maintain. I have little more to do than examine 

Speech 413 

how far precedents accord with principles, and 
whether any estabhsh a contrary doctrine. I do not 
know that it is necessary to do more than has already 
been done by my associate counsel, and yet, perhaps, 
I should not complete my duty without adverting to 
what has fallen, on this point, from our opponents. 
There is not one of the ancient precedents in which 
our doctrine has not in general prevailed, and it is, 
indeed, to be traced down to one of a modem date. 
The case of the seven bishops is that to which I 
allude. There it was permitted to go into the truth, 
and all the court submitted the question to the jury. 
This case deserves particular attention. If, on the 
one hand, it was decided at a time when the nation 
was considerably agitated, it was, on the other hand, 
at a time when great constitutional precedents and 
points were discussed and resolved. The great one 
was, the power of the jury; and this power was sub- 
mitted to, to extricate the people, for the salvation 
of the nation, from the tyranny with which they 
were then oppressed. This was one of the reasons 
which brought about their glorious revolution, and 
which, perhaps, tended to the maturing those prin- 
ciples which have given us ours. This ought to be 
considered as a landmark to our liberties, as a pillar 
which points out to us on what the principles of our 
liberty ought to rest; particularly so if we examine 
it as to its nature, and the nature of the attempts 
then made to set up and support the endeavors to 
construe an act of duty a libel — a deed in which con- 
science did not permit those reverend characters to 
act in any other way than what they did, a respect 

V. 

414 Alexander Hamilton 

to which they held a bounden duty. It is a pre- 
cedent then on which we should in every way fasten 
ourselves. The case of Fuller is of minor import- 
ance. Yet that is one in which Lord Holt called on 
the defendant to enter into the truth. In the King 
vs. Tutchin, Lord Holt expressly tells the jury, You 
are to consider whether the tendency of this writing ; 
be not to criminate the administration ; you, the . 
jury are to decide on this. Owen's case is to the 
same effect. There Lord Camden was of counsel, 
and in the discussion, in the House of Lords, he tells 
us, and surely his testimony is good, that being of 
counsel for the defendant, he was permitted to urge 
to the jury a cognizance of the whole matter of libel ; 
that in the case of Shepherd, where, by his official 
situation, he was called on to prosecute for the 
Crown, where the interests of government called on 
him to maintain an opposite doctrine, yet then he 
insisted for a verdict on the whole matter, from the 
consideration of the jury. In the King vs. Home, 
Lord Mansfield himself tells the jury they have a 
right to exercise their judgment from the nature of 
the intent. This surely, then, is a precedent down 
to a late period. It is not, however, to be denied, 
that there is a series of precedents on the other side. 
But as far as precedents of this kind can be sup- 
ported, they can rest on precedents alone, for the 
fundamental rights of juries show, that as by their 
power they can affect a question of this nature, so, 
politically speaking, they have the right. To ascer- 
tain this, it is necessary to inquire, whether this law, 
now contended for, uniformly and invariably formed 

Speech 415 

the practice of all the judges in Westminster Hall. 
For, if so, then an argument may, with more pro- 
priety, be raised ; but if it was disputed, then it is to 
be doubted. Precedents ought to be such as are 
universally acknowledged, and this, if we are to 
credit the highest authority, was not the invariable 
practice. Lord Loughborough says, that his prac- 
tice was the other way. He declares that he invari- 
ably left the whole to the jury; and Lord Camden 
gives us to understand the same thing. Here, then, 
is proof that it was not universally acquiesced in, 
and this, by some of the most respected characters 
that ever sat on a bench. 

Can we call this a settled practice — a practice 
which is contradicted by other precedents? Have 
they not varied? I consider nothing but a uniform 
course of precedents, so established that the judges 
invariably conform to it in their judicial conduct, as 
forming a precedent. When this is not the case, we 
must examine the precedent, and see how far it is 
conformable to principles of general law. If, then, 
they have not that character of uniformity, which 
gives force to precedents, they are not to be regarded, 
for they are too much opposed to fundamental prin- 
ciples. The court may, therefore, disregard them, 
and say the law was never thus settled. It was a 
mere floating of litigated questions. Different con- 
duct was pursued by different men, and, therefore, 
the court is at liberty to examine the propriety of 
all; and if it be convenient that a contrary mode 
should be adopted, we ought to examine into what 
has been done, for we have a right so to do, and it is 

4i6 Alexander Hamilton 

our sacred duty. When we pass from this to the 
declaratory law of Great Britain, the whole argument 
is enforced by one of the first authorities. I do not 
consider it as binding, but as an evidence of the 
common law. If so, I see not why we may not now 
hold it as evidence of another evidence, that the law 
had not been settled by a regular course of judicial 
precedents. In all the debates on this question, it is 
denied to have been so settled. It must then be 
confessed that it was so ; the law was one thing, and 
the practice another; that to put it out of doubt 
was the end and object of Mr. Fox's bill. There- 
fore it is in evidence that the law was not settled in 
that country. I notice another fact, or historical 
evidence of this; it is what was mentioned by Lord 
Lansdowne, in the very debates to which I have 
before alluded. It is, that twenty years before, a 
similar act was brought forward and dropped. Here 
then is a matter of fact to show that, in the consid- 
eration of that nation, the doctrines of Lord Mans- 
field were never palatable nor settled, and that the 
opinions of judges and lawyers were considered by 
many as not the law of the land. Let it be recol- 
lected, too, that with that nation the administration 
of justice in the last resort is in the House of Lords. 
That being so it gives extreme weight to a declar- 
atory act, as it shows the sense of the highest branch 
of the judicature of that country. It is in evidence 
that what we contend for was and had been the law, 
and never was otherwise settled. It is a very honor- 
able thing to that country, in a case where party 
passions had been excited to a very great height, to 

speech 417 

see that all united to bring it in. It was first intro- 
duced by Mr. Fox; the principal officers of the 
crown acquiesced; the Prime-Minister gave it his 
support, and in this they were aided by many of the 
great law lords. All parties concurred in declaring 
the principles of that act to be the law, and not only 
does the form prove it to be declaratory, but when 
the court read the debates on that subject they will 
see this to be the fact. Adding the word '' enacted " 
to a bill does not vary the conclusion of its being de- 
claratory. The word ** enacted " is commonly super- 
added, but the word '' declared " is never used but 
when it is intended that the act shall be considered 
as declaratory; and when they insert the word ''de- 
clare" it is because they deem it important that it 
should be so understood. This I deem conclusive 
evidence of the intent. Thus also it was understood 
by all the judges except Lord Kenyon, and he does 
not say that it was not declaratory. To be sure he 
makes use of some expressions that look that way, 
such as, " that the act had varied the old law. " But 
not one word to show that it was not intended by 
Parliament to be a declaratory law. But it would 
not be surprising that Lord Kenyon, who opposed 
the passage of the act, should, in a judicial decision, 
still adhere to his old ideas. This, however, does 
not affect the evidence which arises from the words 
of the act. I join in issue, then, whether this be 
sufficient evidence to the court. For I contend, that 
notwithstanding the authority of Lord Kenyon and 
the cases on the other side, the conclusions they 
maintain would be unfair. For if these conclusions 

VOL. Vlll. — 27. 

41 8 Alexander Hamilton 

necessarily tend to the subversion of fundamental 
principles, though they be warranted by precedents, 
still the precedents ought not to weigh. But should 
they have settled the law by their precedents, still 
this court will admit any evidence to show that the 
facts are otherwise, and the law never was as they 
have settled it. In this case, then, I say, as matters 
of evidence, these precedents shall not prevail and 
shall not have any effect. In practice on this de- 
claratory act they have gone into a construction im- 
portant to our argument. But previously to entering 
into this I shall make one observation to show the 
nature of this act to be declaratory ; the recital states 
it to be so. 

Spencer, Attorney-General — The whole matter in 
issue are the words. 

Hamilton — Is it to be doubted that every general 
issue includes law and fact? Not a case in our 
criminal code in which it is otherwise. The con- 
struction, the publication, the meaning of the innu- 
endoes, the intent and design, are all involved in the 
question of libel, and to be decided on the plea of not 
guilty, which puts the whole matter in issue. It is, 
therefore, a subtlety to say that the fact and law are 
not in issue. There can be no distinction taken, 
even by judges, between libels and other points. 
But will it be said, that when this question was be- 
fore the Parliament, whether the law and the fact 
should be in issue, that the Parliament did not mean 
to give the power to decide on both? It is a mere 
cavil to say that the act did not mean to decide 
on this very point. The opposition of the twelve 

Speech 419 

judges has been much insisted on. But in my opin- 
ion they have given up the point as to the right of 
the jury to decide on the intent. They in some part 
of their answer assert the exclusive power of the 
court; they deny in terms the power of the jury to 
decide on the whole. But when pressed on this 
point as to a letter of a treasonable nature, how do 
they conclude? Why, the very reverse of all this. 
Here, then, we see the hardship into which the best 
of men are driven, when compelled to support a 
paradox. Can the jury do it with power, and with- 
out right? When we say of any forum that it can 
do and may hazard the doing a thing, we admit the 
legal power to do it. What is meant by the word 
* 'hazard " ? If they choose to do it, they have then the 
legal right; for legal power includes the legal right. 
This is really only a question of words. But in the 
exercise of this right, moral ideas are no doubt to 
restrain ; for the conscience ought to decide between 
the charge and the evidence which ought to prevail, 
one side or the other. The moment, however, that 
question as to the power is admitted, the whole 
argument is given up. I consider the judges driven 
to yield up, at the conclusion of their opinion, that 
point for which they had in the former parts con- 
tended. Thus, then, stands the matter, on English 
conduct, and on English precedent. Let us see if 
any thing in the annals of America will further the 
argument. Zenger's case has been mentioned as an 
authority. A decision in a factitious period, and 
reprobated at the very time. 

A single precedent never forms the law. If in i 

420 Alexander Hamilton 

England it was fluctuating in an English court, can 
I a colonial judge, of a remote colony, ever settle it? 
/ He cannot fix in New York what was not fixed in 
Great Britain. It was merely one more precedent 
to a certain course of practice. But because a 
colonial governor, exercising judicial power, subor- 
dinate to the judges of the mother country, decides 
in this way, can it be said that he can establish the 
law, and that he has, by a solitary precedent, fixed 
what his superior could not? The most solemn de- 
cisions of the court of king's bench are at one time 
made and at another time overruled. Why are our 
courts to be bound down by the weight of only one 
precedent? Is a precedent, like the laws of the 
Medes and Persians, never to be changed? This is 
to make the colonial precedent of more weight than 
is in England allowed to a precedent of Westminster 
Hall. To pursue the precedents more emphatically 
I our own, let us advert to the sedition law, branded 
■ indeed with epithets the most odious, but which will 
one day be pronounced a valuable feature in our 
, national character. In this we find not only the 
I intent but the truth may be submitted to the jury, 
1 and that even in a justificatory manner. This, I 
I afiirm, was on common-law principles. It would, 
} however, be a long detail to investigate the appli- 
cability of the common law to the Constitution of the 
United States. It is evident, however, that parts of 
it use a language which refers to former principles. 
The habeas corpus is mentioned, and as treason, it 
adopts the very words of the common law. Not 
even the Legislature of the Union can change it. 

Speech 42 1 

Congress itself cannot make constructive or new 
treasons. Such is the general tenor of the Constitu- 
tion of the United States, that it evidently looks to 
antecedent law. What is, on this point, the great 
body of the common law ? Natural law and natural 
reason applied to the purposes of society. What are ., 
the English courts now doing but adopting natural ' 
law? 

What have the court done here? Applied moral 
law to constitutional principles, and thus the judges 
have confirmed this construction of the common 
law; and therefore, I say, by our Constitution it is 
said the truth may be given in evidence. In vain it 
is to be replied that some committee met, and in 
their report gave it the name of amendment. For 
when the act says declared, I say the highest legis- 
lative bodies in this country have declared that the 
common law is, that the truth shall be given in evi- 
dence ; and this I urge as a proof of what that com- 
mon law is. On this point a fatal doctrine would be 
introduced if we were to deny the common law to be 
in force according to our federal Constitution. Some 
circumstances have doubtless weakened my position. 
Impeachments of an extraordinary nature have 
echoed through the land, charging as crimes things 
unknown, and although our judges, according to that 
Constitution, must appeal to the definitions of the 
common law for treasons, crimes, and misdemeanors, 
this, no doubt, was that no vague words might be 
used. If, then, we discharge all evidence of the 
common law, they may be pronounced guilty ad 
libitum, and the crime and offence being at once 

422 Alexander Hamilton 

their will, there would be an end of that Consti- 
tution. 

By analogy a similar construction may be made of 
our own Constitution, and our judges thus got rid of. 
This may be of the most dangerous consequences. 
It admonishes us to use with caution these argu- 
ments against the common law; to take care how 
we throw down this barrier which may secure the 
men we have placed in power; to guard against a 
spirit of faction, that great bane to our community, 
that mortal poison to our land. It is considered by 
all great men as the natural disease of our form of 
government, and therefore we ought to be careful to 
restrain that spirit. We have been careful that 
when one party comes in it shall not be able to break 
down and bear away the others. If this be not so, 
in vain have we made constitutions; for if it be not 
so, then we must go into anarchy, and from thence 
to despotism and to a master. Against this I know 
there is an almost insurmountable obstacle in the 
spirit of the people. They would not submit to be 
thus enslaved. Every tongue, every arm would be 
uplifted against it; they would resist, and resist, 
and resist, till they hurled from their seats those who 
dared make the attempt. To watch the progress of 
such endeavors is the office of a free press — to give 
us early alarm, and put us on our guard against the 
encroachments of power. This, then, is a right of 
the utmost importance; one for which, instead of 
yielding it up, we ought rather to spill our blood. 
Going on, however, to precedents, I find another in 
the words of Chief -Justice Jay, when pronouncing the 

Speech 423 

law on this subject. The jury are, in the passage 
already cited, told the law, and the fact is for their 
determination; I find him telling them that it is 
their right. This admits of no qualification. The ' 
little, miserable conduct of the judge in Zenger's 
case, when set against this, will kick the beam ; and 
it will be seen that even the twelve judges do not 
set up, with deference, however, to their known 
ability, that system now insisted on. If the doctrine 
for which we contend is true in regard to treason 
and murder, it is equally true in respect to libel. 
For there is the great danger. Never can tyranny 
be introduced into this country by arms; these can ) 
never get rid of a popular spirit of inquiry ; the only 
way to crush it down is by a servile tribunal. It is 
only by the abuse of the forms of justice that we 
can be enslaved. An army never can do it. For \ 
ages it can never be attempted. The spirit of the \ 
country, with arms in their hands, and disciplined as 
a militia, would render it impossible. Every pre- 
tence that liberty can be thus invaded is idle decla- 
mation. It is not to be endangered by a few 
thousand of miserable, pitiful military. It is not thus i 
that the liberty of this country is to be destroyed. 
It is to be subverted only by a pretence of adhering 
to all the forms of law, and yet by breaking down 
the substance of our liberties; by devoting a 
wretched but honest man as the victim of a nominal 
trial. It is not by murder, by an open and public 
execution that he would be taken off. The sight of 
this, of a fellow-citizen's blood, would at first beget 
sympathy; this would rouse into action, and the 

424 Alexander Hamilton 

people, in the madness of their revenge, would break, 
on the heads of their oppressors, the chains they had 
destined for others. 

One argument was stated to the court of a most 
technical and precise kind. It was that which re- 
lates to putting on the record a part only of the libel. 
That on this, no writ of error would lie. What was 
the answer given? That it could not be presumed 
judges could be so unjust. Why, it requires neither 
prejudice nor injustice, it may be matter of opinion. 
The argument goes to assert that we are to take for 
granted the infallibility of our judges. The court 
must see that some better reason must be given, 
that it must be shown that this consequence cannot 
ensue. If not, it is decisive against the argument. 
Surely this question deserves a further investigation. 
Very truly and righteously was it once the intention 
of the attorney-general that the truth should have 
been given in evidence. It is desirable that there 
should be judicial grounds to send it back again to a 
jury. For surely it is not an immaterial thing that 
a high official character should be capable of saying 
any thing against the father of this country. 

It is important to have it known to the men of 
our country, to us all, whether it be true or false ; it 
is important to the reputation of him against whom 
the charge is made, that it should be examined. It 
will be a glorious triumph for truth ; it will be happy 
to give it a fair chance of being brought forward ; an 
opportunity, in case of another course of things, to 
say that the truth stands a chance of being the cri- 
terion of justice. Notwithstanding, however, the con- 

The French Revolution 425 

trary is asserted to be the doctrine of the EngHsh 
courts, I am, I confess, happy to hear that the free- 
dom of the EngHsh is allowed; that a nation with 
king, lords, and commons, can be free. I do not 
mean to enter into a comparison between the free- 
dom of the two countries. But the attorney-general 
has taken vast pains to celebrate Lord Mansfield's 
character. Never, till now, did I hear that his repu- 
tation was high in republican estimation ; never, till 
now, did I consider him as a model for republican 
imitation. I do not mean, however, to detract from 
the fame of that truly great man, but only conceived 
his sentiments were not those fit for a republic. No 
man more truly reveres his exalted fame than my- 
self; if he had his faults, he had his virtues; and I 
would not only tread lightly on his ashes, but drop 
a tear as I passed by. He, indeed, seems to have 
been the parent of the doctrines of the other side. 
Such, however, we trust, will be proved not to be 
the doctrines of the common law nor of this country, 
and that in proof of this, a new trial will be granted. 

FRAGMENT ON THE FRENCH REVOLUTION ' 

Facts, numerous and unequivocal, demonstrate 
that the present ^RA is arnong the most extra- 
ordinary which have occurred in the history of human 

^ This fragment, now first printed, from the Hamilton MSB., vol. xv., 
p. 117, has no date, but is of interest as showing the effect produced 
upon his mind by the French Revolution, and why that great con- 
vulsion so affected and colored the views of the Federalists and of 
the more conservative classes of every community. 

426 Alexander Hamilton 

affairs. Opinions, for a long time, have been gradu- 
ally gaining ground, which threaten the foundations 
of religion, morality, and society. An attack was 
first made upon the Christian revelation, for which 
natural religion was offered as the substitute. The 
Gospel was to be discarded as a gross imposture, but 
the being and attributes of God, the obligations of 
piety, even the doctrine of a future state of rewards 
and punishments, were to be retained and cherished. 

In proportion as success has appeared to attend 
the plan, a bolder project has been unfolded. The 
very existence of a Deity has been questioned and in 
some instances denied. The duty of piety has been 
ridiculed, the perishable nature of man asserted, and 
his hopes bounded to the short span of his earthly 
state. Death has been proclaimed an eternal 
sleep; "the dogma of the immortality of the soul a 
cheat, invented to torment the living for the benefit 
of the dead." Irreligion, no longer confined to the 
closets of conceited sophists, nor to the haunts of 
wealthy riot, has more or less displayed its hideous 
front among all classes. 

Wise and good men took a lead in delineating 
the odious character of despotism, in exhibiting the 
advantages of a moderate and well-balanced govern- 
ment, in inviting nations to contend for the en- 
joyment of national liberty. Fanatics in political 
science have since exaggerated and perverted their 
doctrines. Theories of government unsuited to the 
nature of man, miscalculating the force of his pas- 
sions, disregarding the lessons of experimental wis- 
dom, have been projected and recommended. These 

The French Revolution 427 

have everywhere attracted sectaries, and everywhere 
the fabric of government has been in different de- 
grees undermined. 

A league has at length been cemented between the 
apostles and disciples of irreligion and of anarchy. 
Religion and government have both been stigma- 
tized as abuses; as unwarrantable restraints upon 
the freedom of man; as causes of the corruption of 
his nature, intrinsically good; as sources of an arti- 
ficial and false morality which tyrannically robs him 
of the enjoyments for which his passions fit him, 
and as clogs upon his progress to the perfection for 
which he was destined. 

As a corollary from these premises, it is a favorite 
tenet of the sect that religious opinion of any sort is 
unnecessary to society; that the maxims of a genu- 
ine morality and the authority of the magistracy and 
the laws are a sufficient and ought to be the only 
security for civil rights and private happiness. 

As another corollary, it is occasionally maintained 
by the same sect that but a small portion of power is 
requisite to government; that even this portion is 
only temporarily necessary, in consequence of the 
bad habits which have been produced by the errors 
of ancient systems ; and that as human nature shall 
refine and ameliorate by the operation of a more en- 
lightened plan, government itself will become use- 
less, and society will subsist and flourish free from 
shackles. 

If all .the votaries of this new philosophy do not go 
the whole length of its frantic creed, they all go far 
enough to endanger the full extent of the mischiefs 

428 Alexander Hamilton 

which are inherent in so wild and fatal a scheme, 
every modification of which aims a mortal blow at 
the vitals of human happiness. 

The practical development of this pernicious sys- 
tem has been seen in France. It has served as an 
engine to subvert all her ancient institutions, civil 
and religious, with all the checks that served to 
mitigate the rigor of authority; it has hurried her 
headlong through a rapid succession of dreadful 
revolutions, which have laid waste property, made 
havoc among the arts, overthrown cities, desolated 
provinces, unpeopled regions, crimsoned her soil with 
blood, and deluged it in crime, poverty, and wretch- 
edness; and all this as yet for no better purpose 
than to erect on the ruins of former things a despot- 
ism unlimited and uncontrolled; leaving to a de- 
luded, an abused, a plundered, a scourged, and an 
oppressed people, not even the shadow of liberty to 
console them for a long train of substantial misfor- 
tunes, of bitter suffering. 

This horrid system seemed awhile to threaten the 
subversion of civilized society and the introduction 
of general disorder among mankind. And though 
the frightful evils which have been its first and only 
fruits have given a check to its progress, it is to be 
feared that the poison has spread too widely and 
penetrated too deeply to be as yet eradicated. Its 
activity has indeed been suspended, but the elements 
remain, concocting for new eruptions as occasion 
shall permit. It is greatly to be apprehended that 
mankind is not near the end of the misfortunes which 
it is calculated to produce, and that it still portends 

The Funding System 429 

a long train of convulsion, revolution, carnage, de- 
vastation, and misery. 

Symptoms of the too great prevalence of this sys- 
tem in the United States are alarmingly visible. It 
was by its influence that efforts were made to em- 
bark this country in a common cause with France in 
the early period of the present war; to induce our 
government to sanction and promote her odious 
principles and views with the blood and treasure of 
our citizens. It is by its influence that every suc- 
ceeding revolution has been approved or excused ; all 
the horrors that have been committed justified or 
extenuated; that even the last usurpation, which 
contradicts all the ostensible principles of the Re- 
volution, has been regarded with complacency, and 
the despotic constitution engendered by it slyly held 
up as a model not unworthy of our imitation. 

In the progress of this system., impiety and in- 
fidelity have advanced with gigantic strides. Pro- 
digious crimes heretofore unknown among us are 
seen. The chief and idol of * * * [The rest is 
wanting.] 

DEFENCE OF THE FUNDING SYSTEM ' 

The second feature of the plan as stated was to 
fund the entire debt, foreign and domestic, original 
and assumed. 

^ This paper and the one which follows are from the Hamilton MSB. 
in Washington, now printed here for the first time. They were not 
discovered in season for the volume on Taxation and Finance, where 
they belong, and are therefore added here to the miscellaneous papers. 
They are unfinished and incomplete, and the originals have marginal 

430 Alexander Hamilton 

The funding of the debt has been unexpectedly 
the theme of much declamation and invective. A 
confusion of ideas has been attempted to be produced 
among the ignorant. The funding with the assump- 
tion has been sometimes treated as the creation of 
the debt ; at others the funding has been represented 
as its perpetuation, and as a direct attempt to fasten 
the burthen irrevocably about the necks of the 
people. A particular ingredient in the plan pro- 
posed— the rendering the debt redeemable only in 
certain proportions — has been pressed to reinforce 
this argument and to prove the iniquitous tendency 
of the plan. The circumstance of qualified re- 
deemability will be spoken of hereafter. Remarks 
here will be confined to the mere funding of the 
debt. 

The Revolution, which gave us independence and 
secured us liberty, left upon the country as the 
price of it a considerable debt, partly contracted by 

notes of points to be investigated. They are numbered 9 and 10 
respectively but I have printed them in an inverse order because it 
seems to preserve the logical sequence of thought and subject better 
than the numerical arrangement. These two papers have no date, and 
there is no trace of any preceding numbers. It is possible that they 
were intended as part of the unfinished "Vindication of the Funding 
System" (Vol. iii., p. i), but they are conceived on a much more 
elaborate and extensive plan, and while the "Vindication" belongs to 
the year 1791, these papers are clearly later than 1795, when Hamil- 
ton retired from office. Unfinished and unrevised as they are, these 
essays are to be ranked among the most remarkable of Hamilton's 
financial papers. The second one is of especial interest, because it con- 
tains an exhaustive defence of the assumption measures — the most 
contested portion of Hamilton's financial policy, and upon which his 
arguments and opinions in all their extent have never before been 
thoroughly known. The discovery of these papers, in a word, has 
made an important addition to Hamilton's writings on finance, the 
subject in which above all others he was a master. 

The Funding System 431 

the United States in their joint capacity, partly by 
the individual States in their separate capacities. 

What was to be done with the debt ? Was it to be 
wiped off with a sponge or was it to be provided for ? 

The first idea was the extreme of political pro- 
fligacy and folly. Governments like individuals have 
burthens which ought to be deemed sacred, else they 
become mere engines of violence, oppression, extor- 
tion, and misery. Adieu to the security of property, 
adieu to the security of liberty ! Nothing is then safe. 

All our favorite notions of natural and constitu- 
tional right vanish. Every thing is brought to a 
question of power. Right is anathematized, ex- 
communicated, and banished. 

In the code of moral and political obligations, that 
of paying debts holds a prominent place. Tried by 
the test of utility, there is perhaps none of greater 
force or extent. Without it, no borrowing or lend- 
ing, no selling or purchasing upon time; no credit, 
private or public ; consequently a more cramped and 
less prosperous agriculture, fewer and more imperfect 
mechanic and other industrial arts; less and more 
embarrassed commerce; an immense contraction 
of national resource and strength. A most active 
power in the whole scheme of national happiness 
would be destroyed. A vast void would be created. 
Every thing would languish an,d wither. 

No one will be hardy enough directly to dispute 
these positions or advocate the horrid doctrine of 
applying the sponge, but it was seen to lurk beneath 
some very insidious suggestions, often reiterated and 
urged with earnestness and exaggeration. 

432 Alexander Hamilton 

The debt had a great deal of alloy in it. A great 
part of it had been produced for no adequate value. 
To pay it, therefore, involved injustice and injury to 
the public. 

The real state of the fact which is the basis of this 
suggestion shall be discussed in another place. Here 
it shall be taken for granted that it was well founded. 

But what were the causes ? The bad arrangement 
and delinquencies of government itself ; the infidelity 
of its own agents ; the enhancement of price from the 
demand and scarcity incident to a long and exhaust- 
ing war ; the embarrassments and risks to individuals 
from a depreciating currency; the eventual hazards 
inseparable from a state of revolution. These were 
the essential causes of the alloy, if any, in the 

Was any one or all of them a good plea to the 
government not to pay ? Was it just that the whole 
debt should be cancelled because a fifteenth, or a 
tenth, or a fifth of it had been contracted without 
adequate consideration? Was it equitable that 
those persons who had yielded their personal serv- 
ices, lent their money, and parted with their prop- 
erty to the government, upon fair and reasonable 
compensation and values, should lose their rights 
because others may have extorted or imposed; be- 
cause the disorders in the public arrangements had 
prevented proper liquidations of accounts and had 
let in unfounded claims; because the infidelity of 
the government's own agents had produced dilapida- 
tions and had emitted evidences of debt without 
value or for little value? Was it reasonable to ob- 

The Funding System 433 

ject to compensations and allowances predicated 
upon a state of war, revolution, disorder, and hazard, 
because they were not agreeable to a standard ad- 
justed to a state of peace, established government 
credit, and safety? An individual may plead duress 
and compulsion as an objection to the performance 
of his engagements ; but this is impossible to a gov- 
ernment. Individuals cannot exercise over it that 
species of control which may be demonstrated as 
compulsion. It may oppress, but it cannot be op- 
pressed. Circumstances which, according to the laws, 
enable individuals to demand high prices for their 
property are never arguments of compulsion to vit- 
iate the contract. 

Where would an objection of this kind lead ? War, 
insurrection, every great disturbance of the social 
order is apt to augment price. Is there constantly 
on the return of peace and order to be a revision and 
reliquidation or a rejection of the contracts? How 
long would governments under such a system obtain 
any success but by exactions and violence in similar 
emergencies ? 

It is plain that such an objection ought to be dis- 
carded as a contemptible and pernicious subterfuge. 
It was in the view both of justice and policy indis- 
pensable to provide fairly for the debt. 'T is afflict- 
ing that there should be a state of public opinion or 
feeling, however limited, which should encourage a 
man to dare to expect to give currency to a contrary 
insinuation, or to throw any degree of unpopularity 
upon a fair provision for the debt. 

Another weapon indirectly used against a pro- 

VOL. VIII.— 28. 

434 Alexander Hamilton 

vision for the debt was the fact of alienations of it at 
low values. 

But how could this supersede the obligation of the 
government to pay or provide? The government 
had received the benefit of the services, loans, or 
supplies which were the consideration of its con- 
tracts. These contracts were in their constitution 
alienable and assignable. The proprietors had a 
full right to part with them at any value they 
pleased, or even to give them away. What was it 
to the government how they disposed of them? By 
what rule of reason, law, or right was the govern- 
ment dispensed, by alienations, provident or im- 
provident, of the original proprietors, from paying 
its debts and performing its engagements? 

It is evident that the only colorable question which 
could be raised was not whether the debt should be 
provided for, but for whose benefit the provision 
should accrue — that of the original proprietors or of 
their alienees — a question which will be examined in 
another place. 

The obligation to provide for the debts of the bene- 
fit of those who were best entitled was indisputable. 
No argument can enforce it; no man who has the 
least regard for his reputation will hazard a denial 
of it. 

But the anonymous publications have, by insinua- 
tions, attempted to raise doubts and prejudices. Not 
the mode merely of providing has been attacked, 
but by implication any provision whatever. The 
debt itself has been sometimes treated as a nuisance, 
as a morbid excrescence on the body politic, as the 

The Funding System 435 

creature of a wicked combination to create a monied 
aristocracy and undermine the republican system. 
A debt created by that very revolution which gave 
us the republican system has been artfully presented 
in these odious colors to the dislikes of a spirit of 
jealousy and avarice, and those who were disposed 
to uphold the integrity and credit of the nation have 
been exhibited as conspirators against democratic 
principles. It is afflicting that there should be a 
state of public information, opinion, or feeling which 
should encourage any man to attempt to traffic for 
popularity by means so absurd and so base as these. 
If they could succeed we must renounce those pre- 
tensions to intelligence and light as a people which 
we claim hitherto on such just grounds; we must 
soon after renounce that republican system of which 
these men affect to be so fond. 

The plainest maxims of common sense and common 
honesty establish that our government had no option 
but to make a fair provision for the debt. Justice, 
true policy, character, credit, interest, all spoke on 
this head a uniform and unequivocal language. Not 
to have listened to it would have been to have pro- 
strated every thing respectable among nations. It 
would have been an act of suicide in the government 
at the very commencement of its existence. It 
would not have strangled the serpents which threat- 
ened, but it would have strangled itself. 

The only possible question was about the nature 
of the provision. And to this point indeed were con- 
fined all the questions formally raised, though in- 
directly it has been endeavored to excite prejudices 

43^ Alexander Hamilton 

in the public mind against the debt itself, and conse- 
quently against all provision for it. 

But among the questions raised as to the nature 
of the provision, I neither recollect nor can trace that 
among the legislative parties, while the subject was 
under discussion, there was any party against the 
principle of funding the debt as contradistinguished 
from other modes of providing. 

Indeed, but three options occurred: to pay off the 
principal and interest at once, which was impossible; 
to provide annually for the interest and occasionally 
for reimbursing as much of the principal as the public 
resources permitted; to fund the debt, or, in other 
words, to pledge specified and adequate funds for the 
regular payment of interest till the principal was re- 
imbursed, and, as an auxiliary measure, to constitute 
and pledge adequate funds for the reimbursement of 
the principal. 

The last was conformable to the sense of America 
repeatedly and solemnly expressed. Different acts 
of Congress under the old Confederation embrace and 
enforce the propriety of this measure, and frequently 
with unanimity. The States separately had all 
sanctioned it. The objectors were a few solitary 
individuals, neither numerous nor significant enough 
by weight of talents or character to form a party. 

In proposing, therefore, to fimd the debt, I con- 
sidered myself not only as pursuing the true prin- 
ciples of credit and the true policy of the case, but 
the uniform general sense of the Union. 

I had heard no lisp from any description of men in 
the national legislature of an objection to this idea, 

The Funding System 437 

and accordingly when the plan proposed was under 
discussion there appeared none in opposition to it. 

The clamors therefore which have been subse- 
quently raised on this head and patronized more or 
less directly by a whole party are not less strong in- 
dications of the disingenuousness of party spirit than 
of an immaturity of ideas on the subject of public 
credit. 

The substance of the argument against the funding 
systems is that by facilitating credit they encourage 
to enterprises which produce expense ; by furnishing 
in credit a substitute for revenue, they prevent the 
raising contemporarily with the causes of expense 
as much as might be raised to avoid the unpopularity 
of laying new taxes, and in both ways occasion a 
tendency to run in debt, consequently a progressive 
accumulation of debt and its perpetuation — at least 
till it is crushed beneath the load of its own enorm- 
ous weight. 

An analysis of this argument proves that it turns 
upon the abuses of a thing intrinsically good. 

A prosperous state of agriculture, commerce, and 
manufactures nourishes and begets opulence, re- 
source, and strength. These, by inspiring a con- 
sciousness of power, never fail to beget in the councils 
of nations, under whatever form of government, 
pride, ambition, and a sentiment of superiority. 
These dispositions lead directly to war, and conse- 
quently to expense and to all the calamities which 
march in the train of war. Shall we, therefore, 
reprobate and reject improvements in agriculture, 
commerce, and manufactures? 


Again the same causes leading to opulence, in- 
creasing the means of enjoyment, naturally sharpen 
the appetite for it, and so promote luxury, extra- 
vagance, dissipation, effeminacy, disorders in the 
moral and political system, convulsions, revolutions, 
the overthrow of nations and empires. Shall we, 
therefore, on this account renounce improvements 
in agriculture, commerce and manufactures? 

Again, science, learning, and knowledge promote 
those momentous discoveries and improvements 
which accelerate the progress of labor and industry, 
and with it the accumulation of that opulence which 
is the parent of so many pleasures and pains, so many 
blessings and calamities. Shall we, therefore, on 
this account explode science, learning, and know- 
ledge ? 

Again, true liberty, by protecting the exertions 
of talents and industry, and securing to them their 
justly acquired fruits, tends more powerfully than 
any other cause to augment the mass of national 
wealth and to produce the mischiefs of opulence. 
Shall we, therefore, on this account proscribe liberty 
also? 

What good, in fine, shall we retain? 'T is the por- 
tion of man, assigned to him by the eternal allotment 
of Providence that every good he enjoys shall be 
alloyed with ills, that every source of his bliss shall 
be a source of his affliction — except virtue alone, the 
only unmixed good which is permitted to his tem- 
poral condition. 

But shall we on this account forego any advantage 
which we are fitted to enjoy ? Shall we put in prac- 

The Funding System 439 

tice the horrid system of the detestable Robespierre ? 
Shall we make war upon science and its professors? 
Shall we destroy the arts useful as well as pleasur- 
able? Shall we make knowledge a crime, ignorance 
a gratification ? Shall we lay in ruins our towns and 
deform the face of our fields? Shall we enchain the 
human mind and blunt all its energies under the 
withering influences of privation and the benumbing 
strokes of terror? Shall we substitute the unmin- 
gled misery of a gloomy and destructive despotism 
to the alternate sunshine and storms of liberty ? 

The very objection to funding systems makes 
their panegyric. '' They facilitate credit'' ; they give 
energy, solidity, and extent to the credit of a nation ; 
they enable it in great and dangerous emergencies to 
obtain readily and copiously the supplies of money 
of which it stands in need for its defence, safety, and 
the preservation or advancement of its interests. 
They enable it to do this, too, without crushing the 
people beneath the weight of intolerable taxes ; with- 
out taking from industry the resources necessary for 
its vigorous prosecution; without emptying all the 
property of individuals into the public lap; without 
subverting the foundation of social order. 

Indeed, war, in the modem system of it, offers but 
two options — credit or the devastation of private 
property. 'T is impossible merely with that portion 
of the income of the community which can be spared 
from the wants, conveniences, and industrious pur- 
suits of individuals to face the expenses of a serious 
war during its progress. 

There must be anticipation by credit, or there must 

440 Alexander Hamilton 

be a violent usurpation of private property. The 
state must trench upon the capital instead of the 
revenue of the people, and thus every war would in- 
volve a temporary ruin. 

'T is the signal merit of a vigorous system of 
national credit, that it enables a government to 
support war without violating property, destroying in- 
dustry, or interfering unreasonably with individual 
enjoyments. The citizens retain their capital to 
carry on their several businesses and a due propor- 
tion of its produce for obtaining their usual comforts. 
Agriculture, commerce, and manufactures may re- 
ceive some check, but they receive no serious wound ; 
their stamina remain, and, on peace returning, they 
quickly resume their wonted elasticity. 

War, by the use of credit, becomes less a scourge 
and loses a great portion of its sting. 

Will it be said that equal credit may be established 
without funding systems? Then I answer the ob- 
jection made to those systems will apply to that 
mode whatever it is by which this equal credit is 
obtained. 'T is credit which, giving extraordinary 
resources to government encourages to enterprises 
that produce expense, and which, furnishing a sub- 
stitute for revenue, relaxes the efforts of taxation, 
and prevents the raising for the current expenditure 
as much as might be raised in this way. However 
that credit is acquired the same consequences follow 
— the same evils ensue. 

Will it be said that without funding systems not 
an equal but a competent credit might be secured ? I 
answer by asking what is this competent credit ? Is 

The Funding System 441 

it the power of obtaining by loans all that the state 
may want for extraordinary exigencies, more than 
it can conveniently and without oppression or dis- 
order raise on the citizens? If any thing less it is 
plainly not enough, and if it is this it is as much as 
funding systems effect. The how much in each case 
to be obtained in loans beyond what can be conve- 
niently raised in taxes depends on the pressure of the 
occasion and the opinion of the legislature of the day. 
And this opinion will be affected by the temper of 
the times — the degree of popular favor or disfavor 
towards the object of expense and the genius of the 
government. A credit is not good which does not 
extend the power of the government to borrow to 
the utmost limit of the power of individuals to lend. 

Thus it appears that the great objection to fund- 
ing systems resolves itself into an objection to credit 
in the abstract, and if listened to drives us to the 
alternative of a mean surrender of our rights and in- 
terests to every enterprising invader, or to the op- 
pression of the citizens and destruction of capital 
and industry in every war in which we should be en- 
gaged, and in the end from the insupportableness of 
that situation to the same surrender of our rights 
and interests. 

Indeed as far as it is the attribute of funding sys- 
tems to invigorate credit, it is their tendency in an 
important particular to diminish debt. This relates 
to the lower or higher rate of interest at which money 
is borrowed according to the state of credit. A 
government which borrows 100 dollars at three per 
cent, owes in fact a less debt than a government 

442 Alexander Hamilton 

which is obliged to borrow the same sum at five per 
cent. Interest is always a part of the debt, and it is 
self-evident that the ultimate discharge of one which 
bears five per cent, will exhaust more money or in- 
come than that of one which only bears three per 
cent. This principle runs through all the public 
operations in which credit is concerned, and the 
difference in the result of the public expenditures, 
and consequently its debts, from a perfect or an im- 
perfect state of credit, is immense. 

Every state ought to aim at rendering its credit — 
that is, its ability to borrow — commensurate with 
the utmost extent of the lending faculties of the 
community and of all others who can have access to 
its loans. 'T is then that it puts itself in a condition 
to exercise the greatest portion of strength of which 
it is capable, and has its destiny most completely in 
its own hands. 'T is then that it is able to supply 
all its wants, not only in the most effectual manner, 
but at the cheapest rate. 'T is then that the various 
departments of its industry are liable to the least 
disturbance and proceed with the most steady and 
vigorous motion. An ignorance which benights the 
political world and disputes the first principles of 
administration is requisite to bring this position for 
a moment into question. The principle on which 
such a question could be founded would equally com- 
bat every institution that promotes the perfection 
of the social organization; for this perfection in all 
its shapes, by giving a consciousness of strength and 
resource and inspiring pride, tends to ambitious pur- 
suits, to war, expense, and debt. 

The Funding System 443 

On this question, as on most others, evils are 
traced to a wrong source. Funding systems, as the 
engines of credit, are blamed for the wars, expenses, 
and debts of nations. Do these evils prevail less in 
countries where either those systems do not exist or 
where they exist partially and imperfectly? Great 
Britain is the country where they exist in most en- 
ergy. Her wars have no doubt been frequent, her 
expenses great, and her debts are vast. But is not 
this, with due allowance for difference of circum- 
stances, the description of all the great powers of 
Europe — France, Spain, Austria, Russia, Prussia? 
Are they not as frequently at war as Great Britain, 
and as often of their own choice? Have not their 
expenses compared with their means and the state of 
society been as great? Have they not all, except 
Prussia, heavy debts? 

The debt of France brought about her revolution. 
Financial embarrassments led to those steps which 
led to the overthrow of the government and to all the 
terrible scenes which have followed. 

Let us then say, as the truth is, not that funding 
systems produce wars, expenses, and debts, but that 
the ambition, avarice, revenge, and injustice of man 
produce them. The seeds of war are sown thickly 
in the human breast. It is astonishing, after the 
experience of its having deluged the world with 
calamities for so many ages, with how great pre- 
cipitancy and levity nations still rush to arms 
against each other. 

Besides what we see abroad, what have we re- 
cently witnessed among ourselves? Never was a 

444 Alexander Hamilton 

thing more manifest than that our true policy lay in 
cultivating peace with scrupulous care. Never had 
a nation a stronger interest. Yet how many were 
there who directly, and indirectly raised and joined 
in the cry of war. Sympathy with one nation and 
animosity against another, made it infinitely difficult 
for the government to steer a course calculated to 
avoid our being implicated in the volcano, which 
shook and overwhelmed Europe. Vague speculations 
about the cause of liberty seconded by angry passions, 
had like to have plunged this young country, just 
recovering from the effects of the long and desolating 
war, which confirmed its revolution, just emerging 
from a state little short of anarchy; just begin- 
ning to establish system and order, to revive credit 
and confidence, into an abyss of war, confusion, and 
distress ! 

After all the experience, which has been had upon 
the point, shall we still charge upon funding systems 
evils which are truly chargeable upon the bad and 
turbulent passions of the human mind? 

Peruse the history of Europe from its earliest pe- 
riod, were wars less frequent or pernicious before the 
system of credit was introduced than they have been 
since ? They were more frequent and more destruc- 
tive though perhaps not of as long duration at one 
time. 

But they did not equally produce debt. This is 
true, yet it remains to compare the evils of debt with 
those which resulted from the antecedent system of 
war — the devastations and extortions, the oppres- 
sions, and derangements of industry in all its 

The Funding System 445 

branches ; and it remains to consider whether expedi- 
ents may not be devised, which may secure to nations 
the advantages of credit and avoid essentially its 
evils. If this shall be practicable, the argument in 
favor of the system of credit has no counterpoise and 
becomes altogether conclusive. 

Credit may be called a new power in the mechan- 
ism of national affairs. It is a great and a very use- 
ful one, but the art of regulating it properly, as is 
the case with every new and great contrivance, has 
been till lately imperfectly understood. The rule of 
making contemporary provision for the extinguish- 
ment of principal as well as for the payment of in- 
terest in the act of contracting new debt, is the 
desideratum — the true panacea. 

But this, like most others, is not an absolute but a 
relative question. If it were even admitted that the 
system of anticipation by credit is, in the abstract, a 
bad one, it will not follow that it can be renounced 
by any one nation while nations in general continue 
to use it. It is so immense a power in the affairs of 
war, that a nation without credit would be in great 
danger of falling a victim in the first war with a 
power possessing a vigorous and flourishing credit. 

What astonishing efforts has credit enabled Great 
Britain to make? What astonishing efforts does it 
enable her at this very moment to continue ? What 
true Englishman, whatever may be his opinion of 
the merits and wisdom of the contest in which his 
country is engaged, does not rejoice that she is able 
to employ so powerful an instrument of warfare? 
However he may wish for peace, he will reflect that 

44^ Alexander Hamilton 

there must be two parties to the pacification, and 
that it is possible the enemy may either be unwilling 
to make peace, or only willing to make it on terms 
too disadvantageous and humiliating. 

He must, therefore, cherish the national credit, as 
an engine by which war, if inevitable can be main- 
tained, and by which, from that very possibility, a 
better peace can be secured. 

It is remarkable too that Great Britain, the only 
power which has uniformly cultivated an enlightened 
and exact plan of national credit at a juncture so 
critical as the present, continues to uphold the vari- 
ous branches of her commerce and industry in great 
energy and prosperity, and will in the end tax her 
adversary, in exchange for the products of her in- 
dustry, with a large proportion of the expenses of 
the actual war. 

The commerce and manufactures of France are so 
prostrated that this consequence cannot but follow. 
For some years to come, after peace, she must be 
customer to Great Britain for vast supplies. 

But let us still return to and keep in view this very 
material point already stated. 'T is credit in gen- 
eral, not funding systems in particular, against 
which the objections made, as far as they have 
foundation, lie. However obtained, it leads to ex- 
actly the same consequences, which are charged on 
funding systems, which are no otherwise answerable 
for those consequences than as they are means of 
credit. 

Any provision, therefore, for our revolution debt, 
which from its justice and efficiency would have given 

The Funding System 447 

satisfaction and inspired confidence, would equally 
have conferred national credit, and would have been 
equally liable to the evils of an abuse of credit. 

The dilemma was either to make and continue a 
just and adequate provision for the debt, till it was 
discharged, and thereby establish credit, and incur 
the chances of the evils incident to its abuse ; or not 
to make a just and adequate provision for the debt, 
and so commit national injustice, incur national dis- 
honor and disgrace, and, it may be added, shake 
and weaken the foundation of property and social 
security. 

Thus we may discard from the examination of the 
subject, the general question whether the system of 
credit (and as a means of credit, the funding of 
debts) is a salutary or a pernicious system. It could 
only with propriety arise with regard to the policy 
of the government in future cases — that is, how it 
would or would not in future emergencies resort to 
anticipation by credit, or find immediate resources 
in contemporary contributions of the community and 
in the spoils of war. It could never be properly 
raised as to a debt previously contracted. The ob- 
jections to a system of credit could never, with an 
honest man, justify a moment's hesitation about the 
obligation and propriety of a just and efficacious 
provision for a debt previously incurred, either from 
a real necessity or from a past neglect of the govern- 
ment to attend duly to the impolicy of employing 
credit and of contracting debt. 

A government which does not rest on the basis of 
iustice rests on that of force. There is no middle 

448 Alexander Hamilton 

ground. Establish that a government may decline 
a provision for its debts, though able to make it, and 
you overthrow all public morality, you unhinge 
all the principles that must preserve the limits of 
free constitutions, you have anarchy, despotism, or 
what you please, but you have no just or regular 
government. 

In all questions about the advantages or disad- 
vantages of national credit, or in similar questions 
which it has been seen may be raised (and it may be 
added have been raised) with respect to all the 
sources of social happiness and national prosperity, 
the difference between the true politician and the 
political empyric is this: the latter will either at- 
tempt to travel out of human nature and introduce 
institutions and projects for which man is not fitted 
and which perish in the imbecility of their own con- 
ception and structure, or without proposing or at- 
tempting any substitute they content themselves 
with exposing and declaiming against the ill sides 
of things, and with puzzling and embarrassing 
every practicable scheme of administration which 
is adopted. The last indeed is the most usual be- 
cause the easiest course, and it embraces in its prac- 
tice all those hunters after popularity who, knowing 
better, make a traf^c of the weak sides of the human 
understanding and passions. 

The true politician, on the contrary, takes human 
nature (and human society its aggregate) as he finds 
it, a compound of good and ill qualities, of good and 
ill tendencies, endued with powers and actuated by 
passions and propensities which blend enjoyment 

The Funding System 449 

with suffering and make the causes of welfare the 
causes of misfortune. 

With this view of human nature he will not at- 
tempt to warp or disturb its natural direction, he 
will not attempt to promote its happiness by means 
to which it is not suited, he will not reject the em- 
ployment of the means which constitute its bliss be- 
cause they necessarily involve alloy and danger, but 
he will seek to promote its action according to the 
bias of his nature, to lead him to the development of 
his energies according to the scope of his passions, 
and erecting the social organization on this basis he 
will favor all those institutions and plans which tend 
to make men happy according to their natural bent, 
which multiply the sources of individual enjoyment 
and increase national resources and strength, taking 
care to infuse in each case all the ingredients which 
can be devised as preventives or correctives of the 
evil which is the eternal concomitant of temporal 
blessing. 

Thus, observing the immense importance of credit 
to the strength and security of nations, he will en- 
deavor to obtain it for his own country in its highest 
perfection, by the most efficient means ; yet not over- 
looking the abuses to which, like all other good things, 
it is liable, he will seek to guard against them by 
prompting a spirit of true national economy, by pur- 
suing steadily, especially in a country which has no 
need of external acquisition, the maxims of justice, 
moderation, and peace, and by endeavoring to es- 
tablish, as far as human inconstancy allows, certain 
fixed principles in the administration of the finances 

VOL. VIII. — 2g. 

450 Alexander Hamilton 

calculated to secure efficaciously the extinguishment 
of debt as fast at least as the public exigencies of the 
nation are likely to occasion the contracting of it. 
These, I can truly say, are the principles which have 
regulated every part of my conduct in my late office. 

And as a first step to this great result, I proposed 
the funding of the public debt. 

This quality of funding appeared to me essential 
in the plan of providing, for different reasons. 

1. First it appeared to me advisable that the na- 
ture of the provision should be such as to give satis- 
faction and confidence by inspiring an opinion of 
security to the creditors. This was important not 
only as it regarded their advantage, but as it regarded 
the public interest, the national credit was intimately 
connected with that satisfaction and confidence. 
They tended besides to produce another important 
effect which will be noticed hereafter. 

2. It was desirable to guard the government and 
the creditors against the danger of inconstancy in 
the public councils. The debt being once funded, it 
would require the concurrence of both branches of 
the legislature and of the President, or of two thirds 
of both branches overruling the opposition of the 
President, to shake the provision. Of this there was 
a moral impossibility — at least the highest degree of 
improbability. To make a provision annually would 
require the like concurrence in its favor; of course, 
would be continually liable to be defeated by im- 
proper views on either of the branches or depart- 
ments. Whoever has attended to the course of our 
public councils, and to the dispositions which have 

The Funding System 451 

been manifested by a powerful party in them, must 
be sensible that danger in this case was not ideal. 
There was good ground to apprehend that the acci- 
dental result of a single election and the accidental 
prevalency of ill-humors in parts of the community 
might violate the justice and prostrate the credit of 
the nation. 

It is the part of wisdom in a government, as well 
as in an individual, to guard against its own infirmi- 
ties; and, having taken beforehand a comprehensive 
view of its duty and interest, to tie itself down by 
every constitutional precaution to the steady pur- 
suit of them. 

3. It appeared important to give all practicable 
solidity and stability to the funds or stock which 
constituted the debt. The funding of the debt was 
essential to this end. This is but an inference from 
the preceding remarks. It was to result from ob- 
viating the danger of fluctuating councils concerning 
the debt from the satisfaction and confidence of the 
creditors arising from an opinion of security, from 
the constant estimation in which that opinion of 
security would cause it to be holden, not only by the 
creditors, but by all other classes of the community, 
and by foreigners. 

One effect of this was to accelerate the period 
which would terminate an irregular and excessive 
spirit of speculation in the funds. It is evident that 
this must have been in proportion to the causes cal- 
culated to produce fluctuation in the public opinion 
with regard to the value of the funds. Insecurity, 
the chance of the provision being interrupted or de- 

452 Alexander Hamilton 

teriorated, occurring at every new period of making 
it, was a more fruitful source than any other of that 
fluctuation of opinion. The degree of this being 
always incalculable would have given the utmost 
scope to imagination, to the acts and intrigues of 
stock-jobbers, and must have kept the funds con- 
stantly an object of the most gambling speculation. 

The moment opinion, regulated by experience, had 
liquidated the value of the funds, speculation would 
be confined within the limits necessary to give them 
due activity and value. The immutability of the 
provision by furnishing better data of calculation, as 
well as giving security, would hasten that moment, 
and once arrived it would continue. 

The funds in this State would become as they 
ought to be an object of ordinary and temperate 
speculation like any other article, whether of com- 
merce, manufactures, or agriculture. While on the 
opposite plan they would be as long as they existed 
a mere game of chance and a subject of the most 
gambling speculation. 

It may be remarked that it is now a considerable 
time since the public stock has reached the desirable 
point and put an end to the excessive spirit of specu- 
lation. This, for some time past, has been far more 
active, even to intemperateness in other pursuits, in 
trading adventures and in lands. And it is curious 
to observe how little clamor there is against the 
spirit of speculation in its present direction ; though 
it were not difficult to demonstrate that it is not less 
extravagant or as pernicious in the shape of land- 
jobbing than in that of stock- jobbing. But many 

The Funding System 453 

of the noisy patriots who were not in condition to be 
stock-jobbers are land-jobbers, and have a becoming 
tenderness for this species of extravagance. And 
virtuous, sensible men, lamenting the partialities of 
all over-driven speculation, know at the same time 
that they are inseparable from the spirit and free- 
dom of commerce and that the cure must result from 
the disease. 

Another important effect of funding the debt was 
the quick appreciation of the funds from the same 
opinion of security. This was calculated to save 
immense sums to the country. Foreigners else 
would have become the proprietors of the stock at 
great undervalues, to the loss of millions to the 
holders and to the country. The loss to the holders 
is perceived at once, but the loss to the country, 
though an obvious consequence, has not been equally 
palpable to all. 

But a little reflection and combination must make 
it evident to the meanest capacity. If the sale of 
any article is made at an undervalue by one citizen 
to another of the same country, what one loses the 
other gains, and containing within its own bosom 
the gainer as well as the loser is neither the richer nor 
the poorer by the operation. It possesses exactly 
the same property which it had before the bargain 
between its two citizens. .But when the citizen of 
one country sells to the citizen of another country 
residing abroad any article at an undervalue, a more 
valuable thing goes out of the country in exchange 
for a less valuable thing which is brought into it, 
and the state whose citizen is the seller loses in exact 

454 Alexander Hamilton 

proportion to the difference of value of the things 
exchanged, whether commodity for commodity, or 
commodity for money — that is, the state loses 
exactly what its citizen loses by the disadvantageous 
sale. 

It has been imagined, however, that if our debt 
had not been funded, its precariousness would have 
been a security against transfers to foreigners. But 
waiving the observation that this precariousness, 
which it is supposed would deter foreigners, would 
imply a depreciation and discredit of the funds, and 
consequently a bad state of national credit, it may 
be replied that the effect expected from it would not 
have been realized. 

Foreigners who possessed redundant capitals would 
still have devoted a part of them to play in this pre- 
carious stock, to buy and to sell again. And, though 
permanent transfers of the stock might not have 
taken place in the same degree, yet it is probable 
more property of the country in another shape might 
have been extracted by the force of this gambling 
capital acting upon the occasional necessities and 
sporting with the occasional confidences of our citizens. 

Another expedient has been mentioned for pre- 
venting alienations, and consequently loss by aliena- 
tions to foreigners. This was to forbid the alienations 
to foreigners; in other words, to render them in- 
capable of holding the debt. 

But this expedient was inadmissible, and would 
have been ineffectual. 

I. The original debt was alienable without re- 
striction, and foreigners had actually become the 

The Funding System 455 

bona-fide proprietors of a considerable sum of it 
which they had an indisputable title to a provision 
for, and it was not easy in many cases to distinguish 
between past and future acquisition, without danger 
of interfering with rights already acquired. 

2. The original debt being in its constitution alien- 
able without restriction, which was an ingredient of 
value to the holder, it could not have been taken 
away without breach of contract, unless with his con- 
sent upon an equivalent, and this would have in- 
creased the embarrassment of such a modification of 
the debt with consent of the creditors as would con- 
sist with the contract and with the immediate re- 
quisite accommodation of the government. 

3. It was ineligible, as calculated to diminish the 
value of the stock. All restraints upon alienation, 
by fettering the free use and circulation of an article 
of property, naturally lessen its value. As far as 
foreign capital could have been excluded from the 
stock market, the effect would have been sensible 
upon it. It is evident that the value of an article 
must depend materially on the quantity of capital 
employed in its negotiations, and it is known that 
foreign capital has formed and must have formed a 
considerable portion of that which was employed in 
the funds. 

But, in fact, this exclusion would not have taken 
place. Foreigners under the cover of citizens would 
have continued to speculate in the funds, but they 
would have given considerably less for them on ac- 
count of the additional risk from the necessity of 
that cover. And it might have happened that fewer 

45^ Alexander Hamilton 

of those solid and discreet capitalists, who meant to 
hold, would have engaged in the business, and more 
of those who meant a temporary profit proportioned 
to the risk, and, in the end, the probability was the 
price of stock would have been much lower and less 
steady, and the foreigners would have had as much 
of the property either in the shape of stock in trust 
or in equivalents resulting from the traffic in it as if 
there was not restriction, and for a less compensa- 
tion to the country. This has been exemplified in 
the case of our waste-lands in those States which do 
not permit foreigners to hold. The only effect, then, 
of the restriction would have been to depreciate the 
stock of the country, the thermometer of its credit, 
without any counterbalancing good. 

Indeed, if the exclusion of foreigners could have 
been effected, cui bono ? What harm is there that 
foreigners should speculate in our funds, if they give 
full value for them? Will not the money they give 
for the stock, employed in extending our commerce, 
agriculture, manufactures, roads, canals, and other 
ameliorations, more than indemnify the country for 
the interest which they will receive upon the stock, 
till the principal is reimbursed? In a country with 
so much improvable matter in a crude state as ours 
it cannot be doubted that capital employed in those 
ways will incomparably more than repay the interest 
of the money employed. 

But to overthrow this important consideration, it 
is alleged that the money acquired by the sales of 
stock to foreigners would not be employed on the 
objects which have been mentioned, but would be 

The Funding System 457 

dissipated in the enjoyments of luxury and extra- 
vagance and sent abroad again to pay for these 
objects, to the loss pro tanto of the country? 

This suggestion was not founded in probability, 
nor has been warranted by the fact. It was true 
that a large increase of active capital and augmenta- 
tion of private fortunes would beget some aug- 
mentation of expense among individuals, and that 
a portion of this expense would be laid out on foreign 
articles of luxury. But the proportion which this 
employment of the new capital would bear to the 
part of it which would be employed on useful and 
profitable objects, would be and has been inconsider- 
able. Whoever will impartially look around will see 
that the great body of the new capital created by 
the stock has been employed in extending commerce, 
agriculture, manufactures, and other improvements. 
Our own real navigation has been much increased, 
our external commerce is carried on much more 
upon our own capitals than it was; our marine in- 
surances in a much greater proportion are made by 
ourselves; our manufactures are increased in num- 
ber and carried on upon a larger scale. Settlements 
of our waste-land are progressing with more vigor 
than at any former period. Our cities and towns 
are increasing rapidly by the addition of new and 
better houses. Canals are^ opening, bridges are 
building with more spirit and effect than was ever 
known at a former period. The value of lands has 
risen everywhere. 

These circumstances (though other causes may 
have co-operated) it cannot be doubted by a 


well-formed or candid man are imputable in a great 
degree to the increase of capital in public debt, and 
they prove that the predictions of the dissipation in 
luxurious extravagances have not been verified. If 
a part has gone in that way, this loss has not been 
considerable enough to impair the force of the argu- 
ment. The universal vivification of the energies of 
industry has laid the foundation of benefits far 
greater than the interests to be paid to foreigners can 
counterbalance as a disadvantage. 

Indeed, it is a question whether there has not been 
an incidental advantage equivalent to the incidental 
disadvantage of an increased expense in foreign 
articles. It is the restoration of stock alienated to 
the country by the emigration to it of foreign set- 
tlers with capitals. It may be said that this advan- 
tage is foreign to the operation of the plan — it arises 
from other causes out of the state of Europe. But 
it is to be remembered that collateral facilities, when 
dispositions to a certain event exist, contribute to 
give them an effect which they would not have with- 
out those facilities. The convenient mode of trans- 
ferring property to this country, through the medium 
of our stock in the markets of Europe, has materially 
promoted the emigration of persons possessed of cap- 
ital. And if our government continues to operate in 
a manner which will maintain the confidence of for- 
eigners, it is a question whether the possession of 
large sums in our funds will not bring over most of 
the proprietors, so as to reinvest the country with 
the alienated stock, and thus procure it a double 
compensation on foreign alienations. 

The Funding System 459 

A third important effect of giving soHdity and sta- 
bihty to the stock by funding the debt, was the 
rendering it useful as capital. Those who may deny 
that it has even this tendency in defiance of the most 
manifest facts, cannot dispute that it must have it, 
if at all, in proportion to the security of the footing 
upon which it stands. 

The opinion of its being a safe and substantial 
property is essential to that ready marketable 
quality which will render it expedient to invest 
unemployed monies in it till the opportunity of em- 
ployment occurs, and certain that it can be brought 
into action when the opporuntity arrives. 

To be certain of its operation as active capital it 
is only necessary to consider that it is property which 
can almost at any moment he turned into money. All 
property is capital; that which can quickly and at 
all times be converted into money is active capital. 
It is nearly the same thing as if the possessor had an 
equal sum of money in hand. The profound and 
ingenious Hume thus describes its effects. 

****** 

Who doubts that a man who has in his desk 10,000 
dollars in good bank notes, has that sum of active 
capital? Who doubts any more, though there be 
two steps in the process, that a man who has in his 
hand 10,000 dollars of the notes of merchants of un- 
questionable solidity and credit, which he can at any 
moment discount at the banks, has an equal sum, 
bating the price of discount, of active capital ? Who 
can doubt any more that the possessor of 10,000 
dollars of funded stock which he can readily carry 

46o Alexander Hamilton 

into the market and sell for 10,000 dollars of these 
merchants' or bank notes, or gold and silver, is 
equally possessor of so much active capital? 

In this country, where the sum of gold and silver, 
the great organ of alienation and circulation, is com- 
paratively more limited than in Europe, the cer- 
tainty of an immediate conversion of stock into 
money is not as great as in some of the great stock 
markets of Europe; but the difference is not so 
material as to prevent the effect being substantially 
the same. 

When the stock is unfunded and precarious, its 
salableness is proportionably fluctuating and uncer- 
tain. So much so, that it does not possess the quality 
of active capital, but inverts the effect by becoming 
a mere subject of gambling speculation. This was 
noticed in my first report on the finances in these 
words. * * * 

Some theoretical writers on political economy have 
contested the effect of public funds as capital. 

Their objections, and an answer to them are to be 
found in my report on manufactures. * * * 

It may be useful to add some further illustrations. 
Trace the progress of a public debt in a particular 
case. 

The government borrows of an individual one hun- 
dred dollars in specie, for which it gives its funded 
bonds. These hundred dollars are expended on 
some branch of the public service. It is evident 
they are not annihilated; they only pass from the 
individual who lent, to the individual or individuals 
to whom the government has disbursed them. They 

The Funding System 461 

continue, in the hands of their new masters, to per- 
form their usual functions, as capital. But besides 
this, the lender has the bonds of the government for 
the sum lent. These from their negotiable and easily 
vendible nature, can at any moment be applied by 
him to any useful or profitable undertaking which 
occurs; and thus the credit of the government pro- <^' 
duces a new and additional capital, equal to one ' '-'^ 
hundred dollars, which, with the equivalent for the 
interest on that sum, temporarily diverted from 
other employments while passing into and out of 
the public coffers, continues its instrumentality as a 
capital, while it remains not re-imbursed. 

When, indeed, the money borrowed by the gov- 
ernment is sent abroad to be expended, the effect 
above described does not happen, unless the expen- 
diture is for a purpose which brings a return. But 
this is a partial exception to the general rule. 

It has been said that from the sum of the debt 
acting as capital is to be deducted the. quantity of 
money actually employed in the negotiation of the 
funds. To conceive well of the immense disparity 
between the capital negotiated and the organ of 
negotiation, money, it may be useful to advert to 
the small quantity of specie in certain nations of 
immense capital in fixed and negotiable property. 
The specie of Great Britain, for example, is computed 
as from 15,000,000 to 20,000,000 stg. How small a 
sum to be the organ of all the alienations of landed 
property, ships, merchandise, manufactures, public 
funds, and of insurances and other pecuniary nego- 
tiations! The capital value of its land is estimated 

462 Alexander Hamilton 

at * * * The public funds amount to near 
* * * The objects of foreign and domestic com- 
merce, including manufactures and other casual ob- 
jects, cannot be estimated at less than * * * 
Yet the small sum of from 15,000,000 to 20,000,000 
of specie is directly and indirectly the instrument of 
all the alienation of this prodigious mass. This gives 
us an idea of the vast activity of the power. 

A simple, concise, and yet comprehensive view of 
the effect of the funds as capital is comprised in 
this exhibition of it. To the mass of active capital 
resulting from the property and credit of all the 
individuals of the nation, is added another mass con- 
stituted as the joint credit of the whole nation, and 
existing in the shape of the government stock, which 
continues till that stock is extinguished by redemp- 
tion or reimbursement. Is it not evident that this 
throwing into the common stock of individual opera- 
tions the credit of the nation, must increase and in- 
vigorate the powers of industrious enterprise ? 

See what a wonderful spectacle Great Britain ex- 
hibits. Observe the mature state of her agricultural 
improvements under the auspices of large capitals 
employed to that end. Consider the extent of her 
navigation and external commerce. Note the huge 
and varied pile of her manufactures. See her factors 
and agents spread over the four quarters of the globe, 
doing a great part of the business of other nations 
by force of capital. View the great extent of her 
marine insurances attracting to her a considerable 
portion of the profits of the commerce of most other 
nations. View her, in fine, the creditor of the world. 

The Funding System 463 

Consider withal what her population is, that all 
the gold and silver she contains probably falls short 
of 20,000,000 stg., then ask whether there be not a 
strong presumption that her public funds are a prin- 
cipal pillar of this astonishing edifice, as her own men 
of business generally believe. But another and a 
powerful motive to the funding of the debt was that 
it would serve as one of the equivalents to be offered 
to induce the public creditors to consent voluntarily 
to those modifications of their claims which the pub- 
lic accommodation required. 

The public debt of this country, as I stated in my 
first report upon the finances, was fifty-four millions. 

There was no obligation to do more than make 
provision annually for the debt. The funding of it 
was no part of the original contract. 

This, therefore, superadded a material advantage 
for the creditors to their primitive rights. The 
additional security was a reasonable ingredient or 
commutation to be proposed for something to be 
relinquished. 

Among individuals, money lent for a length of 
time on personal security frequently carries a higher 
interest than if lent on real security. The change 
from one to the other would be a fair ground for a 
stipulation to lower the interest as the consideration. 
A government need not fear imputations on its 
honor or loss of credit by regulating itself in its 
money concerns according to the rules which pre- 
vail among fair individuals. 

The third feature of my plan was to provide, in the 
first instance, for the foreign part of the general 

464 Alexander Hamilton 

debt in exact conformity with the contracts con- 
cerning it. 

The propriety of this has been uncontested and 
speaks for itself. It would have been highly inex- 
pedient and would have exposed our credit abroad 
to have perplexed our creditors with any new propo- 
sitions concerning their debts. Even the measure of 
endeavoring to transfer the foreign debt to a domes- 
tic foundation, which has been subsequently pro- 
posed, upon equivalents to be given, would have 
been premature till confidence had been inspired by 
an experience of the efficacy of the provision. 

The fourth feature was "to take, as the basis of 
the provision for the domestic part of the general 
debt, the contracts with the creditors as they stood 
at the time of the adoption of the new Constitution, 
according to the then unrevoked acts and resolu- 
tions of the former government, except as to such 
alterations as they might, on legal principles, be pro- 
nounced to have undergone by voluntary acts and 
acquiescences of the creditors themselves; bottom- 
ing the provision on this principle, that those con- 
tracts were to be fulfilled as far and as fast as was 
practicable, and were not to be departed from with- 
out the free consent of the creditors." 

To a man who thinks justly and feels rightly for 
the reputation of the country of which he is a citizen, 
it is a humiliating reflection that it should be at all 
necessary to insist on the propriety of regulating the 
provision for the debt by the contracts concerning it. 

The obligation to fulfil contracts is so fundamental 
a principle of private morality and social justice — so 

The Funding System 465 

essential a basis of national credit, that nothing less 
than the fact itself could induce a belief that the 
application of the rule to our public debt could have 
been controverted by leaders of parties or by any 
considerable portion of the community. Yet, in 
truth, it has been controverted, either avowedly or 
virtually, by a great proportion of all parties, by 
declarations or propositions disclaiming the applica- 
tion of the principle, or by the rejection of proposi- 
tions necessary to give it effect. 

The general proposition, indeed, which affirms the 
obligation of fulfilling contracts, on governments as 
well as individuals, was of a nature which the most 
profligate politician was not shameless enough to 
deny. 

But it has been contended that the case of our pub- 
lic debt was an extraordinary and peculiar case, jus- 
tifying, on great principles of national justice and 
policy, a departure from common rules. The quan- 
tity of alloy in its original concoction, the extensive 
alienations at undervalues, the extreme point of de- 
preciation for a certain period, the confused state of 
the debt by antecedent violations of contract and 
by the concession of partial advantages to particular 
descriptions of it, the impossibility of reinstating the 
primitive contracts which had been formerly vio- 
lated, and the inequality of a full provision accord- 
ing to the new, — all these were urged or espoused as 
reasons for arbitrary provisions for the debt accord- 
ing to certain abstract notions of equity and right. 
It has been intimated that these heretics were divided 
into two principal classes: one which advocated a 

VOL. VIII. — 30. 

466 Alexander Hamilton 

provision for the debt on the ground of a discrimina- 
tion between original holders and alienees; another 
which advocated an equal provision for all at some 
arbitrary rate of interest inferior to the stipulated 
rates. 

The first was apparently at least subdivided into 
three lesser sects: one which contended for provid- 
ing in f ayor of original holders according to the terms 
of the contract, and in cases of alienation by a kind 
of composition or compromise between the original 
holders and alienees, which, in the course of the de- 
bate in Congress, took the specific form of giving ten 
shillings in the pound to one and the same to the 
other; another which contended for a full premium 
for original holders who had not alienated, and for 
an inferior one to alienees, without regarding the 
original holders who had alienated ; a third for a re- 
liquidation of the debt, making a full provision ac- 
cording to that reliquidation for original holders and 
an inferior one for alienees, with or without regard 
to the creditors who alienated. 

The second general sect had also a diversity of 
opinions, some willing to allow a higher, some a 
lower rate of interest ; some willing to fix the stand- 
ard absolutely, without compensations for the reduc- 
tion ; others willing to give some kind of equivalents, 
but to make the provision absolute and final, leaving 
no option to the creditors. 

The latter, when the subject was under debate, 
made no direct propositions; but then and since, 
they discovered their intentions in their conversa- 
tions, in endeavoring to pare down the provision 

The Funding System 467 

proposed in my report, and in resisting in subsequent 
cases a compliance with the contracts as to those 
creditors who have not accepted the terms held out 
to them. 

The former made a formal and passionate effort to 
substitute their scheme for that which was contained 
in the plan reported from the Treasury. It failed, 
but it has laid the foundation of the great schism 
which has since prevailed. 

There never was a doubt that if the idea of dis- 
crimination had obtained it would have resulted in a 
fraud on alienees without benefit to their alienors. 
A large proportion of those who supported the prin- 
ciple of discrimination clearly manifested that they 
meant to leave the difference in the public pocket. 

The substance of the argument for a discrimina- 
tion was this: [The rest is wanting.] 

DEFENCE OF THE FUNDING SYSTEM 

II 

THE ASSUMPTION OF THE STATE DEBTS 

The operation of these circumstances generated a 
variety of different sects holding different opinions. 
The parties in and out of Congress on the subject of 
a provision for the public debt ' may be thrown into 

^ In speaking of the public debt hereafter, to avoid circumlocution I 
shall denominate the original debt of the United States the general 
debt, and the separate debts of the respective States the particular 
debts. As often as these terms occur they are to be understood in this 
sense. 

468 Alexander Hamilton 

five classes: I. Those who were for providing for the 
general debt, exclusively of the particular debts, on 
the basis of the subsisting contracts. II. Those who 
were for providing separately for the general debt on 
the principle of a discrimination between original 
holders and alienees. III. Those who were for pro- 
viding separately for the general debt without that 
discrimination at arbitrary rates of interest inferior 
to the stipulated rates. IV. Those who were for pro- 
viding for the general debt on the basis of the sub- 
sisting contracts, and for assuming the particular 
debts upon an equal provision. V. Those who were 
for providing for the general debt at arbitrary rates 
of interest inferior to the stipulated rates, and for 
assuming the State debts upon an equal provision. 

The classes which embraced the greatest number 
of real partisans were the second and fifth. The 
second was subdivided, apparently at least, into 
those who advocated the taking the rate of interest 
stipulated in the contract as the standard of pro- 
vision, giving to the original holders what was with- 
held from the alienees and those who were for saving 
to the public what was withheld from the alienees. 
The last, though not in appearance, was in fact the 
most numerous. Indeed it may justly be doubted 
whether any of those who professed to advocate 
compensation to the original holders were ever sin- 
cere in the proposition. But neither of the classes in 
either house of Congress was itself a majority for the 
general debt. 

Those who favored a provision at lower than the 
stipulated rates of interest were influenced respect- 

The Funding System 469 

ively by different motives : some by a doubt of the 
ability of the government to make a full provision, 
especially with the assumption of the particular 
debts ; others by an opinion that from the constitu- 
tion of the debt and what they called the alloy in it 
a rate of interest lower than that stipulated was most 
consistent with justice to the public; others from 
a spirit of mean and fraudulent parsimony which 
aimed at savings to the public per fas et nefas. These 
last were not distinguishable in their principle of 
action from those who advocated one species of dis- 
crimination. Collateral circumstances respecting the 
course of alienations locally and otherwise gave a 
d fferent direction to their conduct. 

It is easy to perceive that such a heterogeneous 
mass of opinions, not merely speculative, but actu- 
ated by different interests and passions, could not 
fail to produce much embarrassment to the person 
who was to devise the plan of a provision for the 
public debt, if he had been provident enough to 
sound the ground and probe the state of opinions. 

It was proper for him to endeavor to unite two 
ingredients in his plan: intrinsic goodness and a 
reasonable probability of success. 

It may be thought that the first was his only con- 
cern, that he ought to have devised such a plan as 
appeared to him absolutely the best, leaving its 
adoption or rejection to the chance of events and to 
the responsibility of those whose province it was to 
decide. 

But would not this have been to refine too much ? 
If a plan had been offered too remote from the pre- 

470 Alexander Hamilton 

vailing opinions, incapable of conciliating a suffi- 
cient number to constitute a majority, what would 
have been the consequences? The minister would 
have been defeated on his first experiment. 

Before he had established any reputation for a 
knowledge of the business of his department, he 
might be sure that the blame of his ill-success would 
have fallen on his want of skill, not upon the ig- 
norance or perverseness of those who had rejected 
his plan. 

Placed in a background, he would have lost con- 
fidence and influence. A retreat, or the disgrace of 
remaining in office without weight or credit or an 
adequate prospect of being useful, would have been 
his alternative. The public interest might have been 
still more injured. The public deliberations, left 
without any rallying point, would have been the 
more apt to be distracted between jarring, incoher- 
ent, and indigested projects, and either to conclude 
nothing or to conclude on something manifestly con- 
trary to the public interests. That this is a natural 
inference is proved by the diversity and still more by 
the crudity of the opinions which have been enumer- 
ated, and by the zeal with which considerable men 
afterwards and since have maintained opinions which 
would disgrace pupils not yet out of the alphabet of 
political science. 

Had a single session passed, after the subject had 
been once seriously entered upon, without some ade- 
quate provision for the debt, the most injurious con- 
sequences were to have been expected. 

With but a slight dawning of previous confidence, 

The Funding System 471 

such a delay arising from the conflict of opinions, 
after a public display of the very unsound and hereti- 
cal notions which were entertained by too many, 
would have excited something very like despair in 
the creditors, and would have thrown complete dis- 
credit on the debt. The value in the market would 
have sunk to almost nothing, to the great prejudice 
of those who had lately, through confidence in the 
new government, purchased at high prices. The 
fluctuation would have increased the dissatisfaction 
with the thing itself, and by its influence upon opin- 
ion would have multiplied twofold the obstacles to 
a future provision on proper principles. The con- 
tagion of the opposite opinions maintained in the 
legislature would have spread through the commun- 
ity, fixing, increasing, and embittering the differ- 
ences of opinion there, which, by reaction, would 
have strengthened and confirmed the oppositions in 
the legislature. No mortal could foresee the result. 
A total failure to provide for the debt was possible. 
A provision for it on terms destructive of principle, 
replete with injustice to the creditors, was the least 
ill result to have been apprehended. 

Those who from a horrible sentiment of injustice 
or the mania of false opinions regard the public debt 
with detestation as a nuisance and a curse, and 
every creditor as a culprit;^ those who would have 
delighted in the disgrace of a government they had 
resisted and villified, might have looked forward 
with malignant pleasure to this wreck of the public 
debt. But every virtuous enlightened man would 
foresee, in the complicated mischief of ruined credit, 

472 Alexander Hamilton 

the prostration abroad and at home of the character 
of the new government, its possible subversion, and 
with it a severe blow to the general security of 
property. 

In hinting at the possible subversion of the gov- 
ernment, it may be proper to explain the foundation 
of this idea. The public creditors, who consisted of 
various descriptions of men, a large proportion of 
them very meritorious and very influential, had had 
a considerable agency in promoting the adoption of 
the new Constitution, for this peculiar reason, among 
the many weighty reasons which were common to 
them as citizens and proprietors, that it exhibited 
the prospect of a government able to do justice 
to their claims. Their disappointment and disgust, 
quickened by the sensibility of private interest, could 
not but have been extreme. 

There was another class of men, and a very 
weighty one, who had had great share in the estab- 
lishment of the Constitution, who, though not per- 
sonally interested in the debt, considered the maxims 
of public credit as of the essence of good government, 
as intimately connected by the analogy and sym- 
pathy of principles with the security of property in 
general, and as forming an inseparable portion of the 
great system of political order. These men, from 
sentiment, would have regarded their labors in sup- 
porting the Constitution as in a great measure lost; 
they would have seen the disappointments of their 
hopes in the unwillingness of the government to do 
what they esteemed justice, and to pursue what they 
called an honorable policy; and they would have 

The Funding System 473 

regarded this failure as an augury of the continuance 
of the fatal system which had for some time pro- 
strated the national honor, interest, and happiness. 
The disaffection of a part of these classes of men 
might have carried a considerable reinforcement to 
the enemies of the government. The lukewarmness 
of the residue would have left them a clearer stage 
to direct their assaults against it. The real failure 
to do right, which often sinks the governments as 
well as individuals into merited contempt, alienating 
many of its ablest friends, while it would diminish 
its support, would, at the same time, increase in a 
tenfold ratio the mass of unfavorable opinion towards 
it. And from the combination of these causes it would 
have been likely to have degenerated into a despic- 
able impotence, and after a lingering atrophy to have 
perished. 

In pursuing too far the idea of absolute perfection 
in the plan to be proposed, unaccommodated to cir- 
cumstances, the chance of an absolutely bad issue 
was infinitely enhanced, and of the evils connected 
with it. 

Was this the course either of patriotism or true 
personal policy? It has been remarked that in the 
rejection of the plan which was proposed it was to be 
apprehended that public opinion would charge the 
fault upon the plan, not upon the rejecters of it. 
But it may be said that time and the experience of 
ill effects would have done justice and placed the 
blame at the proper door. Let it be so. Would it 
not have been blamably selfish to have sought to 
secure reputation at the hazard of so great evils to 

474 Alexander Hamilton 

the community ? Was it not more fit by accommoda- 
tion to circumstances within due limits to pursue 
a better chance of public good at the risk of an im- 
putation that complete theoretic perfection had not 
been adhered to ? 

Would time have pronounced a favorable sen- 
tence upon a different course? Would it not have 
said that goodness is often not an absolute but a 
relative term, and that it was culpable refinement to 
have sacrificed the prospect of accomplishing what 
was substantially good to the impracticable attain- 
ment of what was deemed theoretically perfect? 

I grant that the idea of accommodation was not 
to be carried so far as to sacrifice to it any essential 
principle. This is never justifiable. But with the 
restriction of not sacrificing principle, was it not 
right and advisable so to shape the course as to 
secure the best prospect of effecting the greatest 
possible good? 

To me this appeared the path of policy and duty, 
and I acted under the influence of that sentiment. 

Thus guided, I resolved to give the following 
features to my plan : 

First. To embrace in the provision, upon equal 
terms, the particular debts of the individual States 
as well as the general debt of the United States. 

Secondly. To fund the whole by pledging for the 
payment of the interest certain specified revenues 
adequate to the object, to continue pledged until the 
redemption or reimbursement of the principal of the 
debt. 

Thirdly. To provide, in the first instance, for the 

J 

The Funding System 475 

foreign part of the general debt in exact conformity 
with the contracts concerning it. To endeavor to 
effect a new, more manageable, and more convenient 
modification of the domestic part of the general debt, 
with consent of the creditors, upon the ground of 
certain equivalents to be offered to them. 

Fourthly. To take as the basis of the provision 
for the domestic part of the general debt the con- 
tracts with the creditors as they stood at the tim.e 
of the adoption of the new Constitution, according 
to the unrevoked acts and resolutions of the former 
government, except as to such alterations as they 
might on legal principles be pronounced to have 
undergone by voluntary acts and acquiescences of 
the creditors themselves ; bottoming the provision on 
this principle, that those contracts were to be ful- 
filled as far and as fast as was practicable, and were 
not to be departed from without the free consent of 
the creditors. 

Fifthly. To provide for the arrears of interest 
which had accumulated, upon the same terms with 
the principal, constituting them a new capital. 

Sixthly. To endeavor to carry these ideas into 
effect by opening two loans on the terms proposed, 
one for the domestic part of the general debt, the 
sums subscribed thereto to be paid in the principal 
and arrears of interest of the .old debt ; another for 
the particular debts of the respective States, the 
sums subscribed thereto to be paid in the principal 
and arrears of interest of those debts. 

Seventhly. To endeavor to establish it as a rule 
of administration, that the creation of debt should 

476 Alexander Hamilton 

always be accompanied with a provision for its ex- \ 
tinguishment ; and to apply the rule as far as it 
could be applicable to a new provision for an old 
debt by incorporating with it a fund for sinking the 

Eighthly. As an incident to the whole, to provide 
for the final settlement of accounts between the 
United and individual States, charging the latter 
with the sums assumed for them by the subscriptions 
on State debts, which should be made to the pro- 
posed loan. 

Let us now review, and under each head, the 
reasonings which led to this plan and the means and 
modes of execution : 

I. As to the uniting in the provision upon equal 
terms the particular debts of the several States with 
the general debt of the United States. 

It appeared to me that this measure would be 
conducive to the greatest degree of justice, and was 
essential to policy. 

I use a qualified and comparative mode of expres- 
sion in the first case, because from the past course ^ 
and then existing state of things perfect justice was ^ 
unattainable. The object consequently was to pur- 
sue such a plan as would procure the greatest prac- 
ticable quantum of justice. 

The true rule for conducting the expenses of the 
Revolution, which established independence, seems 
to have been this: That, as the benefits to be de- I 
rived from it would be individually equal to the 
citizens of every State, so the burthens ought also to 
be individually equal among the citizens of all the 

The Funding System 477 

States according to individual property and ability. 
That for this purpose all the expenses of the war 
ought to have been defrayed out of a common treas- 
ury, supplied by contributions of all the individuals 
of the United States, levied under the common au- 
thority, according to equal rules, by loans either 
direct by borrowing or indirect and implied by emis- 
sions of paper money, operated upon the joint credit 
of the Union, and by bringing into common stock 
all auxiliary or adventitious resources, as waste 
land, confiscated property, etc. 

This was the true justice of the case and the true 
national ground — a ground which perhaps might 
well have been taken by those full assemblies of 
the Union, convened by the direct commission of 
the people, with plenary power to take care of the 
nation, but which was never but partially taken, and 
was successfully abandoned in compliance with the 
unnational demands of State claims — the aristocracy 
of State pretensions. 

But instead of this course, that which was pursued 
was a compound of incoherent principles. A part of 
the general expenditure was defrayed on the general 
credit of the United States immediately by the emis- 
sion of bills of credit and by loans of individuals, 
mediately by the contracts of various officers and 
agents who obtained services^ and supplies on the 
credit of the Union and gave certain paper evidences 
of them. Another part was defrayed in consequence 
of requisitions upon the States of men, money, pro- 
visions, and other articles of supply, according to 
certain estimated or conjectural quotas to be raised 

47^ Alexander Hamilton 

and furnished by the States separately. A third 
part was defrayed by the spontaneous exertions of 
the States themselves for local defence, for enter- 
prises independently undertaken to annoy ' the com- 
mon enemy, divest him of acquisitions,^ or make 
acquisitions ^ upon him. Each State enjoyed the 
exclusive benefit of its extra resources, waste lands, 
and confiscated property. Geographical lines thus 
made a substantial difference in the condition of the 
citizens of one common country, engaged in a com- 
mon cause. 

It was impossible that such a state of things shotild 
not have led to very disproportionate exertions and 
contributions — should not have produced and left 
very unequal burthens on the citizens of different 
States. According to the temporary energy of the 
councils of each, according to their comparative de- 
gree of zeal in the common cause, according to the 
pressure of circumstances, the remoteness or prox- 
imity of danger, according to the peculiar character 
of the citizens of each State, according to a variety 
of contingent impulses — were the exertions of the 
several States, and of course their contributions to 
the expenses of the general defence. 

Very different also was the care and accuracy of 
the different States in recording and preserving the 
evidences of their contributions. Some States kept 
an account of every thing; others only of those 
things which they had furnished upon regular au- 
thorizations of the Union; others kept very loose 

' Frigates and Carolinas. " Penobscot expedition. 

3 Indian expeditions. 

The Funding System 479 

and imperfect accounts of any thing; and others 
lost by accidents of the war the records and vouchers 
which they had taken. 

Add to all this the circumstance of the valuable 
aids which some States were able to derive more 
than others from auxiliary resources, particularly of 
waste land and confiscated property, and two obvi- 
ous consequences will result: 

First. That it was impossible that in the course 
of the war there could have been any proportional 
equality between the exertions, contributions, and 
burthens of the citizens of the different States. 

Secondly. That it was impossible by any after 
adjustment to restore the equilibrium and produce 
retrospective equality. 

All then that could be rationally aimed at was to 
pursue such a course as promised most certainly 
the greatest degree of justice. 

The option lay between three modes of proceed- 
ing: 

First. To refer the obtaining of ultimate justice to 
a final settlement of accoimts between the United 
and individual States upon the best and most equi- 
table principles which were practicable, and to pro- 
vide for the balances which would be established in 
favor of certain States by that settlement. 

Second. To exonerate all the States from debt by 
the assumption of their still-existing debts, and to 
abandon a settlement as impracticable on certain 
and equitable principles. 

Third. To exonerate the States from debt by the 
assumption of their still-existing debts; to charge 

480 Alexander Hamilton 

each with the sums assimied upon its account, and 
to attempt an ultimate equalization by the settle- 
ment of accounts. 

The first and second plans were those contrasted 
by official propositions and deliberations, and will be 
considered together by way of comparison with each 
other: first, with regard to justice; and secondly, 
with regard to policy. 

The first plan, which was that vehemently insisted 
upon by those who opposed the assumption of the 
State debts, appeared to me liable to some conclusive 
objections on the score of justice. 

I. It would have left certain States greatly in- 
debted, deprived of the most easy and productive 
sources of revenue by the occupation of them in a 
provision for the general debt, to struggle for an in- 
definite and uncertain period with a heavier load 
than they were able to bear, depending for relief on 
the precarious issues of a final settlement of accounts 
and a provision for the balances. 

II. It was uncertain in the nature of the thing, 
and so considered by all parties, not only when a 
settlement could be effected, but whether any settle- 
ment would ever be practicable. The peace took 
place in 1783. In 1790 very little more than the 
formal measures of settlement had been devised, and 
scarcely any impression made on the business. 

III. It was altogether a chapter of accidents 
whether a settlement would bring the expected and 
the just relief. From the circumstances which have 
been mentioned, a settlement must have been of 
necessity an artificial and arbitrary thing. It was 

The Funding System 4S1 

impossible for any to be made on truly equitable or 
satisfactory principles. 

The greatest portion of human intellect and justice 
was unequal to it, because adequate data were want- 
ing. Some States would have credits, when others, 
from the manner of keeping their accounts, would 
be without the corresponding credits for similar ob- 
jects.' Some States, from the system of manage- 
ment, would have much larger credits for a given 
quantum of service and supply than others.^ Some 
States, from the imperfect mode of keeping their 
accounts, and from the loss of vouchers, would either 
have too much or too little credit. Either stricter 
rules of evidence must be pursued, which would ex- 
clude too much, or looser rules must be admitted, 
which would admit too much. These suggest suf- 
ficient and yet only a part of the causes which 
rendered a just settlement impracticable. 

In such a posture of things consequently, it might 
well have happened that an indebted State, well en- 
titled to relief by a balance in its favor, might have 
been disappointed by the issue of the settlement. 

Not to assume the State debts therefore was to have 
the greatly indebted States totter under a burthen 
to which they were unequal, in the indefinite expec- 
tation of a settlement, and to involve a possibility 
that they might never obtain relief, either from 
the total failure of a settlement on account of the 

* Thus botinties for engaging men were in particular States regularly 
brought into account and vouched; in others, ftimished at the expense 
of classes, no accounts were ever kept. 

2 Thus purchasers at exorbitant prices procured in some stations 

what coercion at regulated moderate prices procured in others. 
VOL. vni.— 31. 

482 Alexander Hamilton 

difficulties attending it, or from not receiving their 
just dues by the embarrassment that unavoidably 
rendered a settlement artificial and arbitrary. 

The reference, therefore, to a settlement as the 
sole rule of justice, without an assumption of the 
State debts, was not likely to afford either such 
prompt or such certain justice as might be looked for 
from the immediate assumption of the State debts. 

The objection to this reasoning was that it takes 
it for granted that the greatly indebted States were 
not so through want of good management or exer- 
tion, and were entitled to eventual relief ; but the con- 
trary of this presumption might have been the fact. 

There were good grounds for the conclusion that 
the States most indebted were so from meritorious 
causes, from their exertion in the common cause, 
and not from extravagance in the first instance, or 
want of effort to extricate themselves in the second. 

The States most involved in debt, in proportion to 
their resources, were South Carolina and Georgia to 
the south, Massachusetts, Connecticut, and Rhode 
Island to the north. 

South Carolina and Georgia, it is well known, next 
to New York, had been the principal theatres of the 
war. Though the metropolis of New York was dur- 
ing almost the whole of the war in the hands of the 
enemy, and there were very few parts of it which at 
some period were not exposed to his ravages, yet it 
never was so completely overrun or so entirely a 
victim as were the States of South Carolina and 
Georgia. It is known that they were temporarily 
conquered. 

The Funding System 483 

Besides, as the principal military operations in the 
southern quarter were late in the war, when the de- 
clension of the paper money disabled Congress from 
affording equal succor, and their remoteness from the 
States of the greatest pecuniary resources prevented 
them from deriving equal aid from their neighbors, 
they were of course left to sustain on their own shoul- 
ders a greater part of the weight of the war than 
had been borne by other States while the seats of it. 

Besides exhausting all the means of credit, they 
were subjected a great part of the time to the mili- 
tary coercion of our own army as well as the depre- 
dations of the enemy. What in other cases had 
been an extraordinary and momentary expedient was 
there an ordinary resource — the principal means for 
a considerable time of carrying on the war. They 
were literally devoured by the war. The whole 
movable property of the States was taken by the 
enemy or thrown into the public lap. Besides this, 
the State governments, from the same circumstance 
of remoteness, were more ostensible in that quarter. 
More of the effort was on their immediate account. 
The consequence was that a less proportion of the 
supplies drawn from the country were taken to the 
immediate account of the United States by their 
officers and agents and upon their acknowledgments 
or certificates ; consequently a greater proportion of 
the expense assumed the shape of State debt. 

The consequence was that the particular debts of 
South Carolina and Georgia, especially the former, 
were, comparatively speaking, swelled to an enor- 
mous amount. 

484 Alexander Hamilton 

To face them they had but slender resources. The 
degree to which they had been exhausted and rav- 
aged by the war left them in a situation to require 
bounties rather than to struggle with heavy debts. 
The inability of South Carolina and Georgia to pro- 
vide for their debts was increased by the consider- 
able debts which their individuals owed to foreigners. 
The population of either of them was not great. 
Georgia may be considered as in its infancy. She 
claims a large tract of waste land, but besides the 
counter claim of the United States it had not been 
in her power, from the situation of her frontier with 
regard to the Indians, to turn them to great account. 
She had indeed paralyzed a great proportion of her 
debt by means far from justifiable, but she was un- 
able to provide even for the residue. 

South Carolina ' had no auxiliary resource except 
what she had derived from confiscated property, 
which a spirit of liberality that does her honor on the 
return of peace prevented her turning to much ac- 
count, and which at best was a very inadequate 
resotirce compared with her burthens. It was mani- 
festly impossible for her to face efficaciously the 
interest upon her debts, much more to make any 
impression on the principal. 

From this sketch and various circumstances of 
general notoriety, scepticism itself cannot doubt that 
South Carolina had indisputable claim of relief from 
the United States. She had contracted her debt 

' In attempts to provide for the interest, taxation had been carried in 
South Carolina to a length not short of any State, except Massachusetts 
and perhaps Connecticut. 

The Funding System 485 

most meritoriously, her sufferings had only been 
equalled by her efforts, she was unable to struggle 
unassisted with her debt, she was chargeable with no 
deficiency of effort to face it since the peace, and she 
was equitably entitled to relief from the United 
States. But her situation with regard to the reg- 
ularity of her accounts and the evidence for 
authenticating her claims, rendered it peculiarly 
problematical whether she would ever find relief in a 
general settlement of accounts. 

Rhode Island had also contracted her debt mer- 
itoriously. A considerable part of her small territory 
had been for a great part of the war in the possession 
of the enemy. She kept, for her population, respect- 
able forces in the field throughout the war, and had 
uniformly manifested a useful and laudable zeal. 
Her resources were slender. Taxes upon a popula- 
tion of were all she could pretend to. She had 

no waste land, and none or very little confiscated 
property. 

Her debt was considerable ; 't is evident that if 
she was to provide for it, the means must come from 
the United States. And there was every presump- 
tion that she was entitled to this aid. It is true that 
she had in a great measure encumbered herself by 
means which will be an indelible stain in her annals. 
But the individuals who were the victims had not 
the less claim upon the justice of their country. The 
assumption has promoted this justice, and has en- 
abled and induced the State to come forward with 
more equitable arrangements in their favor. 

The pretensions of Massachusetts and Connecticut 

486 Alexander Hamilton 

with regard to their debt were of the most meritori- 
ous complexion. As a general position each State 
may justly claim the praise of a laudable spirit of 
exertion in the defence of their common liberty, 
but there were certainly marked differences in the 
degrees. Abstracting the impulse of being the im- ! 
mediate seat of the war, Massachusetts and Connecti- ■ 
cut, especially Massachusetts, stood pre-eminent for - 
steady, constant, and efficient exertions, immedi- 
diately conducing to the great object of the war, not 
to collateral acquisitions and partial advantages. 
Massachusetts in particular might justly be de- 
nominated the Atlas of the Union, uniformly zealous, 
uniformly vigorous. 

The records of the Treasury and War Departments 
witness by their results the great exertions of these 
States in men, money, and other supplies. 

The situation in which I myself was placed during 
the war gave me an opportunity of appreciating the 
efforts of these different States in the results. The 
impression on my mind was decisive as to the spirit 
of what I have asserted. In how many critical 
periods of the war were the forces of those States 
the sinews and muscles of the war ? Let the records 
before mentioned declare. Let the memoirs of those 
who, charged with the chief direction of our military 
affairs, had the best opportunities of observing, 
pronounce. 

No well-informed man then doubted the fact ; sub- 
sequent examination, the evidence of official records, 
confirm the truth. 

While the efforts of these States during the war 

The Funding System 487 

are incontestably ascertained, they are chargeable 
with no want of exertion since to exonerate them- 
selves from debt. 

Taxation in Connecticut embraced every object, 
and was carried as far as it could be done without 
absolutely oppressing individuals. Instead of a few 
scattered examples of excise, every article of con- 
sumption in Connecticut was excised. 

In Massachusetts taxation was carried still fur- 
ther, even to a degree too burdensome for the com- 
fortable condition of the citizens. This may have 
been partly owing to that unskilfulness which was 
the common attribute of the State administration of 
finance, but it was still more owing to the real weight 
of the taxes. The insurrection was in a great de- 
gree the offspring of this pressure. 

These States had no material auxiliary resources. 
The moderation of fortunes had left them without 
much aid from confiscated property. They had 
claims to waste land, but that of Connecticut has 
issued in a very unimportant acquisition. That of 
Massachusetts has fared better, but her acquisition 
would have done little towards the extinguishment 
of her debt. Connecticut, without any seaport of 
consequence, not only could not derive resources 
from this circumstance, but had been tributary to 
her more fortunate neighbors. 

There was, therefore, a priori satisfactory evi- 
dence that these overburdened States had a just 
claim of relief from the United States; and, if we 
may take the settlement of accounts as evidence, 
the anticipation has been fully justified by the event. 

488 Alexander Hamilton 

For not only the sums assumed for them have been 
covered, but they have had considerable balances 
reported in their favor. 

It will strengthen the argument for the superior 
justice of the assumption plan, to remark that the 
debts of the States represented the great mass of 
State effort during the war. 

Not much had been done by taxation. Credit 
had been the principal engine. 

Another objection on the score of justice, which 
was strenuously urged against the plan of assuming, 
was that certain States, by vigorous efforts, had 
considerably reduced these particular debts, while 
others had made little impression on them. It was, 
therefore, unequal to assume the debts in the unequal 
States. 

It has been already shown that this difference, as 
far as it may be founded in fact, was owing to ad- 
ventitious advantages, and, therefore, in point of 
substantial justice, the States which had absorbed 
less of their debt had not the less equitable title to 
relief. I recur to the example of New York. This 
State, by large possessions of waste land, by a great 
deal of confiscated property, by not providing for 
payment of interest on the debt, whereby its value 
was kept low to the great injury of the creditors, 
was able to absorb a considerable proportion of her 
debt. Connecticut, without these advantages was 
able to do much less, though her citizens were bur- 
dened with a much more considerable effort in con- 
tribution. Was it, therefore, inequitable as between 
these States, that Connecticut should find relief in 

The Funding System 489 

an assumption ? Surely it was not. Again, if a set- 
tlement of account, which was a part of the plan of 
assumption, was to be relied upon, any inequality 
created by the assumption would be rectified by the 
settlement. 

Either an equitable settlement of accounts would 
take place, or it would not. If it did not, the greatly 
indebted States without an assumption would cer- 
tainly fail of justice and due relief; if it did, with an 
assumption, the settlement would remedy any in- 
equality which might have been occasioned by it, 
and restore equilibrium. An assumption and a set- 
tlement on right principles would ensure justice — 
no assumption and no settlement would ensure in- 
justice. It was to be feared a settlement might not 
take effect. It was precarious and contingent. An 
assumption, of course, gave the greatest certainty of 
justice by an assumption or equalization of the con- 
dition of individuals. Pursuing such impressions, 
this must be deemed of more consequence than any 
thing which regarded the States in their corporate or 
collective capacities. 

The most simple and satisfactory notion of justice 
was to secure that individuals of the same nation, 
who had contended in the same cause for the same 
object — their common liberty, — should, at the end of 
the contest, find themselves on an equal footing as 
to burdens arising from the contest. 

Nothing could be more revolting than that the 
citizens of one State should live at ease free from 
taxes and the citizens of a neighboring State be over- 
burthened with taxes growing out of a war which 

490 Alexander Hamilton 

had given equal political advantages to the citizens 
of both States. 

This condition of things previous to the assump- 
tion was remarkably exemplified between New York 
and Massachusetts, between New York and Connec- 
ticut. The citizens of New York scarcely paid any 
taxes, those of Massachusetts and Connecticut were 
heavily burthened. A like comparison though dif- 
ferent in degree might be extended to other States. 

The relative condition of States depended on many 
artificial circumstances. These circumstances might 
forever have stood in the way of that equality of 
condition among citizens which was infinitely the 
most important consideration and the most desir- 
able attainment. The measure which went most 
directly and certainly to this object was to be pre- 
ferred. The assumption was such a measure. By 
taking all the debts upon the Union, to be paid out 
of the common treasury, defrayed by common con- 
tribution according to general rules, the citizens of 
every State were on an equal footing. State pro- 
visions produced inequality from the inequality of 
their debts, from the inequality of adventitious re- 
sources, from the inequality of permanent abilities. 
Justice among individuals was better promoted in 
another way. 

The New Government had given to the United 
States the exclusive possession of the branch of re- 
venue which for a considerable time to come in this 
country is likely to be most productive. Had the 
government of the United States confined itself to a 
provision for the general debt, the proprietors of the 

The Funding System 491 

particular debts would in several States have been 
not only in a very unequal, but in a very bad situa- 
tion. Thus forms would have superseded substance. 
Men who had contributed their services and property 
to the support of the common cause at the instance 
of a State Government, would have fared worse than 
those who have done the same thing at the instance 
of the General Government. Did this comport with 
any rational and true scheme of justice which pre- 
ferred natural to artificial consideration ? 

It would have been the more hard, unjust, and 
tmnatural, because a great proportion of the State 
debts, had been originally contracted immediately 
with the United States and afterwards transferred 
to the particular State. 

A still greater part was contracted in virtue of the 
requisitions of Congress upon the States, in which 
cases it was more reasonable to consider them as 
agents than as principals. 

To resume. — The superiority of the plan of a joint 
provision over that of a separate provision in the 
view of justice consists in this : 

That supposing a final equitable settlement of 
accounts between the States, either plan wotild pro- 
duce eventual justice. 

But the plan of assumption was most likely to ex- 
pedite justice by the imraediate relief which it gave 
to the overburthened States. 

That setting aside the supposition of a final equi- 
table settlement of accoimts, the plan of assumption 
contained the best chance of success, by giving relief 
to the overburthened States, which would otherwise 

492 Alexander Hamilton 

have remained without it, though from known cir- 
cumstances there was a moral certainty of their being 
entitled to it. 

That the asstmiption in every event better con- 
sulted justice by conducing to equalize in the first 
instance the burthen of citizens of the same country 
arising from a contest in a common cause, and by 
securing a simultaneous and equal provision for 
creditors who otherwise would have fared imequally. 

These are the principal considerations that relate 
to justice. In the view of policy the argimient is 
still more conclusive in favor of assumption. 

CONTINUED IN VOL. IX. 

University of 
Connecticut 

Libraries 

GESTECllEBT^Co,