LIBRARY 

OF CALIFORNIA 
DAVIS 

THE CONNOISSEUR'S FEDERAL EDI 
TION OF THE WORKS OF ALEXANDER 
HAMILTON IS LIMITED TO FOUR HUN 
DRED SIGNED AND NUMBERED SETS OF 
WHICH THIS IS NUMBER .jdtJL 

fx V* ffu%t€a***!<i^$-trHd 

mt 

xx£ 

LIBRARY 

.UNIVERSITY OF 

The Works of 

/ -j 

Alexander Hamilton 

Edited by 
Henry Cabot Lodge 

" The sacred rights of mankind are not to be rummaged for among old parchments or 
musty records. They are written, as with a sunbeam, in the whole volume of human nature, 
by the hand of the Divinity itself, and can never be erased or obscured by mortal power." 

[HAMILTON— The Farmer Refuted, 1775, ^Et. i8.J 

" We are laboring hard to establish in this country principles more and more national, 
and free from all foreign ingredients, so that we may be neither * Greeks nor Trojans,' but 
truly Americans." — [HAMILTON TO KING, 1796, K*. 39.] 

Volume III 

G. P. Putnam's Sons 

New York and London 
Sbe "fcnicherbocher press 
LIBRARY 

UNIVERSITY OF CALJFOWT* 

Ube imicfeerbocfcer press, flew 

CONTENTS 

FINANCE — Continued: 

VINDICATION OF THE FUNDING SYSTEM . . 3 

PAYMENTS OF PUBLIC DEBT .... 24 

Civis TO MERCATOR 28 

FACT 40 

PUBLIC DEBT 46 

LOANS 61 

PUBLIC FUNDS 137 

LOANS . 139 

OBSERVER 177 

HAMILTON TO THE SPEAKER OF THE HOUSE OF 

REPRESENTATIVES 178 

LOAN 179 

HAMILTON TO WASHINGTON . . . .183 

HAMILTON TO A COMMITTEE OF CONGRESS . 185 

HAMILTON TO A COMMITTEE OF CONGRESS . 187 
WASHINGTON TO HAMILTON . . . .190 
HAMILTON TO WASHINGTON . . . .190 

HAMILTON TO WASHINGTON .... 194 

REPRESENTATIVES 199 

PUBLIC CREDIT 199 

IMPROVEMENT OF THE REVENUE . . . 301 

BUILDING TAX 312 

VOL. ni. 

in 

iv Contents 

PAGB 

NATIONAL BANK: 

HAMILTON TO ROBERT MORRIS, 1780 . . 319 

HAMILTON TO ROBERT MORRIS .... 342 

NATIONAL BANK 388 

WASHINGTON TO HAMILTON .... 443 

HAMILTON TO WASHINGTON .... 444 

HAMILTON TO WASHINGTON .... 445 

FINANCE (Continued) 

VOL in.— i. 

FINANCE (Continued] 

VINDICATION OF THE FUNDING SYSTEM 

I 

NUMBER ONE 

1791 (?) 

IT was to have been foreseen, that though the virtu 
ous part of those who were opposed to the pre 
sent Constitution of the United States, while in 
deliberation before the people, would yield to the 
evidence which experience would afford of its use 
fulness and safety, there were opponents of a certain 
character, who, as happens in all great political ques 
tions, would always remain incurably hostile to it; 
that in the course of its administration its greatest 
merits would be in the eyes of such men its greatest 
blemishes, its most brilliant successes to them occa 
sions of bitter chagrin and envious detraction, its 
slightest mismanagements subjects of malignant ex 
aggeration, its most trivial misfortunes the welcome 
topics of virulent accusation and insidious misrepre 
sentation. 

With some men the hardest thing to forgive is the 
demonstration of their errors, — the manifestation 
that they are not infallible. Mortified vanity is one 
of the most corroding emotions of the human mind; 
4 Alexander Hamilton 

one of the most unextinguishable sources of animosity 
and hatred. 

It was equally to have been foreseen, that personal 
disappointments would be likely to alienate from the 
government some individuals who had at first advo 
cated its adoption, perhaps from motives not the 
most patriotic or commendable ; that personal rival- 
ships and competitions would throw others into an 
opposition to its measures, without much regard to 
their intrinsic merits or demerits; and that a third 
class would embrace the path of opposition as the 
supposed road to popularity and preferment, raising 
upon every colorable pretext the cry of danger to 
liberty, and endeavoring to disseminate among the 
people false terrors and ill-grounded alarms. 

Phenomena like these have deformed the political 
horizon, and testify the depravity of mankind, in all 
countries and at all times. 

It was likewise to have been expected that among 
the well-meaning friends of the government, there 
would be a part, competent to the proper manage 
ment of the affairs of the Union, who, sensible from 
experience of the insufficiency of the former system, 
gave their assent to the substitute offered to their 
choice, rather from general impressions of the neces 
sity of a change, than from an accurate view of the 
necessary compass of the authorities which ought to 
constitute it. 

When they came to witness the exercise of those 
authorities upon a scale more comprehensive than 
they had contemplated, and to hear the incendiary 
comments of those who will ever be on the watch for 

Funding System 5 

pretexts to brand the proceedings of the government 
with imputations of usurpation and tyranny, and the 
factious and indiscreet clamors of those who, in and 
out of the Legislature, with too much levity, torture 
the Constitution into objections to measures which 
they deem inexpedient; — it was to have been ex 
pected, I say, that some such men might be carried 
away by transient anxieties and apprehensions, and 
might for a moment add weight to an opposition 
which could not fail to grow out of other causes, and 
the real objects of which they would abhor. 

There is yet another class of men, who, in all the 
stages of our republican system, either from desper 
ate circumstances, or irregular ambition, or a mixture 
of both, will labor incessantly to keep the government 
in a troubled and unsettled state, to sow disquietudes 
in the minds of the people, and to promote confusion 
and change. Every republic at all times has its 
Catilines and its Caesars. 

Men of this stamp, while in their hearts they scoff 
at the principles of liberty, while in their real char 
acters they are arbitrary, persecuting, and intolerant, 
are in all their harangues and professions the most 
zealous; nay, if they are to be believed, the only 
friends to liberty. Mercenary and corrupt them 
selves, they are continually making a parade of 
their purity and disinterestedness, and heaping upon 
others charges of peculation and corruption. Ex 
travagant and dissipated in their own affairs, they 
are always prating about public economy, and railing 
at the government for its pretended profusion. Con 
scious that as long as the confidence of the people 

6 Alexander Hamilton 

shall be maintained in their tried and faithful serv 
ants, in men of real integrity and patriotism, their 
ambitious projects can never succeed, they leave no 
artifice unessayed, they spare no pains to destroy 
that confidence, and blacken the characters that 
stand in their way. 

Convinced that as long as order and system in the 
public affairs can be maintained, their schemes can 
never be realized, they are constantly representing 
the means of that order and system as chains forged 
for the people. Themselves the only plotters and 
conspirators, they are for ever spreading tales of plots 
and conspiracies; always talking of the republican 
cause, and meaning nothing but the cause of them 
selves and their party ; virtue and liberty constantly 
on their lips, fraud, usurpation, and tyranny in their 
hearts. 

There is yet another class of opponents to the gov 
ernment and its administration, who are of too much 
consequence not to be mentioned : a sect of political 
doctors; a kind of POPES in government; standards 
of political orthodoxy, who brand with heresy all 
opinions but their own ; men of sublimated imagina 
tions and weak judgments; pretenders to profound 
knowledge, yet ignorant of the most useful of all 
sciences — the science of human nature; men who 
dignify themselves with the appellation of philoso 
phers, yet are destitute of the first elements of true 
philosophy ; lovers of paradoxes ; men who maintain 
expressly that religion is not necessary to society, 
and very nearly that government itself is a nuisance ; 
that priests and clergymen of all descriptions are 

Funding System 7 

worse than useless. Such men, the ridicule of any 
cause that they espouse, and the best witnesses to 
the goodness of that which they oppose, have no 
small share in the clamors which are raised, and in 
the dissatisfactions which are excited. 

While the real object of these clamors, with the 
persons most active in propagating them, is opposi 
tion to the administration of it ; while they are strain 
ing every nerve to render it odious, they are profuse 
in their professions of attachment to it. To oppose 
avowedly the work of the people would be too bare 
faced. It would not accord with that system of 
treacherous flattery, which is the usual engine of 
these pretended " friends," but real betrayers, of the 
people. 

Circumstances require that the mode of attack be 
changed. The government is to be good, if not ex 
cellent, but its administration is to be execrable,— 
detestable, — a mere sink of corruption; a deep-laid 
plan to overturn the republican system of the country. 

Suspicions of the most flagitious prostitution and 
corruption in office, of improper connections with 
brokers and speculators to fleece the community, of 
the horrid depravity of promoting wars, and the 
shedding of human blood, for the sake of sharing 
collusively the emoluments of lucrative contracts, 
suspicions like these are, if possible, to be thrown 
upon men, the whole tenor of whose lives gives the lie 
to them ; who, before they came into office, were never 
either land-jobbers, or stock-jobbers, or jobbers of 
any other kind ; who can appeal to their fellow-citi 
zens of every other party and description to attest 

8 Alexander Hamilton 

that their reputations for probity are unsullied, that 
their conduct in all pecuniary concerns has been 
nicely correct and even exemplarily disinterested; 
who, it is notorious, have sacrificed and are sacrificing 
the interests of their families to their public zeal; 
who, whenever the necessity of resisting the machin 
ations of the enemies of the public quiet will permit 
them to retire, will retire poorer than they came into 
office, and will have to resume under numerous dis 
advantages the pursuits which they before followed 
under every advantage. Shame, where is thy blush? 
- if detraction so malignant as this can affront the 
public ear. Integrity, where is thy shield? where 
thy reward ? — if the poisonous breath of an unprinci 
pled cabal can pollute thy good name which thou 
incessantly toiled to deserve. 

People of America, can ye be deceived by arts like 
these ? Will ye suffer yourselves to be cheated out of 
your confidence in men who deserve it most? Will 
ye be the dupes of hypocritical pretenders ? 

Think for yourselves. Look around you. Con 
sult your own experience. If any of you have 
doubts, listen calmly and dispassionately to the argu 
ments and facts which, in the course of the following 
numbers, shall be opposed to the suggestions which 
would persuade you that the administration of your 
government has been in the aggregate weak or 
wicked, or both. 

NUMBER TWO 

Of all the measures of the government, that which 
has been most bitterly inveighed against is the fund- 

Funding System 9 

ing system, contained in the act making provision for 
the debt of the United States. As well for this rea 
son, as on account of its superior importance, the 
objections which have been made to it are entitled to 
an examination in the first place. 

It is a curious phenomenon in political history (not 
easy to be paralleled), that a measure which has ele 
vated the credit of the country from a state of abso 
lute prostration to a state of exalted pre-eminence, 
should bring upon the authors of it obloquy and 
reproach. 

It is certainly what, in the ordinary course of hu 
man affairs, they could not have anticipated. They 
are not here chargeable with arrogance, if they in 
dulged from it the hope of credit and applause ; and if 
the clamors which have been raised have truly pro 
ceeded, as the clamorers assure us, from patriotic 
motives, it must be confessed that they have the ad 
ditional merit of novelty and singularity. 

There must be something original in the passions as 
well as in the ideas of the sect to which they are 
attributable. It will be hardly possible not to be 
lieve, that some mysterious work of political regen 
eration has begun to make its way in the world, and 
that all those who have not been the subjects of it are 
in a state of pitiable darkness and error. 

The two first points which, in considering the fund 
ing system, present themselves to attention, are the 
existence and the composition of the debt funded. 

A person who, unacquainted with the fact, should 
learn the history of our debt from the declama 
tions with which certain newspapers are perpetually 

io Alexander Hamilton 

charged, would be led to suppose that it is the mere 
creature of the present government for the purpose of 
burthening the people with taxes, and producing an 
artificial and corrupt influence over them ; he would, 
at least, take it for granted that it had been con 
tracted in the pursuit of some wanton or vain project 
of ambition or glory; he would scarcely be able to 
conceive that every part of it was the relict of a war 
which had given independence and preserved liberty 
to the country ; that the present government found it 
as it is, in point of magnitude (except as to the dimi 
nutions made by itself), and has done nothing more 
than to bring under a regular regimen and provision 
what was before a scattered and heterogeneous mass. 

And yet this is the simple and exact state of 
the business. The whole of the debt embraced by 
the provisions of the funding system consisted of the 
unextinguished principal and arrears of interest of 
the debt which had been contracted by the United 
States in the course of the late war with Great 
Britain, and which remained uncancelled, and the 
principal and arrears of interest of the separate debts 
of the respective States contracted during the same 
period, which remained outstanding and unsatisfied, re 
lating to services and supplies for carrying on the war. 
Nothing more was done by that system than to in 
corporate these two species of debt into the mass, and 
to make for the whole one general, comprehensive 
provision. 

There is, therefore, no arithmetic, no logic, by 
which it can be shown that the funding system has 
augmented the aggregate debt of the country. The 

Funding System n 

sum total is manifestly the same ; though the parts 
which were before divided are now united. 

There is, consequently, no color for an assertion 
that the system in question either created any new 
debt, or made any addition to the old. 

And it follows that the collective burthen upon the 
people of the United States must have been as great 
without as with the union of the different portions and 
descriptions of the debt. The only difference can 
be, that without it that burthen would have been 
otherwise distributed, and would have fallen with 
unequal weight instead of being equally borne as it 
now is. 

These conclusions which have been drawn respect 
ing the non-increase of the debt proceed upon the pre 
sumption that every part of the public debt, as well 
that of the States individually as that of the United 
States, was to have been honestly paid. 

If there is any fallacy in this supposition, the infer 
ences may be erroneous, but the error would imply 
the disgrace of the United States, or parts of them — 
a disgrace from which every man of true honor and 
genuine patriotism will be happy to see them rescued. 

When we hear the epithets, "vile matter," "cor 
rupt mass," bestowed upon the public debt, and the 
owners of it indiscriminately maligned as the harpies 
and vultures of the community, there is ground to 
suspect that those who hold the language, though 
they may not dare to avow it, contemplate a more 
summary process for getting rid of debts than that of 
paying them. Charity itself cannot avoid conclud 
ing from the language and conduct of some men (and 

12 Alexander Hamilton 

some of them of no inconsiderable importance), that 
in their vocabularies creditor and enemy are synonym 
ous terms, and that they have a laudable antipathy 
against every man to whom they owe money, either 
as individuals or as members of the society. 

It has been said that the sum of the debt to be ul 
timately provided for has been artificially increased by 
the plan for the settlement of accounts between the 
United States and individual States. This point will 
most properly be the subject of a distinct examina 
tion, as the act which settles the accounts is a distinct 
one from that which establishes the funding system. 
It will appear, upon examination, that there is no 
foundation for the assertion, and, moreover, that the 
plan which has been adopted by the present govern 
ment for the settlement of the accounts is essentially 
a recapitulation of that which was adopted under 
the Confederation, and which established principles 
which were not only equitable in themselves, but 
could not have been reversed without an infraction 
of the public faith. 

NUMBER THREE 

My last number contained a concise and simple 
statement of facts tending to show that the public 
debt was neither created nor increased by the fund 
ing system, and, consequently, that it is not respons 
ible either for the existence or the magnitude of the 
debt. 

It will be proper next to examine the allegations 
which have been made of a contrary tendency. 

In the first place, it is asserted that the debt is 

Funding System 13 

greater than it ought to be, because, from the state of 
depreciation in which the government found it, a 
much less provision for it than that which was made 
might have sufficed. A saving of nearly one half, it 
is said, might have been made by providing for it 
in the hands of alienees, at least at Ss. or los. in 
the pound, who, having come by it at a much less 
rate, would have been well compensated by such a 

To a man who entertains correct notions of public 
faith, and who feels as he ought to feel for the reputa 
tion and dignity of the country, it is mortifying to 
reflect that there are partisans enough of such a doc 
trine to render it worth the while to combat it. It is 
still more mortifying to know that in that class are 
comprehended some men who are in other respects 
sober-minded and upright, friends to order, and 
strenuous advocates for the rights of property. 

In reasoning upon all subjects, it is necessary to 
take, as a point of departure, some principle in which 
reasonable and sound minds will agree. Without 
this there can be no argument, no conclusion, in 
moral or political more than in physical or mathe 
matical disquisitions. 

The principle which shall be assumed here is this, 
that the established rules of morality and justice are 
applicable to nations as well as to individuals; that the 
former as well as the latter are bound to keep their 
promises; to fulfil their engagements to respect the 
rights of property which others have acquired under 
contracts with them. Without this there is an end 
of all distinct ideas of right or wrong, justice or 

14 Alexander Hamilton 

injustice, in relation to society or government. There 
can be no such thing as rights, no such thing as 
property or liberty ; all the boasted advantages of a 
constitution of government vanish into air. Every 
thing must float on the variable and vague opinions 
of the governing party, of whomsoever composed. 

To this it may be answered that the doctrine, as a 
general one, is true, but that there are certain great 
cases which operate as exceptions to the rule, and in 
which the public good may demand and justify a 
departure from it. 

It shall not be denied that there are such cases ; but 
as the admission of them is one of the most common 
as well as the most fruitful sources of error and abuse, 
it is of the greatest importance that just ideas should 
be formed of their true nature, foundation, and ex 
tent. To minds which are either depraved or feeble, 
or under the influence of any particular passion or 
prejudice, it is enough that cases are only attended 
with some extraordinary circumstances to induce their 
being considered as among the exceptions. Con 
venience is with them a substitute for necessity, and 
some temporary, partial advantage is an equivalent 
for a fundamental and permanent interest of society. 
We have too often seen in the United States examples 
of this species of levity. The treaties of the United 
States, the sacred rights of private property, have 
been too frequently sported with, from a too great 
facility in admitting exceptions to the maxims of 
public faith and the general rules of property. A 
desire to escape from this evil was a principal cause 
of the union which took place among good men to 

Funding System 15 

establish the national government; and it behoved 
its friends to have been particularly cautious how they 
set an example of equal relaxation in the practice of 
that very government. 

The characteristics of the only admissible excep 
tions to the principle that has been assumed, are — 
ist. NECESSITY, ad. There being some intrinsic 
and inherent quality in the thing which is to consti 
tute the exception, contrary to the social order and to 
the permanent good of society. 

Necessity is admitted in all moral reasoning as an 
exception to general rules. It is of two kinds, as ap 
plied to nations — where there is want of ability to 
perform a duty, and then it is involuntary; and 
where the general rule cannot be observed without 
some manifest and great national calamity. 

If from extraordinary circumstances a nation is dis 
abled from performing its stipulations, or its duty in 
any other respect, it is then excusable on the score 
of inability. But the inability must be a real, not 
a pretended, one ; one that has been experimentally 
ascertained, or that can be demonstrated to the 
satisfaction of all honest and discerning men. And 
the deviation ought to be as small as possible; all 
that is practicable ought to be done. 

A nation is alike excusable in certain extraordinary 
cases for not observing a right or performing a duty, 
if the one or the other would involve a manifest and 
great national calamity. But here, also, an extreme 
case is intended ; the calamity to be avoided must not 
only be evident and considerable — it must be such 
an one as is like to prove fatal to the nation, as 

1 6 Alexander Hamilton 

threatens its existence, or at least its permanent 
welfare. 

War, for instance, is almost always a national 
calamity, of a serious kind ; but it ought often to be 
encountered in protection even of a part of the com 
munity injured or annoyed; or in performance of 
the condition of a defensive alliance with some other 
nation. 

But if such special circumstances exist in either 
case, that the going to war would eminently endanger 
the existence or permanent welfare of the nation, it 
may excusably be forborne. 

Of the second class of exceptions, the case of cer 
tain feudal rights, which once oppressed all Europe, 
and still oppress too great a part of it, may serve as 
an example; rights which made absolute slaves of a 
part of the community, and rendered the condition of 
the greatest proportion of the remainder not much 
more eligible. 

These rights, though involving that of property, 
being contrary to the social order, and to the per 
manent welfare of society, were justifiably abolished 
in the instances in which abolitions have taken place, 
and may be abolished in all the remaining vestiges. 

Wherever, indeed, a right of property is infringed 
for the general good, if the nature of the case admits 
of compensation, it ought to be made ; but if compen 
sation be impracticable, that impracticability ought 
not to be an obstacle to a clearly essential reform. 

In what has been said, the cases of exception have 
been laid down as broad as they ought to be. They 
are cases of extremity — where there is a palpable 

Funding System 17 

necessity — where some great and permanent national 
evil is to be avoided — where some great and perma 
nent national good is to be obtained. It must not 
be to avoid a temporary burthen or inconvenience — 
to get rid of a particular, though a considerable evil, 
or to secure a partial advantage. A relaxation of 
this kind would tend to dissolve all social obligations 
— to render all rights precarious, and to introduce a 
general dissoluteness and corruption of morals. 

A single glance will suffice to convince that the case 
of the debt of the United States was not one of those 
cases which could justify a clear infraction of the 
fundamental rules of good faith, and a clear invasion 
of rights of property acquired under the most un 
equivocal national stipulations. 

If there was any doubt before, the real facility with 
which a provision for the debt has been made removes 
it; a provision which touches no internal source of 
revenue but the single article of distilled spirits, and 
lays upon that a very moderate duty. 

But a history of the real state of the debt when it 
was taken up by the government will put the matter 
out of all doubt. This shall constitute the subject of 
my next number. 

NUMBER FOUR 

The debt proper, or the original debt of the United 
States, in its primary sense, may be classed under 
four general heads: ist, the old emissions of Con 
tinental money; 2d, the loan office debt, contracted 
for moneys lent to the government; 3d, the army 

VOL. III.— 2. 

1 8 Alexander Hamilton 

debt, contracted for the pay and commutation of the 
army; 4th, the debt of the five great departments, as 
they are called in the resolution of Congress, being for 
services and supplies in the Marine Department, the 
Quartermaster's, Commissary's, Clothing, and Hos 
pital Departments. 

Emanations from these were the registered debt, so 
denominated from new kinds of certificates issued by 
the Register of the Treasury in lieu of the former evi 
dences. Indents of interest being a species of paper 
payable to bearer, which, by different resolutions of 
Congress, were issued on account of arrears of interest 
on the old debt. The new emission money is not 
added to the enumeration, because it was issued upon 
funds of the respective States, with only a guaranty 
of the United States, and falls, perhaps, most pro 
perly, in the class of State debts. 

Of this original debt, it appears by a statement of 
the Register of the Treasury, published Sept. 30, 
1 79 1,1 not less than $16,900,203 73 in its first con 
coction, belonged to citizens of the States from 
Pennsylvania to New Hampshire inclusively; the 
remaining belonging to States from Maryland to 
Georgia inclusively, in nearly the following pro 
portions: to Maryland, $1,697,910 34; to Virginia, 
$1,024,104 26; to North Carolina, $28,994 75; to 
South Carolina, $299,109 88; to Georgia, $97,233 03. 
The reasons of this state of things are obvious. Until 

1 This date and all the figures which follow are blank in the edition 
of 1850. I have filled them from the Register's report, which I think 
must be the one referred to, of Sept. 30, 1791. (See American State 
Papers, " Finance," vol. i., p. 149.) 

Funding System 19 

the year 1779 the principal theatre of the war had been 
in the States from Pennsylvania north ; and after that 
period, to the close of it, the principal part of the 
enemy's force remained stationary at New York, 
which obliged the keeping up in the same quarter 
large bodies of troops till the termination of the war. 

The natural consequence of this state of things 
was, that a very large proportion of the means for 
carrying on the war — men, money, and other supplies 
—were drawn from the States comprehended in the 
first division. They indeed possessed greater com 
parative resources than the more southern States, 
and with only the same degree of zeal could furnish 
more to the common cause. Obvious causes always 
conspire to occasion larger aids to be drawn from the 
vicinity of the war than from more distant parts of 
the country, and the main dependence of the United 
States being credit, a large debt was created in the 
scene from which the principal supplies came. 

The use of this statement of the original distribu 
tion of the debt will appear hereafter. 

A leading character of every part of the debt is, 
that it was in its origin made alienable. It was pay 
able to the holder, either in capacity of assignee or 
bearer, far the greatest part of the latter description. 
The contract, therefore, was, in its very issue, a con 
tract between the government and the actual holder. 

A considerable part of the debt was consequently 
alienated by the first proprietors at different periods, 
from its commencement down to the time of passing 
the funding act. 

But this has been much exaggerated, both as to the 

20 Alexander Hamilton 

quantity alienated and as to the rates of alienation. 
The declamations on the subject have constantly 
represented far the greatest part of the debt in the 
hands of alienees, and have taken the lowest price at 
which it ever was in the market as the common 
standard of the alienation. The changes have been 
rung upon two shillings and sixpence in the pound, 
in all the arguments which have advocated a viola 
tion of the rights of the alienees. 

Neither the first nor the last supposition is true. 
As to the first point, namely, the quantity of the debt 
alienated, there are no documents by which it can 
be satisfactorily ascertained, which of course gives 
full scope to imagination. 

But there is an important fact which affords strong 
evidence that the quantity has always been much less 
considerable than has been supposed. 

In the year 1786 the State of New York passed a 
law permitting the holders of Continental securities 
to bring them in and receive in exchange for them 
State securities upon certain conditions, which were 
generally deemed for the advantage of the holders to 
accept. The same arrangement embraced an ex 
change of old State securities for new. 

In the event of this exchange, which was completed 
by the ist of May, 1787, it appeared that about two 
thirds x of the debt remained in the hands of the 
original proprietors. 

1 This as well as the two preceding dates is blank in the edition of 
1850. The dates are filled from the laws of New York for 1786. The 
proportion of alienated debt I have calculated from the returns of the 
State Treasurer of New York. — American State Papers, " Finance," i., 

Funding System 21 

Alienations after this period. . v^Ss£f 

It may be stated as a fact, that there always has 
prevailed in the States north of New York, a more 
firm confidence in an eventual provision for the debt 
than existed in that State; and it may be inferred 
that the alienation was still less in those States than 
in the State of New York. 

In Jersey and Pennsylvania, it is probable that the 
alienations were not more considerable in their degree 
than in New York. In Maryland they may be sup 
posed to have been still less, on account of that State 
having made a better provision for its debt than any 
other, and having included in it Continental securities 
in the hands of its own citizens by an exchange of 
certificates. 

It is probable from information, though not cer 
tainly known, that a more considerable alienation in 
proportion had taken place in the States south of 
Maryland. But making all due allowance for this, 
and taking into the account that the principal part of 
the debt was originally owned from Pennsylvania 
north, the probability still is, that the progress of 
alienation has been much less rapid than has been 
conjectured. Nothing is more natural than a mis 
take on this point. The dealers in the debt in the 
principal cities appeared to be continually engaged 
in buying and selling large sums ; and it has not been 
their fault generally, to underrate the extent of their 

p. 30. The "Alienations" since May, 1787, I have not been able to 
ascertain. This defence of the funding system was not apparently 
published, hence its incomplete state and the consequent blanks for 
figures. 

22 Alexander Hamilton 

dealings. Thence it came to be imagined that the 
whole debt, or the greatest part of it, was in the 
market; whereas a small sum comparatively was 
sufficient to satisfy all the appearances. Bandied 
incessantly from hand to hand, a few hundred thou 
sand dollars appeared like as many millions. 

The best inquiries on the subject will lead to an 
opinion that there never was, prior to the funding 
system, three millions of dollars of floating debt in 
all the great stock markets of the United States. 
And the whole sum which had been acquired by 

foreigners, was about . From all which it is 

very questionable whether one third of the debt in 
the hands of alienees at the time when Congress be 
gan to deliberate concerning a provision for it would 
not be an ample allowance. 

With regard to the terms of alienation, they have 
varied from 2os. down to 2$. 6d. in the pound. 

There are several considerable classes of alienees, 
who hold the debt at full or high values: 

I. Those who advanced moneys or furnished sup 
plies to public officers upon loan-office certificates, 
issued to those officers in their own names. An ex 
ample of this exists in the cases of purchases made 
during the war by public officers. Warrants from the 
Treasury would frequently be drawn in their favor 
upon the commissioners of loans, who would often 
furnish loan-office certificates in their own names in 
payment of those warrants. For these certificates 
the officers would sometimes procure the current 
paper in exchange, and would transfer the certificates 
to those who advanced the money. In other cases 

Funding System 23 

they would pay for supplies in the certificates them 
selves, which they would in like manner transfer. 
This is a very extensive case. 

II. Those whose money has been placed in the 
funds by trustees or agents, who took out certificates 
in their own names, and afterwards assigned them to 
the true proprietors. 

An instance of this was mentioned in the debates in 
Congress on the subject of a discrimination between 
original and present holders, and can be ascertained 
by any one who will take the pains to inquire. It 
was that of a Mr. Caldwell, a respectable clergyman 
and zealous patriot in New Jersey, who acted for some 
time during the war in the capacity of deputy quar 
termaster. In that capacity he frequently had 
money to pay to individuals, which, at their desire, 
he would place in the loan-office for them, take certifi 
cates in his own name, and afterwards transfer them 
to the persons whose money he had deposited. There 
are likewise instances, not a few, of trustees and 
agents for absent persons and minors, who placed the 
moneys of those whom they represented in the loan- 
offices, took out certificates in their own names, and 
afterwards transferred them to the parties entitled. 

III. Those who, by laws of particular States, were 
compelled to take certificates at the full value in pay 
ment of debts. 

A law of the State of New York, passed in the year 

, obliged all persons who had resided within the 

British lines during the war to receive, in satisfaction 
of their debts from those who had been without the 
lines, certificates. 

24 Alexander Hamilton 

IV. Those who, at different periods, voluntarily re 
ceived certificates in payment of debts. This, in 
some States, is a very extensive case. From the pre 
carious situation in which all persons were placed by 
the Revolution, whose property was merely personal, 
it was no uncommon thing for creditors to receive 
from their debtors certificates in payment of debts; 
and this was almost always at high values. 

Even since the peace, compromises between cred 
itors and debtors, especially those whose fortunes had 
been injured by the war, in which certificates were 
received at full value. — Cater a desunt. 

PAYMENTS OF PUBLIC DEBT 

August 29, 1792. 

The following authentic documents respecting the 
progress which has been made by the present Govern 
ment of the United States, toward extinguishing the 
debts contracted under the former Government, will, 
it is presumed, be very acceptable to the people of the 
United States ; and it is hoped that the different ed 
itors of newspapers will give the information the 
general circulation which its importance merits. 

i 

TREASURY DEPARTMENT, 
REGISTER'S OFFICE, August 24, 1792. 

SIR: — I have the honor to enclose an abstract and 
statement of the debt incurred by the late Government, 
and which has been paid off from the funds of the present 
Government, amounting to one million eight hundred 
and forty -five thousand two hundred and seventeen 

Payments of Public Debt 25 

dollars forty-two cents; but this sum will be increased, 
when the balance of three hundred and ninety-seven 
thousand twenty-four dollars thirteen cents, remaining 
to be appropriated to the further purchase of the public 
debt, shall be applied, and which more particularly ap 
pears by the subjoined statement. 

With every sentiment of the highest respect, I have 
the honor to be, Sir, 

Your most obedient and most humble servant, 

JOSEPH NOURSE, 

Register. 
HON. ALEXANDER HAMILTON, 

Secretary of the Treasury. 

II 

Statement of the balance which remains to be applied to the 
further purchase of the Public Debt 

By the Act passed i2th August, 1790, making pro 
vision for the reduction of the Public Debt, Section 2d, 
it is enacted, That all such surplus of the product of the 
duties arising from impost and tonnage to 3ist Decem 
ber, 1790, after satisfying the several appropriations 
therein specified, shall be applied to the purchase of the 
public debt. 

The product of said duties were . . $3,026,070 65^ 
The total appropriations were . . 1,687,194 81 

The surplus fund to 3ist December, 1790 $1,338,875 84^ 
Deduct the amount paid for $ i , 45 6, 743 1 8 

of the public debt extinguished as 

per abstract ?:L 'V . ;' ... '• ' • .-'. 941,851 69 

Leaves a balance which remains to be 
applied to the further purchases of 
the public debt .... $397,024 

26 Alexander Hamilton 

in 

An abstract Statement of the sum extinguished of the Public 
Debt, also of the payment from the funds of the present 
Government of certain claims which were incurred by the 
late Government. 

PURCHASES OF THE PUBLIC DEBT 

Amount thereof extinguished . . . $1,456,743 38 
Warrants drawn by the Board of Treasury 

under the late Government, and 

which have been discharged in pur 
suance of the Act of Congress of 2gth 

September, 1789 .... 157,789 94 

Civil List: for various payments made 

upon accounts which originated under 

the late Government . . . 25,768 50 

War Department, being for arrearages of 

pay due to sundry officers of the army, 

and for provisions furnished . . 7,308 40 

Abraham Skinner, late Commissary Gen 
eral of Prisoners, for the Board of 

American Prisoners of War at Long 

Island; appropriated by Congress, 

per their Act passed 1 2th August, 1 790 38,683 13 
Representatives of Mr. de Decoudray, 

balance of pay 2,977 24 

Ditto Hon. John Laurens, his salary on an 

embassy to the French Court . . 6,017 31 

Francis Dana, salary on an embassy to 

the Court of St. Petersburg . . 2,410 30 

Benson, Smith, and Barker, their expenses 

attending the embarkation of the 

British troops at New York . . 1,000 oo 

Payments of Public Debt 27 

His Most Christian Majesty, for military 
and ordnance stores supplied to Amer 
ican ships of war in the French West 
Indies . . . . . ...' $ 29,029 68 

Oliver Pollock, for balance due him for 
supplies at New Orleans, with interest 
thereon, in conformity with the sev 
eral Acts of Congress . V . 108,605 °° 

MM. Gardoqui & Son, balance due for sup 
plies furnished in Spain . , . 502 86 

$550,542 14 

Bills of exchange, which had been drawn 
on Foreign Commissioners, not paid 
by them 4,185 50 

Timothy Pickering, late Quartermaster- 
General, being on account of the ap 
propriation of $40,000, passed July i, 
179° 2»°77 89 

Grants of Congress, viz.: 

John McCord, per Act of Congress of ist 

July, 1790 . "^ . . . 1,309 71 

Jehoakim M. Tocksin, per Act of Congress 

of the 26th of March, 1790 . . 120 oo 

Baron de Glaubeck, per Act of 29th Sep 
tember, 1789 . i . , . . 140 26 

Seth Harding, per Act nth August, 1790 . 200 oo 

Caleb Brewster, ditto, ditto . r< . 348 57 

$2,118 54 

$1,845,217 42 
TREASURY DEPARTMENT, 
Register's Office, August 23, 1792. 

JOSEPH NOURSE, 

Register. 

28 Alexander Hamilton 

CIVIS TO MERCATOR 

September 5, 1792. 

Certain Treasury documents were lately published 
for the information of the community, without any 
precise designation of the purpose for which they 
were published. They were left to speak for them 
selves, with only a short introduction, denomin 
ating them "Authentic documents respecting the 
progress which has been made by the present Govern 
ment of the United States towards extinguishing the 
debts contracted under the former Government." 

A writer in this Gazette I of Saturday last, under the 
signature of Mercator, has thought fit to come for 
ward, and, assigning what he conceives to be the 
object of the publication, endeavors to show that the 
contrary of what was intended is true. 

What right had Mercator to suppose, that any thing 
more was intended, than simply to inform the public 
that besides a punctual payment of the interest on the 
debt, from the period at which measures were matured 
to begin that payment, a considerable sum of the Capital 
of the Debt has been extinguished, and that a further 
sum will be extinguished by a provision already made? 
leaving them to this very natural inference, which 

1 The National Gazette, edited by Philip Freneau. This newspaper 
and its editor, as is well known, caused the outbreak of the quarrel be 
tween Hamilton and Jefferson. Hamilton opened his attacks in re 
sponse to those of Freneau just before the appearance of this letter. 
" Civis to Mercator" has hitherto been printed among the essays of the 
Jefferson controversy, but, as it is simply a defence of the funding 
system against the attacks of Freneau, it seems to belong more properly 
here among the writings on finance. 

Civis to Mercator 29 

will be drawn by every candid mind, that the Gov 
ernment has been as attentive as circumstances would 
permit, at so early a period, to the extinguishment of 
the debt. 

But admitting Mercator to be right in his sugges 
tion of the object, it is presumed that a liberal con 
struction of all circumstances will justify the position, 
that the present Government has reduced the debt of 
the former Government to the extent expressed in the 
documents which have been published. This will re 
sult, if it shall appear that provision was made for the 
interest as early as was reasonably practicable. To 
have paid the interest from that period, and to have 
sunk so much of the capital in addition, is, in fair con 
struction, to have reduced the debt to the extent of 
the capital sunk. 

When Mercator undertook to suppose an object 
which was not declared, he ought to have taken care 
to be better informed and more accurate. When he 
undertook to state an account with the Treasury 
Department, he ought not only to have selected just 
items, to have adverted to dates, times, and possibil 
ities, but he ought to have stated the whole account. 

This he has not done ; on the contrary he has both 
misrepresented and suppressed facts. He has shown 
in the true spirit of a certain junto (who, not content 
with the large share of power they have in the gov 
ernment, are incessantly laboring to monopolize the 
whole of its power, and to banish from it every man 
who is not subservient to their preposterous and all- 
grasping views), that he has been far more solicitous 
to arraign than to manifest the truth — to take away, 

3<D Alexander Hamilton 

than to afford consolation to the people of the United 
States. 

The following particulars are proofs of his want 
both of accuracy and candor. 

First. — He charges to the Treasury Department 
arrears of interest which accrued prior to its existence, 
that is, from the ist of August, 1789; whereas the 
department was not instituted till the 26. of Sep 
tember, nor organized till about the i3th, when, I am 
informed, the Secretary of the Treasury entered upon 
the duties of his office. 

Secondly. — He takes as the standard of his calcula 
tion, the whole amount of the annual interest on the 
whole amount of the public debt, as it exists under 
the present funding system, including all the arrears 
of interest made principal, and the $21,500,000 of as 
sumed debt — whereas the arrears which did actually 
accumulate to the end of the year 1790, were only on 
the principal of the foreign and domestic debt, and 
fall short more than a million of dollars of the sum he 
states. 

These simple facts prove the fallacy of his state 
ment. 

But the principle upon which he proceeds is not 
less absurd than his calculations are fallacious. 

With as much propriety might an executor be 
charged with increasing the debts of his testator, by 
suffering the arrears of interest on his bonds and 
notes to accumulate, while he was collecting, arrang 
ing, and disposing of the estate, as the present Gov 
ernment, or, if the phrase is preferred, the present 
Treasury Department, may be charged with those 

Civis to Mercator 31 

arrearages which unavoidably accrued during the 
preparatory measures for bringing the resources of 
the public estate into activity. With as much reason 
might it be charged with the $13,000,000 of interest, 
which accumulated under the imbecile system, the 
old Confederation, to which, if not to worse, — a dis 
solution of the Union! — the designs of the junto 
evidently point or tend. 

When, proceeding upon grounds so loose and un 
just, Mercator makes the extraordinary declaration, 
that the Secretary of the Treasury " has produced an 
actual addition to the public debt of more than one 
million and a half of dollars," is it not palpable, that 
in the most malignant spirit of party he is endeavor 
ing to destroy the public confidence in that officer, no 
matter how unfair the means, as one link in the chain 
of measures by which the domineering aims of his 
party are to be effected, or the cause of confusion pro 
moted? Is it not clear that, in the language and 
conceptions of Mercator, to provide for a debt and to 
"produce" it, amount to the same thing? 

To form a still better estimate of the spirit by 
which he is actuated, let there be a review of some 
leading facts. 

Congress met under the present Government on the 
ist of April, 1789. To put it in motion they had a 
vast and very arduous work before them. This was 
of course a primary object ; a provision for the debt, a 
secondary one. It was natural then, that the first 
session should have been exhausted in organizing the 
Government, and that a systematic provision for 
the debt should be postponed, as in fact it was, to the 

32 Alexander Hamilton 

second session. A temporary and partial provision 
of revenue only was accordingly made by very 
moderate duties of impost, far short of an adequate 
fund for the support of Government and the payment 
of the interest on the debt, to take effect on the ist of 
August, 1789; which was as early as the law could 
be promulgated throughout the Union, and the sub 
ordinate executive arrangements made for carrying 
it into execution. 

It has been stated that the Treasury Department 
began to be in activity on the i3th of September. 
Congress adjourned on the 2pth of that month, after 
having instructed the Secretary of the Treasury to 
report concerning the debt at the ensuing session. It 
is to be recollected that without an order of the House 
that officer can propose nothing. 

It is evident that there was no responsibility on the 
side of that department for the accumulation of in 
terest on the debt until, at earliest, the second session, 
which began on the 7th of January, 1790. 

On Thursday, the i4th of January, the Secre 
tary of the Treasury submitted to the House of 
Representatives, according to order, the plan of a 
provision for the public debt, comprehending an addi 
tional provision of revenue for the purpose of facing 
the interest. But it was not till the 4th of August 
that the principles of a provision for the debt were de 
termined by law, nor till the loth of the same month 
that a supplementary fund was established for paying 
the interest upon it ; and from considerations of an ob 
vious nature the commencement of this fund in oper 
ation was deferred to the ist of January following. 

Civis to Mercator 33 

Here, again, 't is manifest that there was no re 
sponsibility in the Treasury Department for the ac 
cumulation of interest up to the period from which 
it has been punctually paid — namely, the ist of 
January, 1791, — because it was not in the power of 
that department to have accelerated a provision for 
it. Nor will any blame justly light upon Congress for 
the moderate delay which ensued. It was their duty 
to bestow much deliberation upon the subject. Much 
difference of opinion — much discussion — a consider 
able loss of time, were to be expected in relation to a 
subject so momentous, so perplexing, touching so 
differently so many chords of passion and interest. 

The law providing for the debt having passed, the 
Secretary of the Treasury immediately seized the op 
portunity which was afforded by an unappropriated 
surplus of revenue to the end of the year 1790 to 
make an impression on the debt. He proposed that 
it should be applied to purchases of the debt at its 
market prices, which was agreed to by Congress, and 
has been carried into execution as far as circum 
stances have hitherto permitted. 

This was certainly the best application that could 
have been made of the fund. It was equally the in 
terest of the Government and of the public creditors : 
— of the Government, because it was a clear gain of 
all the difference between the sum of specie paid and 
the sum of debt redeemed, which is already $514,- 
891 69, and will be more when the remaining sum 
appropriated comes to be applied to further pur 
chases ; because it was a clear saving to the nation of 
all the difference in price which was paid by foreigners 

VOL. III.— 3. 

34 Alexander Hamilton 

in their purchases, in consequence of the competition 
of the Government in the market as a purchaser. It 
is well known to every well-informed man that the 
rapid appreciation of the debt was materially owing 
to that circumstance, and of course the saving to the 
nation by it has been very considerable. The meas 
ure in question was equally beneficial to the public 
creditors — because, if the fund applied to purchases 
had been apportioned among them in payment of 
interest, it would have been a mere pittance; but 
applied as it was, it gave a rapid spring to the whole 
value of the stock. 

As it is therefore proved that the Treasury Depart 
ment is chargeable with no delay with regard to a 
provision for the debt, occasioning an unnecessary 
accumulation of interest, in a question of merit re 
specting that department which MERCATOR has 
raised, it will follow that the department, on account 
of the operations which have been advised by it, has 
an unbalanced claim of merit with the community— 

i st. — For all that has been or shall be saved by 
purchases of the public debt at the market prices. 

2d. — For all that has been saved to the nation, for 
the more advanced prices given by foreigners in their 
purchases of the debt. 

But there are other items of importance to be 
placed on the same side of the account. 

i st. — The saving resulting from the reduced rate 
on the new loans for paying off the foreign debt. 

2d. — The positive gain of 1,000,000 of dollars, by 
the institution of the Bank of the United States. The 
stock of the bank being at an advance of 50 per cent., 

Civis to Mercator 35 

it is clear that the Government, by having become a 
proprietor to the extent of 2,000,000 of dollars, has by 
this single operation made an actual net profit of 
1,000,000 of dollars — that is, it can get three millions 
for what will have cost it only two. 

I add nothing for any saving which has accrued 
from the particular modification of the domestic debt, 
for two reasons: one, because the subject being more 
complicated would require more illustration ; and the 
other, because the plan adopted by the Legislature, 
though having the leading features of that proposed 
by the Treasury Department, differs from it in some 
material respects, — a strong refutation of the idea, so 
industriously inculcated, that the plans of that de 
partment are implicitly followed by the Legislature, 
and a decisive proof that they have had no more 
weight than they ought to have had — that is to say, 
than they were entitled to from their intrinsic reason 
ableness in the unbiassed and independent judgment 
of majorities in the two Houses of Congress. The 
result of what has been said is this: that provision 
was made for paying the interest of the debt as early 
as could reasonably have been expected; that no 
negligence having happened, the arrears of interest 
which have accumulated in the interval are properly a 
part of the debts of the former Government; and 
consequently, that the sums which appear to have 
been absorbed are so much of the debts of the old 
Government extinguished by the new. 

Mercator brings as a proof that the public debt has 
increased and is increasing, what he terms " the pre 
sent amount and increasing weight of the duties of 

36 Alexander Hamilton 

impost and excise." Let facts decide the soundness 
of this logic. In the last session of Congress, the only 
excise duty which exists was reduced upon an aver 
age fifteen per cent. The only addition which was 
then made to the imposts was for carrying on the 
Indian war, and by avoiding recourse to permanent 
loans for that purpose, to avoid an increase of the debt. 
How then can that which was done to avoid an in 
crease of debt, be a proof that it has increased? 

Civis. 
ii 

PHILADELPHIA, September n, 1792. 

Little other notice of the futile reply of Mercator to 
Civis is necessary, than merely to put in a clear light 
the erroneousness of the standard which he has 
adopted for calculating the arrears of interest to the 
end of the year 1790. 

He takes for his standard, the present annual in 
terest on the whole amount of the public debt, as pro 
vided for under the funding system — that is, ist. Upon 
the former principal of the foreign and domestic debt ; 
2d. Upon the arrears of interest of that principal, 
which on the ist of January, 1791, and not before, be 
came principal, by the provisions of the funding law ; 
3d. Upon the whole amount of the assumed debt 
—that is, $21,500,000. 

Now, the fact is, that the only arrears which can 
colorably be computed are those on the principal of 
the foreign and domestic debt, according to the terms 
of interest which they actually bore up to the ist 
January, 1791. ist. Because, in fact, the arrears of 

Civis to Mercator 37 

interest on that principal did not bear interest till the 
ist of January, 1791; and consequently no interest 
whatever accrued upon them. And 2d, because the 
Government of the United States took up the State 
debts as they stood at the end of the year 1791. If 
arrears of interest accumulated in the meantime, 
't was the affair of the State governments, which were 
the debtors and alone responsible for a provision for 
it, not of the Government of the United States, which 
only became responsible by virtue of the assumption 
from the time that it took effect — that is, from the 
ist of January, 1792, from which period the interest 
has been punctually paid. This is the true view of 
it, unless it can be shown that the Government of the 
United States is answerable for the neglects and 
omissions of the State governments. But what 
arrears may have really accumulated on this part of 
the debt is unknown, as it is understood there was 
in some States a provision for the interest. 

Calculating then the arrears which did actually 
accrue — that is, on the principal and interest of the 
foreign and domestic debt, the former, according to 
the various rates which were stipulated upon it, and 
the latter at six per cent., the rate which it then bore, 
from the ist of August, 1789, to the ist of January, 
1791, from which period interest has been paid, 
the amount is $3,003,378 47 — that is, $1,032,980 72 
less than the amount of the arrears for the same 
period by Mercator. This statement is not made 
from any secret sources of information, but from 
documents long since in the possession of the public. 
If Mercator has been inattentive to the means of 

38 Alexander Hamilton 

information he ought not to come forth the instructor 
of his fellow-citizens. 

In a mere question of the increase and decrease of 
the public debt, if the arrears of interest which ac 
crued on the assumed debt, up to the period from 
which the United States began to pay interest upon 
it, be placed on one side of the account, the saving or 
reduction, by the nature of the provision for it, ought 
to be placed on the other side, and the balance will be 
in favor of the United States. 

Had Mercator stated an account with the Treasury 
Department on his own principle candidly applied — 
namely, that of setting off the surplus of revenue to 
the end of the year 1790 against the amount of the 
debt redeemed by purchasers and payments, the 
account would have stood thus: 

Debtor Side 
To amount of surplus revenue at the end 

of the year 1790 . . . .$1,338,87584 

Credit Side 
By the amount of the sum which appears 

by the statement of the Register of 

the Treasury to have been redeemed 

and paid off $1,845,217 42 

By sum remaining to be applied . . 397,02413 

$2,242,241 55 

Balance .... $903,365 7* 

being the amount of the public debt actually reduced 
beyond the amount of the funds remaining on hand 

Civis to Mercator 39 

at the commencement of the operation of the funding 
system, in virtue of antecedent provision, and exclu 
sive of reductions on the rates of interest. 

As to the concluding remarks of Mercator, they 
depart from the question. 'T is no matter, in refer 
ence to that, whether the items which were mentioned 
are circumstances of temporary expedient or results 
of the soundest policy. They constitute positive 
savings and gains to the nation. 

But it was not sufficient for Mercator to assert; he 
ought to have shown what sacrifice of justice or prin 
ciple was involved in them. Not having done it, it 
is sufficient to observe that one good effect of the 
measures of finance which have been adopted by 
the present Government is at least unequivocal. The 
public credit has been effectually restored. This may 
be in the eyes of Mercator of little moment. There 
are certain theorists who hold both private and public 
credit to be pernicious. But their disciples are not 
numerous ; at least among sober and enlightened men. 

The actual benefits or actual evils of the measures 
connected with the Treasury Department, present 
and future, would be cheerfully submitted to the 
TEST OF EXPERIENCE. Happy would it be for the 
country, honorable for human nature, if the experi 
ment were permitted to be fairly made. But the 
pains which are taken to misrepresent the tendency 
of those measures, to influence the public mind, to 
disturb the operations of the Government, are a de 
cided proof, that those to whom they are attributable 
dare not trust the appeal to such a TEST. Con 
vinced of this, they have combined all their forces, 

40 Alexander Hamilton 

and are making one desperate effort to gain an as 
cendency in the public councils, by means of the 
ensuing election, in order to precipitate the laudable 
work of destroying what has been done. 

Civis. 

FACT 

For the National Gazette 

September n, 1792. 

Much declamation has been indulged against cer 
tain characters, who are charged with advocating the 
pernicious doctrine, that " public debts are public 
blessings/' and with being friends to a perpetuation 
of the public debt of the country. Among these 
characters, if the Secretary of the Treasury has not 
been named, he has been pretty plainly alluded to. 
It is proper to examine what foundation there is, 
then, for those charges. 

That officer, it is very certain, explicitly main 
tained, that the funding of the existing debt of the 
United States would render it a national blessing; 
and a man has only to travel through the United 
States with his eyes open, and to observe the invigor- 
ation of industry in every branch, to be convinced 
that the position is well founded. 

But, whether right or wrong, it is quite a different 
thing from maintaining, as a general proposition, that 
a public debt is a public blessing ; particular and tem 
porary circumstances might render that advantage 
ous at one time, which at another might be hurtful. 

It is known that prior to the Revolution, a great 

Fact 41 

part of the circulation was carried on by paper 
money; that in consequence of the events of the 
Revolution, that resource was in a great measure 
destroyed, by being discredited, and that the same 
events had destroyed a large proportion of the 
moneyed and mercantile capital of the country, and 
of personal property generally. It was natural to 
think that the chasm created by these circumstances 
required to be supplied, and a just theory was suf 
ficient to demonstrate, that a funded debt would 
answer the end. To infer that it would have such 
an effect, was no more to maintain the general doc 
trine of " public debts being public blessings," than 
the saying, that paper emissions, by the authority of 
Government, were useful in the early periods of the 
country, was the maintaining that they would be 
useful in all the future stages of its progress. 

But to put the matter out of all doubt, and to show 
how destitute of candor the insinuations against the 
Secretary of the Treasury on this head have been, I 
have extracted, and shall insert here, some passages 
from some of his reports to the House of Representa 
tives, by which it will be seen that his conduct as well 
as his language have been in uniform opposition to 
the doctrine charged upon him. The length of these 
reports, it is probable, has prevented many well- 
disposed persons from being acquainted with their 
contents, the presumption of which emboldens the 
calumniators of public characters and measures to 
make assertions, of the falsehood of which the mere 
perusal of official documents would convict them. 

Extract from a report of the Secretary of the 

42 Alexander Hamilton 

Treasury on the subject of a provision for the public 
debt, presented the i4th of January, 1790. "Per 
suaded, as the Secretary is, that the proper funding of 
the present debt will render it a national blessing ; yet 
he is so far from acceding to the position, in the lati 
tude in which it is sometimes laid down, that ' public 
debts are public benefits, ' a position inviting to prod 
igality, and liable to dangerous abuse, that he ardently 
wishes to see it incorporated, as a fundamental maxim 
in the system of public credit of the United States, that 
the creation of debt should always be accompanied with 
the means of extinguishment. This he regards as the 
true secret for rendering public credit immortal. And 
he presumes that it is difficult to conceive a situation 
in which there may not be an adherence to the 
maxim. At least he feels an unfeigned solicitude that 
this may be attempted by the United States, and 
that they may commence their measures for the 
establishment of credit with the observance of 
it." 

Extracts from a report of the Secretary of the 
Treasury on manufactures, presented the 5th Decem 
ber, 1791. 

After using several arguments to illustrate the 
operation of a funded debt as capital, the Secretary 
concludes thus: " There are respectable individuals 
who, from a just aversion to an accumulation of public 
debt, are unwilling to concede to it any kind of 
utility, who can discover no good to alleviate the ill 
with which they suppose it pregnant, who cannot 
be persuaded that it ought in any sense to be viewed 
as an increase of capital, lest it should be inferred 

Fact 43 

that the more debt the more capital, the greater the 
burthens the greater the blessings of the community. " 

" But it interests the public councils to estimate 
every object as it truly is ; to appreciate how far the 
good in any measure is compensated by the ill, or the 
ill by the good; either of them is seldom unmixed." 
" Neither will it follow that an accumulation of debt is 
desirable, because a certain degree of it operates as 
capital. There may be a plethora in the political, as 
in the natural body; there may be a state of things in 
which any such artificial capital is unnecessary. The 
debt, too, may be swelled to such a size as that the 
greatest part of it may cease to be useful as a capital, 
serving only to pamper the dissipation of idle and dis 
solute individuals ; as that the sums required to pay 
the interest upon it may become oppressive, and be 
yond the means which a Government can employ, con 
sistently with its tranquillity, to raise them; as that 
the resources of taxation, to face the debt, may have 
been strained too far to admit of extensions adequate 
to exigencies which regard the public safety." 

"Where this critical point is, cannot be pro 
nounced; but it is impossible to believe that there is 
not such a point." 

"And as the vicissitudes of nations beget a per 
petual tendency to the accumulation of debt, there 
ought to be in every government a perpetual, anxious, 
and unceasing effort to reduce that which at any time 
exists, as fast as shall be practicable, consistently with 
integrity and good faith." 

Extracts from a report of the Secretary of the 
Treasury relative to additional supplies for carrying 

44 Alexander Hamilton 

on the Indian war, presented the i6th of March, 
1792. 

" The result of mature reflection is, in the mind of 
the Secretary, a strong conviction that the last of the 
three expedients which have been mentioned (that 
was the raising of the sum required by taxes) is to be 
preferred to either of the other two." 

" Nothing can more interest the national credit and 
prosperity than a constant and systematic attention 
to husband all the means previously possessed for extin 
guishing the present debt, and to avoid, as much as pos 
sible, the incurring any new debt." 

" Necessity alone, therefore, can justify the applica 
tion of any of the public property, other than the 
annual revenues, to the current service, or to the 
temporary and casual exigencies of the country, or 
the contracting of an additional debt, by loans, to 
provide for those exigencies." 

" Great emergencies might exist in which loans 
would be indispensable. But the occasions which 
will justify them must be truly of that description." 
" The present is not of such a nature. The sum to be 
provided is not of magnitude enough to furnish the 
plea of necessity." ''Taxes are never welcome to a 
community. They seldom fail to excite uneasy sen 
sations more or less extensive; hence a too strong 
propensity in the Government of nations to antici 
pate and mortgage the resources of posterity, 
rather than encounter the inconveniences of a present 
increase of taxes." 

" But this policy when not dictated by very peculiar 
circumstances, is of the worst kind. Its obvious tend- 

Fact 45 

ency is, by enhancing the permanent burthens of 
the people, to produce lasting distress, and its natural 
issue is in national bankruptcy." 

" It will be happy if the councils of this country, 
sanctioned by the voice of an enlightened com 
munity, shall be able to pursue a different course." 

Here is example added to precept. In pursuit of a 
doctrine, the opposite of that which is charged upon 
him, the Secretary did not scruple to hazard the 
popularity of his administration with a class of citi 
zens who, as a class, have been among the firmest 
friends of the Government, and the warmest ap 
provers of the measures which have restored public 
credit. The circumstances, indeed, have been a 
weapon dexterously wielded against him by his ene 
mies, who, in consequence of the increase of duties 
proposed, have represented him as the oppressor of 
trade. A certain description of men are for getting 
out of debt, yet are against all taxes for raising money 
to pay it off; they are among the foremost for car 
rying on war, and yet will have neither loans nor 
taxes. They are alike opposed to what creates debt 
and to what avoids it. 

In the first case their meaning is not difficult to be 
divined; in the last it would puzzle any man, not en 
dowed with the gift of second sight, to find it out, 
unless it be to quarrel with and pull down every man 
who will not consent to walk in their leading-strings ; 
or to throw all things into confusion. 

FACT. 

46 Alexander Hamilton 

PUBLIC DEBT 

(Communicated to the House of Representatives, December 3, 1792.) 
TREASURY DEPARTMENT, November 30, 1792. 

In obedience to two resolutions of the House of 
Representatives: one of the 2ist instant, directing 
the Secretary of the Treasury to report a plan for the 
redemption of so much of the public debt as, by the 
act entitled " An act making provision for the debt of 
the United States," the United States have reserved 
the right to redeem; the other of the 226. instant, 
directing him to report the plan of a provision for the 
reimbursement of a loan, made of the Bank of the 
United States, pursuant to the eleventh section of 
the act entitled "An act to incorporate the subscrib 
ers to the Bank of the United States," the said Sec 
retary respectfully submits the following report : 

The expediency of taking measures for the regular 
redemption of the public debt, according to the right 
which has been reserved to the Government, being 
wisely predetermined by the resolution of the House 
of Representatives referring the subject to the Secre 
tary, nothing remains for him but to endeavor to 
select and submit the most eligible means of provid 
ing for the execution of that important object. 

With this view the first inquiry which naturally 
presents itself is, whether the existing revenues are, 
or are not, adequate to the purpose. 

The estimates which accompany the report of the 
Secretary, of the i4th instant, will show that, during 
the continuance of the present Indian war, the appro 
priations for interest, and the demands for the cur- 

Public Debt 47 

rent service, are likely to exhaust the product of the 
existing revenues; though they afford a valuable 
surplus beyond the permanent objects of expenditure, 
which, it is hoped, may erelong be advantageously 
applied to accelerate the extinguishment of the debt. 

In the meantime, however, and until the restora 
tion of peace, the employment of that resource in this 
way must, of necessity, be suspended, and either the 
business of redemption must be deferred, or recourse 
must be had to other expedients. 

But did no such temporary necessity for resorting 
to other expedients exist, the doing of it would still be 
recommended by weighty considerations. It would 
appear, in the abstract, advisable to leave the surplus 
of the present revenues free, to be applied to such 
casual exigencies as may, from time to time, occur; 
to occasional purchases of the debt, when not ex 
hausted by such exigencies; to the payment of in 
terest on any balances which may be found due to 
particular States, upon the general settlement of ac 
counts ; and finally to the payment of interest on the 
deferred part of the debt, when the period for such 
payment arrives. There is a reasonable prospect 
that, if not diverted, it will be found adequate to the 
two last important purposes. 

Relinquishing, then, the idea of an immediate ap 
plication of the present revenues to the object in view, 
it remains to examine what other modes are in the 
option of the Legislature. 

Loans, from time to time, equal to the sums an 
nually redeemable, and bottomed on the same reve 
nues, which are now appropriated to pay the interest 

48 Alexander Hamilton 

upon those sums, offer themselves as one expedient 
which may be employed with a degree of advantage. 
As there is a probability of borrowing at a lower rate 
of interest, a material saving would result; and even 
this resource, if none better could be devised, ought 
not to be neglected. 

But it is obvious that to rely upon this resource 
alone would be to do little towards the final exonera 
tion of the nation. To stop at that point would con 
sequently be neither provident nor satisfactory. The 
interests as well as the expectations of the Union 
require something more effectual. 

The establishment of additional revenues is the 
remaining resource. This, if the business is to be 
undertaken in earnest, is unavoidable. And a full 
confidence may reasonably be entertained, that the 
community will see with satisfaction the employment 
of those means which alone can be effectual for 
accomplishing an end in itself so important and so 
much an object of general desire. It cannot fail to 
be universally felt that, if the end is to be attained, 
the necessary means must be employed. 

It can only be expected that care be taken to 
choose such as are liable to fewest objections, and 
that, in the modifications of the business in other re 
spects, due regard be had to the present and pro 
gressive circumstances of the country. 

Assuming it as the basis of a plan of redemp 
tion, that additional revenues are to be provided, 
the further inquiry divides itself into the following 
branches: 

i. Shall a revenue be immediately constituted, 

Public Debt 49 

equal to the full sum which may at present be re 
deemed, according to the terms of the contract? 

2. Shall a revenue be constituted from year to 
year, equal only to the interest of the sum to be re 
deemed in each year, coupling with this operation an 
annual loan commensurate with such sum? Or, 

3. Shall a revenue be constituted each year, so 
much exceeding the interest of the sum to be re 
deemed, as to be sufficient, within a short definite 
term of time, to discharge the principal itself; cou 
pling with this operation also an annual loan equal to 
the sum to be annually redeemed, and appropriating 
the revenue created to its discharge, within the term 
which shall have been predetermined? 

The first plan, besides being completely effectual, 
would be eventually most economical ; but consider 
ing to what a magnitude the revenues of the United 
States have grown in a short period, it is not easy to 
pronounce how far the faculty of paying might not be 
strained by any sudden considerable augmentation, 
wheresoever immediately placed; while the rapid 
progress of the country in population and resource 
seems to afford a moral certainty that the necessary 
augmentation may be made with convenience, by 
successive steps, within a moderate term of time, and 
invites to temporary and partial suspensions, as capa 
ble of conciliating the reasonable accommodation of 
the community with the vigorous prosecution of the 
main design. For these and for other reasons which 
will readily occur, the course of providing imme 
diately the entire sum to be redeemed is conceived 
not to be the most eligible. 

VOL. III.— 4. 

50 Alexander Hamilton 

The second plan, though much more efficacious 
than that of annual loans, bottomed on the revenues 
now appropriated for the payment of interest on the 
sums to be redeemed, does not appear to be suffi 
ciently efficacious. The schedule A will show the 
effect of it to the ist of January, 1802, when the de 
ferred debt will become redeemable in the propor 
tions stipulated. Supposing the investment of the 
interest which is each year liberated, together with 
that which has been and will be released by purchases 
pursuant to provisions heretofore made, in the pur 
chase of 6 per cent, stock; a sum of principal, equal 
to 2,043,837 dollars and 7 cents, would be sunk, and a 
clear annuity, equal to 459,212 dollars and 82 cents, 
would be created, towards further redemptions ; but 
the fund then necessary for the future progressive 
redemption of the debt, according to the right re 
served, would be 1,176,616 dollars and 44 cents, ex 
ceeding by 667,403 dollars and 62 cents the amount 
of the redeeming fund. Something more effectual 
than this is certainly desirable, and appears to be 
practicable. 

The last of the three plans best accords with the 
most accurate veiw which the Secretary has been able 
to take of the public interest. 

In its application it is of material consequence to 
endeavor to accomplish these two points: ist. The 
complete discharge of the sums annually redeemable 
within the period prefixed, and the reimbursement, 
within the same period, of all auxiliary loans which 
may have been made for that purpose. 2dly. The 
constituting, by the expiration of that period, a clear 

Public Debt 51 

annual fund, competent to the future redemption of 
the debt, to the extent of the right reserved. 

The period to which it is conceived the plan ought 
to refer, is the ist day of January, 1802 ; because then 
the first payment on account of the principal of the 
deferred debt may rightfully be made. 

In conformity to these ideas, the following plan is 
most respectfully submitted ; premising, that the sum 
redeemable for the first year of the six per cent, stock, 
bearing a present interest, is computed at 550,000 
dollars. 

Let an annual fund be constituted, during the pre 
sent session, equal to 103,199 dollars and 6 cents, to 
begin to accrue from the ist of January, 1793. Let 
the sum of 550,000 dollars be borrowed upon the 
credit of this annuity, reimbursable within five years 
— that is, by the ist of January, 1799. The sum 
borrowed to be applied, on the ist of January, 1794, 
to the first payment on account of the principal of the 
debt. 

The proposed annuity will reimburse the sum bor 
rowed, with interest, by the ist of January, 1799, and 
will, thenceforth, be free for any further application. 

The sum redeemable the second year — that is, on 
the ist of January, 1795, is computed at 583,000 

Let an annual fund be constituted, during the 
second session after the present, equal to 109,391 
dollars and 60 cents, to begin to accrue from the ist 
of January, 1794. Let the sum of 583,000 dollars be 
borrowed upon the credit of this annuity, reimburs 
able within five years — that is, by ist of January, 

52 Alexander Hamilton 

1800. The sum borrowed to be applied, on the first 
of January, 1795, to the second payment on account 
of the principal of the debt. 

The proposed annuity will reimburse the sum bor 
rowed, with interest, by the ist of January, 1800, and 
will be, thenceforth, free for any further application. 

The sum redeemable the third year — that is, on the 
ist of January, 1796, is computed at 617,980 dollars. 

Let an annual fund be constituted, during the third 
session after the present, equal to 115,955 dollars and 
17 cents, to begin to accrue from the ist of January, 

1795. Let the sum of 617,980 dollars be borrowed 
upon the credit of this annuity, reimbursable within 
five years — that is, by the ist of January, 1801 . The 
sum borrowed to be applied on the ist of January, 

1796, to the third payment on account of the princi 
pal of the debt. 

The proposed annuity will reimburse the sum bor 
rowed, with interest, by the ist of January, 1801. 

The sum redeemable the fourth year — that is, on 
the ist of January, 1797, is computed at 655,058 
dollars and 80 cents. 

Let an annual fund be constituted, during the 
fourth session after the present, equal to 122,912 
dollars and 48 cents, to begin to accrue from the ist 
of January, 1796. Let the sum of 655,058 dollars 
and 80 cents be borrowed upon the credit of this 
annuity, reimbursable within five years — that is, by 
the ist of January, 1802. The sum borrowed to be 
applied on the ist of January, 1797, to the fourth 
payment on account of the principal of the debt. 

The proposed annuity will reimburse the sum 

Public Debt 53 

borrowed, with interest, by the ist of January, 
1802. 

The sum redeemable the fifth year — that is, on the 
ist of January, 1798, is computed at 694,362 dollars 
and 33 cents. 

Let an annual fund be constituted, during the fifth 
session after the present, equal to 152,743 dollars and 
12 cents, to begin to accrue from the ist of January, 
1797. Let the sum of 694 , 3 6 2 dollars and 3 3 cents be 
borrowed upon the credit of this annuity, reimburs 
able within four years — that is, by the ist of January, 
1802. The sum borrowed to be applied on the ist of 
January, 1798, to the fifth payment on account of the 
principal of the debt. 

The proposed annuity will reimburse the sum bor 
rowed, with interest, by the ist of January, 1802. 

The sum redeemable the sixth year — that is, on the 
ist of January, 1799, is computed at 736,024 dollars 
and 7 cents. 

Let an annual fund be constituted, during the 
sixth session after the present, equal to 197,680 dol 
lars and 20 cents, to begin to accrue from the ist of 
January, 1798. Let the sum of 736,024 dollars and 7 
cents be borrowed upon the credit of this annuity, 
reimbursable within three years — that is, by the ist 
of January, 1802. The sum borrowed to be applied 
on the ist of January, 1799, to the sixth payment on 
account of the principal of the debt. 

The proposed annuity will reimburse the sum 
borrowed, with interest, by the ist of January, 

The sum redeemable the seventh year — that is, on 

54 Alexander Hamilton 

the ist of January, 1800, is computed at 780,185 dol 
lars and 52 cents. 

Let an annual fund be constituted, during the sev 
enth session after the present, equal to 272,848 dol 
lars and 38 cents, to begin to accrue from the ist of 
January, 1799. Let the sum of 780,185 dollars and 
52 cents be borrowed upon the credit of this annuity, 
reimbursable within two years — that is, by the ist of 
January, 1802. The sum borrowed to be applied on 
the ist of January, 1800, to the seventh payment on 

The proposed annuity will reimburse the sum bor 
rowed, with interest, by the ist of January, 1802. 

The sum redeemable the eighth year — thatis, on the 
ist of January, 1801, is computed at 826,996 dollars 
and 65 cents. 

Let an annual fund be constituted, during the 
eighth session after the present, equal to 423,583 dol 
lars and 54 cents, to begin to accrue from the ist of 
January, 1800. Let the sum of 826,996 dollars and 
65 cents be borrowed upon the credit of this annuity, 
reimbursable within one year — that is, on the ist of 
January, 1802. The sum borrowed to be applied on 
the ist of January, 1801, to the eighth payment on 

The proposed annuity will reimburse the sum bor 
rowed, with interest, on the ist of January, 1802. 

The sum redeemable the ninth year — that is, on 
the ist of January, 1802, is computed at 1,126,616 
dollars and 44 cents. 

The then existing means for the discharge of this 
sum, arising from the operation of the plan, will be : 

Public Debt 55 

i st. The amount of the annuity constituted the 
third year, which will have been liberated by reim 
bursement of the third loan. 2d. The arrears of 
interest not previously appropriated, and which are 
computed at 200,000 dollars. 

There will consequently be a deficiency, this year, 
of 810,661 dollars and 27 cents, which will require to 
be supplied by a temporary loan, to be reimbursed 
out of the surplus of the fund which, on the ist of 
January, 1802, will exist for future redemptions, and 
which surplus will be sufficient to reimburse this 
temporary loan in about thirteen years and a half. 

It may be proper to remark, that this deficiency 
upon one year is suffered to exist, to avoid an 
unnecessary augmentation of revenue materially 
beyond the sum permanently requisite. No incon 
venience ensues, because this temporary deficiency is 
made up by the surplus of the permanent fund within 
the period mentioned. And that fund, from the 
ist of January, 1802, is adequate to all future re 
demptions, in the full proportion permitted by the 
contract. 

The table in the schedule B, will show, in one view, 
the principles and operation of this plan. 

The schedule C will exhibit the means of constitut 
ing the several annuities proposed to be established. 
From it will be seen, that the proposed annuities are 
to be composed, partly of taxes, to be successively 
laid at the respective periods of creating them, partly 
of the surplus dividend to be expected on the stock 
belonging to the Government in the Bank of the 
United States, beyond the interest to be paid on ac- 

56 Alexander Hamilton 

count of it, and partly of the funds heretofore pledged 
for' the payment of interest, which will have been 
liberated upon so much of the debt as will have been 
extinguished. 

The respective amounts of the taxes to be severally 
laid will be : 

In the first year .... $ 43,199 06 

In the second year . . . 109,391 60 

In the third year . . . 115,955 17 

In the fourth year . . . 102,912 48 

In the fifth year . . . 102,743 12 

In the sixth year . . . 107,680 20 

In the seventh year . . . 109,649 32 

Making together . . $691,53095 

The sum which will have been redeemed prior to 
the ist day of January, 1802, will be $5,443,607 37. 
The sum redeemable on the ist of January, 1802, will 
be $1,126,616 44; and the fund which will, thence 
forth, exist for the purpose of future redemption (as is 
particularly shown by the schedule D), will be $i,- 
210,744 34, exceeding the sum strictly necessary by 
$84,127 90 — a fund which, including the interest, 
from year to year liberated, will, as already intimated, 
be completely adequate to the final redemption of the 
whole amount of the six per cent, stock (as well the 
deferred as that bearing a present interest), according 
to the right which has been reserved for that purpose. 

In the meantime, a further impression will be made 
upon the debt, by the investment of the residue of the 
funds heretofore established, in the purchase of it; 
and it is hoped, that the restoration of peace with the 

Public Debt 57 

Indians will enable the application of the surplus of 
the existing revenues, together with the proceeds of 
the ceded lands in our Western territory, to the same 
object. These, whenever they can be brought into 
action, will be important aids, materially accelerating 
the ultimate redemption of the entire debt. The em 
ployment of these resources, when it can be done, 
by increasing the interest fund, will proportionably 
lessen the necessity of using the resource of taxation, 
for creating the proposed annuities — if the Govern 
ment shall judge it advisable to avail itself of the sub 
stitute which may accrue from that circumstance. 

Having now given a general view of the plan which 
has appeared, upon the whole, the most eligible, it is 
necessary, in the next place, to present to the con 
sideration of the House the requisite funds for com 
mencing the execution of it. These will embrace a 
provision for the first annuity only, that alone requir 
ing, by the plan, immediate provision. With regard 
to a provision for the subsequent annuities, which is 
proposed to be successive, the Secretary will content 
himself with this general observation, that he dis 
cerns no intrinsic difficulty in making provision for 
them, as fast as shall be necessary, with due con 
venience to the people, and consistently with the idea 
of abstaining from taxing lands and buildings (with 
the stock and implements of farms), reserving them 
as a resource for those great emergencies which call 
for a full exertion of all the contributive faculties of a 
country. 

The following means, for constituting the first an 
nuity, are respectfully submitted, viz. : 

58 Alexander Hamilton 

Annual surplus of the dividend on the stock of Gov 
ernment in the Bank of the United States, beyond the 
interest to be paid out of the said dividend, estimated 
at $60,000. 

Tax on horses, kept or used for the purpose of rid 
ing, or of drawing any coach, chariot, phaeton, chaise, 
chair, sulky, or other carriage for conveyance of per 
sons, excepting and exempting all horses which are 
usually and chiefly employed for the purposes of hus 
bandry, or in drawing wagons, wains, drays, carts, or 
other carriages, for the transportation of produce, 
goods, merchandise, and commodities, or in carrying 
burthens in the course of the trade or occupation of 
the persons to whom they respectively belong, and 
the horses of persons in the military service of the 
United States, viz. : 

For every horse, not above excepted and exempted, 
at the rate of one dollar per annum where only one is 
used or kept by the same person, with an addition of 
fifty cents per annum per horse, where more than one 
and not more than two horses are kept or used by the 
same person; with an addition of one dollar per 
annum per horse, where more than two and not more 
than four are kept or used by the same person ; and, 
with an addition of one dollar and a half dollar per 
horse, per annum, where more than four are kept and 
used by the same person. Provided, That this addi 
tion shall not be made, in respect to horses usually 
employed in public stages, for the conveyance of 
passengers. 

This progressive increase of rates on the higher 
numbers has reference to the presumption of greater 

Public Debt 59 

wealth, which arises from the possession of such 
higher numbers. 

The product of this tax will, probably, be about 
equal to the residue of the proposed annuity, which is 
$43,199 06. How near the truth this estimate may 
prove, experiment alone can, in so untried a case, de 
cide. An aid to this fund may be derived from the 
surplus dividend on the bank stock, for the half year 
ending the last of December next, which, it is pre 
sumed, will be not less than $20,000. Should a de 
ficiency appear, upon trial, it can be supplied by a 
future provision. 

Proper regulations for the collection of this tax will, 
it is believed, be found not difficult, if the tax itself 
shall be deemed eligible. Its simplicity has been a 
considerable recommendation of it. Qualified as it 
is, it is not likely to fall on any but such who can 
afford to pay it. The exemption from the tax, in 
regard to horses which are appropriated to the pur 
poses of husbandry, or of any trade or occupation, 
or to the transportation of commodities, seems to 
obviate all reasonable objection. 

If, however, there should appear to the Legislature 
reasons for preferring a tax on carriages for pleasure, 
which, it may be observed, will operate on nearly the 
same description of persons, the sum required may, 
it is believed, be produced from the following ar 
rangements of rates, viz.: Upon every coach, the 
annual sum of four dollars. Upon every chariot, the 
annual sum of three dollars. Upon every other 
carriage for the conveyance of persons, having four 
wheels, the annual sum of two dollars; and, upon 

60 Alexander Hamilton 

every chair, sulky, or other carriage for the conveyance 
of persons, having less than four wheels, the annual 
sum of one dollar. 

The collection of this tax will be as simple and 
easy, and perhaps more certain, than that which has 
been primarily submitted. 

With regard to the second object referred to the 
Secretary, namely, the plan of a provision for the re 
imbursement of the loan made of the Bank of the 
United States, pursuant to the eleventh section of 
the act by which it is incorporated, the following is 
respectfully submitted, to wit : That power be given 
by law to borrow the sum due to be applied to that 
reimbursement : and that so much of the dividend on 
the stock of the Government, in the bank, as may be 
necessary, be appropriated for paying the interest of 
the sum to be borrowed. 

From this operation it is obvious that a saving to 
the Government will result, equal to the difference 
between the interest which will be payable on the 
new loan, and that which is payable on the sum now 
due to the bank. If the proposed loan can be ef 
fected at the rate of those last made in Holland, the 
net saving to the Government may be computed at 
the annual sum of $35,000; which saving, whatever 
it may be, is contemplated as part of the means for 
constituting the proposed annuities. 

The benefit of this arrangement will be accelerated 
if provision be made for the application of the pro 
ceeds of any loans, heretofore obtained, to the pay 
ment suggested on the condition of replacing the 
sums, which may be so applied, out of the proceeds of 

Public Debt 61 

the loan or loans which shall be made pursuant to the 
power above proposed to be given. 

It will also conduce to the general end in view if the 
Legislature shall think proper to authorize the invest 
ment of the funds, destined for purchases of the debt, 
in purchases of six-per-cent. stock, at the market 
price, though above par. The comparative prices of 
the several kinds of stock have been, and frequently 
may be, such as to render it more profitable to make 
investments in the six per cents, than in any other 
species of stock. 

All which is humbly submitted. 

ALEXANDER HAMILTON, 
Secretary of the Treasury. 

LOANS 

IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES 
OF THE UNITED STATES, 

WEDNESDAY, January 23, 1793. 

Resolved, That the President of the United States 
be requested to cause to be laid before this House 
copies of the authorities under which loans have 
been negotiated, pursuant to the acts of the 4th and 
1 2th of August, 1790, together with copies of the au 
thorities directing the application of the moneys 
borrowed. 

Resolved, That the President of the United States 
be requested to cause this House to be furnished with 
the names of the persons by whom and to whom the 
respective payments of the French debt have been 
made in France, pursuant to the act for that purpose, 

62 Alexander Hamilton 

specifying the dates of the respective drafts upon the 
commissioners in Holland, and the dates of the re 
spective payments of the debt. A similar state 
ment is requested respecting the debts to Spain and 
Holland. 

Resolved, That the Secretary of the Treasury be 
directed to lay before this House an account ex 
hibiting half monthly the balances between the 
United States and the Bank of the United States, in 
cluding the several branch banks, from the com 
mencement of those institutions to the end of the year 
1792. 

Resolved, That the Secretary of the Treasury be 
directed to lay before this House an account of all 
moneys which may have come into the sinking fund, 
from the commencement of that institution to the 
present time, specifying the particular fund from 
which they have accrued, and exhibiting, half yearly, 
the sums uninvested, and where deposited. 

Resolved, That the Secretary of the Treasury be 
directed to report to this House the balance of all 
unapplied revenues at the end of the year 1792, 
specifying whether in money or bonds, and noting 
where the money is deposited: That he also make 
report of all unapplied moneys which may have been 
obtained by the several loans authorized by law, and 
where such moneys are now deposited.1 

1 These resolutions, following certain others offered a month before, 
were introduced to discredit and break down Hamilton. They were 
instigated by Jefferson, with the advice and assistance of Madison, and 
were brought forward in the House by their tool, Giles. This and the 
following reports, which answered everything completely, were pre 
pared with incredible rapidity, and effectually crushed the assailants. 

Loans 63 

REPORT OP THE SECRETARY OF THE TREASURY IN PURSUANCE OP 
THE FOREGOING RESOLUTIONS 

TREASURY DEPARTMENT, February 4, 1793. 

SIR: 

I have lost no time in preparing, as far as has been 
practicable, consistently with the course of facts, the 
several statements required by the resolutions of the 
House of Representatives of the 23d of last month; 
and I have concluded to add to them such further 
statements as appeared to me necessary to convey 
fully the information which is understood to be the 
object of those resolutions. It was my first intention 
to submit these statements collectively, with such ex 
planatory remarks as the occasion might demand; 
but finding, on experiment, from the extent and 
variety of the matter involved in the resolutions, that 
more time will be requisite for a full development of 
it than I had anticipated, considerations of weight 
in my mind have determined me to present the dif 
ferent parts of the subject successively. Among 
other advantages, incident to this course of proceed 
ing, will be that of having it in my power to give a 
more accurate and mature view of the entire subject, 
without too great a dereliction of the current business 
of the Department. In executing the task I propose 
to myself, I shall rely on the indulgence of the House 
to a latitude of observation corresponding with the 
peculiar circumstances of the case. 

The resolutions to which I am to answer were not 
moved without a pretty copious display of the reasons 
on which they were founded. These reasons are be 
fore the public, through the channel of the press. 
They are of a nature to excite attention; to beget 

64 Alexander Hamilton 

alarm; to inspire doubts. Deductions of a very ex 
traordinary complexion may, without forcing the 
sense, be drawn from them. 

I feel it incumbent upon me to meet the sugges 
tions which have been thrown out, with decision and 
explicitness. And while I hope I shall let fall no 
thing inconsistent with that cordial and unqualified 
respect which I feel for the House of Representatives; 
while I acquiesce in the sufficiency of the motives 
that induced on their part the giving a prompt and 
free course to the investigation proposed, I cannot 
but resolve to treat the subject with a freedom which 
is due to truth, and to the consciousness of a pure zeal 
for the public interest. 

I begin with the last of the four resolutions, be 
cause it is that which seeks information relating to 
the most delicate and important of the suggestions 
that have been hazarded. 

Here, however, I have to regret the utter im 
possibility of a strict compliance with the terms 
of the resolution. The practicability of such a 
compliance would suppose nothing less than that, 
since the last day of December, 1792, all the ac 
counts of all the collectors of the customs and 
other officers of the revenue throughout the whole 
extent of the United States could be digested, 
made up, and forwarded to the Treasury ; could be 
examined there, settled, and carried into the public 
books, under their proper heads; in a word, that 
all the accounts of the revenues, receipts, and 
expenditures of this extensive country would have 
passed through a complete exhibition, examination, 

Loans 65 

and adjustment within the short period of twenty- 
three days. 

It was made (as I presume from the result) satis 
factorily to appear to a committee of the House of 
Representatives, who were charged during the last 
session with framing a direction to the Treasury for 
bringing forward an annual account of receipts and 
expenditures, that the course of public business 
would not admit of the rendering of such an account 
in less than nine months after the expiration of each 
year; in conformity to which idea their report was 
formed and an order of the House established. 

I need do nothing more to evince the impractica 
bility of an exact compliance with the resolution in 
question, than to observe that it is even more com 
prehensive (though with less detail) than the order 
of the House to which I have alluded. 

To evince, nevertheless, my readiness to do all in 
my power toward fulfilling the views of the House 
and throwing light upon the transactions of the De 
partment, I shall now offer to their inspection sundry 
statements,1 marked A, AB, B, C, D, E, F, which 
contain, as far as is at this time possible, the informa 
tion desired, and with sufficient certainty and ac 
curacy to afford satisfaction on the points of inquiry 
involved in the resolution. 

The statement A shows in abstract the whole of the 
receipts into, and expenditures from, the Treasury, 
commencing with the first of January, and ending 
with the last of December, 1792, corresponding with 

1 For these statements in full, see State Papers, "Finance," vol. i., p. 
1 88, et seq. 

VOL. III.— 5. 

66 Alexander Hamilton 

the accounts of the Treasurer. These accounts have 
been regularly settled up to the end of September, 
and copies have been laid before the two Houses of 
Congress. The account for the quarter terminating 
with the year has not yet passed through the forms 
of settlement, but is under examination, and will, no 
doubt, be settled as it stands ; the manner of conduct 
ing the business, and the usual care and accuracy of 
the officer concerned, leaving very little room to appre 
hend misstatement or error. A copy of this account 
is herewith submitted, in the schedule marked C. 

This statement takes up the balance of the general 
account of receipts and expenditures to the end of the 
year 1791, as reported to the House of Representa 
tives within the first week of the present session, and 
continuing it down to the end of 1792, shows a bal 
ance then in the Treasury of seven hundred and 
eighty-three thousand four hundred and forty-four 
dollars and fifty-one cents. 

The statement B is a more comprehensive docu 
ment. It is a general account of INCOME and ex 
penditure. It shows not merely the actual receipts 
of money into the Treasury, but the whole amount of 
the national revenues, from the commencement of 
the present Government, to the conclusion of the 
year 1792, as well outstanding as collected; the pro 
ceeds of domestic loans; the whole amount of the 
sums which have been drawn into the United States, 
on account of the foreign loans ; and all other moneys, 
from whatever source, which have accrued within the 
period embraced by the statement. 

These items form the debit side of the account, 

Loans 67 

amounting to seventeen millions eight hundred and 
seventy-nine thousand eight hundred and twenty- 
five dollars and thirty-three cents. 

The credit side consists of two items: i. The whole 
amount of the actual expenditures to the end of the 
year 1 791, as stated in the general account of receipts 
and expenditures before referred to. 2. The whole 
amount of the actual expenditures during the year 
1792, as specified generally in the statement A, and 
particularly in the several quarterly accounts of the 
Treasurer, amounting to twelve millions seven hun 
dred and sixty-five thousand one hundred and 
twenty-eight dollars and eighty- three cents. 

The balance of this account of income and expend 
iture is consequently five millions one hundred and 
fourteen thousand six hundred and ninety-six dollars 
and fifty cents ; which corresponds with the excess of 
the public income (including the proceeds of loans, 
foreign and domestic) beyond the actual expenditure, 
or, more properly speaking, disbursement, to the end 
of the year 1792. This of course is exclusive of those 
parts of the proceeds of foreign loans which have been 
left in Europe, to be applied there; the amount, ap 
plication, and balance of which are exhibited, as far 
as they are yet known at the Treasury, in the state 
ment No. i, of my late report on foreign loans. 

This balance, as noted in the statement B, is com 
posed of the following particulars : 

1. Cash in the Treasury, per statement A . $783,444 51 

2. Cash in the Bank of the United States, 

and the offices of discount and de 
posit of New York and Baltimore, 

68 Alexander Hamilton 

not yet passed to the account of the 

Treasurer, per statement AB W; . 605,883 08 

3. Proceeds of Amsterdam bills remain 

ing in deposit in the Bank of North 
America, including the sum of one 
hundred and fifty-six thousand five 
hundred and ninety-five dollars and 
fifty-six cents, advanced by the bank, 
without interest, which is credited in 
the general account of receipts and 
expenditures, statement A . . 177,998 80 

4. Proceeds of Amsterdam bills sold, but 

not yet received . . . . 614,593 02 

5. Cash in hands of collectors of customs, 

per abstract D . . . . 151,851 25 

6. Bonds unpaid at the end of the year 

one thousand seven hundred and 
ninety-two, on account of the duties 
on imports and tonnage, and falling 
due between that time and May, one 
thousand seven hundred and ninety- 
four, per abstract E . . . 2,442,069 15 

7. Uncollected residue of duties on spirits 

distilled within the United States, per 

abstract F 341,057 19 

Making, together . . $5,116,897 oo 

This aggregate somewhat exceeds the balance of 
the account, but in a case where estimates must 
necessarily supply the deficiency of ascertained re 
sults, differences of this nature are of course. It 
is at the same time satisfactory to observe that the 
estimates which have been heretofore communicated 

Loans 69 

are proved, by the official documents already re 
ceived, to have been essentially correct. 

It will no doubt readily occur to the House, that a 
very small part of the excess which has been stated is 
a real surplus of income. There remain to be satis 
fied numerous objects of expenditure, charged upon 
the fund by the appropriations which have been 
made, that cannot fail ultimately to exhaust it, 
probably within four or five hundred thousand dol 
lars, which will be embraced in the appropriations for 
the service of the year one thousand seven hundred 
and ninety-three. A further explanation on this 
point is reserved for future communication. 

A due comprehension of the statements now pre 
sented must obviate every idea of a balance unac 
counted for, in whatever sense the allegation may 
have been intended to be made. 

If there was before any obscurity on the subject, it 
was certainly not the fault of this Department. Till 
the last resolutions, no call has been made upon it 
which rendered it proper to exhibit a general view of 
the public moneys and funds, or to show the amount 
and situation of such as were unapplied. Particular 
calls for particular objects were made, which, as I 
conceive, were complied with; but they were not 
comprehensive enough to embrace a disclosure of 
that nature. 

It could not therefore with propriety have been 
alleged that there was a balance unaccounted for; to 
infer it from documents which contained only a part 
of the necessary information was not justifiable. 
Nor could it otherwise happen, than that conclusions 

7o Alexander Hamilton 

wholly erroneous would be the consequences of tak 
ing such imperfect data for guides. 

It may be of use, by way of elucidation, to point 
out some of the most palpable features of the error 
which has been entertained. 

The following items are stated as the basis of the 
supposed deficiency: 

Residue of the proceeds of the foreign bills 
supposed to be unapplied (after deduct 
ing the sums furnished for St. Domingo, 
and the amount of the debt to the 
foreign officers) . . . . . $1,668,190 

Surplus of sinking fund, meaning, I presume, 
that part of the surplus of the revenue to 
the end of the year 1790, which had not 
been applied in purchases . . . 400,000 

Surplus of revenue of the year 1792, as re 
ported . . 277,385 

$2,345>575 
Deduct, in bank, meaning, I presume, the 

balance of the Treasurer's cash account . 790,642 

Balance, not accounted for . $1,5 5 4, 93 3 

It appears, in the first place, to have been over 
looked that, in statement No. 3 of my late report 
concerning foreign loans, mention is made that on the 
3d of January there remained to be received of the 
proceeds of the foreign bills six hundred and thirty- 
two thousand one hundred and thirty- two dollars and 
two cents; consequently, that sum could not be con 
sidered as in the Treasury, and ought to be deducted 
from the supposed deficiency. 

Loans 71 

Among the official papers, which it is intimated 
were consulted, was an original account, rendered by 
the Bank of the United States, of the sales of Amster 
dam bills, showing a sum of six hundred and five thou 
sand eight hundred and eighty- three dollars and eight 
cents, as having been received by the bank and two 
of its offices of discount and deposit, for the proceeds 
of those bills. Had the document been understood, 
it would have been known that this sum was in bank 
over and above the balance of the Treasurer's cash ac 
count ; and this also would have served to account for 
a large part of the supposed deficiency — namely, six 
hundred and five thousand eight hundred and eighty- 
three dollars and eight cents. The course of this 
transaction will be hereafter explained. 

But, among the misconceptions which have ob 
tained, what relates to the surplus of revenue of the 
year 1792, is not the least striking. The laws inform 
(and consequently no information on that point from 
this Department could have been necessary) that 
credits are allowed upon the duties on imports, of 
four, six, nine, twelve months, and, in some cases, of 
two years. Reason dictates, that a surplus, in such 
case, must be considered as postponed in the collec 
tion or receipt, till all appropriations upon the fund 
have been first satisfied. The account of receipts 
and expenditures to the end of 1791, in possession of 
the House, shows that, at that time, no less a sum 
than one million eight hundred and twenty-eight 
thousand two hundred and eighty-nine dollars and 
twenty-eight cents of the antecedent duties were 
outstanding in bonds. How, then, could it have 

72 Alexander Hamilton 

happened that the surplus of 1792 was sought for in 
the Treasury at the very instant of the expiration of the 
year? I forbear to attempt to trace the source of a 
mistake so extraordinary! 

Let me, however, add, that, of the surplus in ques 
tion, one hundred and seventy-two thousand five 
hundred and eighty-four dollars and eighty-two cents 
are not payable till April and May, 1794, as will be 
seen by the abstract E. 

Thus I have not only furnished a just and affirm 
ative view of the real situation of the public account, 
but have likewise shown, I trust in a conspicuous 
manner, fallacies enough in the statement, from 
which the inference of an unaccounted-for balance is 
drawn, to evince that it is one tissue of error. In this 
I might have gone still further, there being scarcely a 
step of the whole process which is not liable to the 
imputation of misapprehension. But I wish not un 
necessarily to weary the patience of the House. 

Another circumstance, to which importance has 
been given, and which was noticed in connection with 
the suggestion last discussed, is a disagreement be 
tween a memorandum in the Treasurer's bank-book, 
and the statement reported by me of the amount of 
bills drawn at the Treasury upon the foreign fund. 
A disagreement no doubt exists, and to the extent of 
five millions seven hundred and sixty thousand one 
hundred and thirty-eight florins or guilders. 

But the following circumstances contain the solu 
tion of this disquieting appearance. 

There will be found in the statement A two several 
credits, each for two millions of dollars, as for mon- 

Loans 73 

eys received into the Treasury, with corresponding 
debits of equal sums, as for moneys paid out of the 
Treasury. 

But neither the one nor the other did in reality take 
place. The whole is a mere operation, to accomplish 
the purposes of the eleventh section of the " act to in 
corporate the subscribers to the Bank of the United 
States," without an inconvenient and unnecessary 
displacement of funds. 

That section authorizes a subscription to the stock 
of the bank, on account of the Government, not ex 
ceeding in amount two millions of dollars, and pro 
vides for the payment of it out of the moneys which 
should be borrowed by virtue of either of the acts of 
the 4th and i2th of August, 1790; the first making 
provision for the public debt, the last for reducing it ; 
enjoining, at the same time, that a loan should be 
made of the bank to an equal amount, to replace the 
moneys which were to be applied to the payment of 
the subscription. 

It is evident that nothing could have been more 
useless (at the same time that it would have been at 
tended with obvious disadvantages to the Govern 
ment), than actually to draw from Europe, out of the 
moneys borrowed there, the sum necessary for the 
payment of the subscription to the bank, and again 
to remit, out of the loan which was to be obtained of 
the bank, a sufficient sum to replace such moneys, or 
such part of them as may have been destined for the 
foreign object. Loss upon exchange, in consequence 
of overstocking the market with bills ; loss in interest, 
by the delays incident to the operation; and which 

74 Alexander Hamilton 

would necessarily have suspended the useful employ 
ment of the funds for a considerable time : these are 
some of the disadvantages to the Government. To 
the bank alone could any benefit have accrued ; which 
would have been in proportion to the delay in restor 
ing or applying the fund to its primitive destination. 
Such an operation, therefore, could only have been 
justified by an indisposition on the part of the bank 
to facilitate the principal object, without the inter 
vention of actual payment. 

But no such disposition existed. On this, as on 
every other occasion, a temper liberal toward the 
Government has characterized the conduct of the 
directors of that institution. 

It was accordingly proposed by me, and agreed to 
by them, that the object to be accomplished should 
be carried into effect by a merely formal arrange 
ment. In this, however, it was necessary to consult 
the injunctions of law, and the principles of the con 
stitution of the Treasury Department. 

These points then were to be effected: a payment 
of the subscription money, to vest the Government 
with the property of the stock; possession of the 
means of paying it, which were to be derived from 
the foreign fund, and of course were first to be in the 
Treasury before payment could be made ; the replac 
ing what should be taken from that fund by a loan of 
the bank. 

The following plan for these purposes was devised 
and executed by previous concert: 

The Treasurer drew bills upon our commissioners 
in Amsterdam for the sums requisite to complete the 

Loans 75 

payment on account of the subscription. These bills 
were purchased by the bank, and warrants in favor of 
the Treasurer upon the bank served, to place the pro 
ceeds in the Treasury. Warrants afterward issued 
upon the Treasurer, in favor of the bank, for the 
amount of the subscription money, which was re 
ceipted for on the part of the bank as paid. Other 
warrants then issued in favor of the Treasurer upon 
the bank, for equal sums, as upon account of a loan to 
the Government, which warrants were satisfied by a 
re-delivery to the Treasurer of the bills that had been 
drawn upon the commissioners. In the last place, 
warrants were drawn upon the Treasurer to replace 
the moneys supposed by the arrangement to be drawn 
from the foreign fund, which perfected the operation. 
But, from the detail which has been given, it will be 
seen that, in fact, no moneys were either withdrawn 
from, or returned to, that fund. The bills were can 
celled, annexed to the warrants, and are lodged in the 
Treasury as vouchers of the transaction. 

These bills were for two separate sums, each two 
millions four hundred and seventy-five thousand 
guilders, equal to a million of dollars; the payment 
having been divided into two parts, upon certain 
equitable considerations, relative to the dividend of 
the first half year. 

This transaction explains four millions nine hund 
red and fifty thousand guilders of the sum which 
forms the disagreement between the memorandum 
in the Treasurer's bank-book and the statement re 
ported by me. 

The residue is thus explained: The sum of one 

76 Alexander Hamilton 

million two hundred and thirty-seven thousand five 
hundred guilders, directed to be drawn for, on the 
thirtieth of November, was directed to be comprised 
in one or more bills, as the bank should desire. It 
was at first placed in one bill, but this bill was after 
ward returned, with a request that it might be con 
verted into smaller sums. The bill returned was 
cancelled, and, in lieu of it, there had been furnished, 
prior to the ist of January, of the present year, nine 
hundred and thirty-four thousand five hundred guild 
ers; the balance, three hundred and three thousand, 
then remaining to be furnished. The sum of nine 
hundred and thirty-four thousand five hundred 
guilders, consequently, appears twice in the memo 
randum. 

These two sums, of four millions five hundred and 
ninety thousand, and nine hundred and thirty-four 
thousand guilders, exceed the difference in question, 
by one hundred and twenty-four thousand three 
hundred and sixty-two guilders. 

The Treasurer informs me, that there are two bills 
not included in the memorandum : one for one hund 
red and twenty-three thousand seven hundred and 
fifty, and the other for six hundred and twelve guild 
ers; which make up the above-mentioned excess. 
The former of these two bills was furnished to the 
Secretary of State for the purpose contemplated by 
the third section of the act of the last session, en 
titled " An act making certain appropriations therein 
specified." 

Is it not truly matter of regret that so formal an ex 
planation, on such a point, should have been made 

Loans 77 

requisite ? Could no personal inquiry, of either of the 
officers concerned, have superseded the necessity of 
publicly calling the attention of the House of Repre 
sentatives to an appearance, in truth, so little signifi 
cant? Was it seriously supposable that there could 
be any real difficulty in explaining that appearance, 
when the very disclosure of it proceeded from a volun 
tary act of the head of this Department? 
With perfect respect, 

I have the honor to be, sir, 
Your most obedient and most humble servant, 

ALEXANDER HAMILTON, 
Secretary of the Treasury. 

The Hon. Jonathan Trumbull, Esq., 

Speaker of the House of Representatives. 

P. S. — Another statement of income and expendi 
ture having been made, which presents the subject 
under another aspect, but agreeing in the result with 
the statement B is marked B a.1 

LOANS 

Communicated to the Senate, February 6, 1793. 

TREASURY DEPARTMENT, February 5, 1793. 

SIR: 

In pursuance of the first part of the order of the 
Senate, of the 23d of January past, I have the honor 
to send, herewith, sundry statements, marked A, AB, 
B, Ba, D, E, F,2 and I beg the permission of the 

1 For these schedules see State Papers, " Finance," vol. i., p. 196. 
3 For these statements, see State Papers, " Finance," vol. i., pp. 
187-190; 195-200. 

78 Alexander Hamilton 

Senate to add the copy of a letter dated yesterday, 
which served to transmit duplicates of the same docu 
ments to the House of Representatives, and which 
contains some explanations of them, a repetition of 
which, here, will be, thereby, rendered unnecessary. 
The document C, referred to in that letter, was also 
sent to the House of Representatives, but being of 
considerable length a duplicate is not yet ready, and 
I did not think it advisable to detain the other papers 
till it was ready. 

The documents, now transmitted, will answer the 
whole of the inquiry contained in the first part of 
the order above referred to, except what regards a 
distribution of the expenditures, under each head of 
appropriation, which is in preparation, and will be 
forwarded as soon as it can be ready. 

The situation in which I am placed renders further 
delay absolutely necessary to the fulfilment of the 
second part of the order. 

There is a point in my letter of the i6th of January 
to the Senate, concerning which some explanation is 
requisite. I stated, as one motive to the joint nego 
tiation of the loans, under both acts, " an intimation 
from our bankers in Holland, that a distinction might 
prove an embarrassment, being a novelty, the reason 
of which would not be obvious to the money-lenders. " 
This was done from memory, without recurrence to 
documents, and in a degree of hurry occasioned by 
my anxiety for the speedy passing of the appropria 
tion bill, and upon a revision, proves to be not ac 
curate. The mistake arose in the following manner. 
My original idea was, to maintain a separation be- 

Loans 79 

tween the two acts. This will appear from my letter 
of the 28th of August, 1790, to our bankers, in which 
I express a desire that they would endeavor to place 
part of the first loan upon one act, and another part 
upon the other act. But they did not carry this idea 
into execution, for the reason assigned in their an 
swer, now before the Senate ; which is, that the sub 
division proposed would, under the circumstances 
of the case, tend to excite speculations and doubts 
among the money-lenders. 

But, prior to the receipt of their answer, I had 
made further inquiry, and had reflected more on the 
subject. The result of my inquiry was that the 
money-lenders, having been accustomed to lend on 
the general credit of the Government borrowing, with 
a sort of general pledge of its revenues and resources, 
the attempt to bottom a loan upon any particular 
law might, as a novelty, occasion some hesitation and 
embarrassment among them; especially as they are 
known to be a description of men much influenced by 
habit and precedent; and the conclusions, from more 
full reflection, were that the distinguishing of the 
loans with reference to each act might not only em 
barrass the business in the first stages of negotiation, 
but might interfere with an application of the pro 
ceeds of the loans in the most convenient and bene 
ficial manner, according to circumstances. 

On these considerations I abandoned my original 
intention, and in my first instruction to Mr. Short, 
was silent on the point. 

These different positions of the subject in the 
mind, at different times, and what actually took 

8o Alexander Hamilton 

place, with regard to the first loan, produced some 
confusion in the recollection of facts, and led me to 
assign as a cause what had been only a collateral cir 
cumstance, and to ascribe to the bankers intimations, 
or rather information, which I had received from 
other quarters. 

I submit this explanation of the matter to the can 
dor of the Senate, and have the honor to be with 
perfect respect, 

Sir, your most obedient servant, 

ALEXANDER HAMILTON. 

The Vice-President of the United States and 
President of the Senate. 

Communicated to the Senate, February 6, 1793. 

TREASURY DEPARTMENT, February 5, 1793. 

SIR: 

By order of the President of the United States, I 
have the honor to transmit herewith: 

1. Copies of a power given by him to the Secretary 
of the Treasury for the time being, dated the 28th of 
August, 1790, for the negotiation of the loans author 
ized by the laws of the 4th and i2th of August, 1790, 
and of certain instructions relative thereto, dated on 
the same day. 

2. Copies of an authority, founded upon the power 
of the President, from me to William Short, Esquire, 
dated the ist of September, 1790, and of sundry let 
ters from me to the said William Short, of dates from 
the 29th of May, 1790, to the 3ist of December, 1792, 

Loans 8 1 

inclusively, relating to the negotiation and applica 
tion of the above-mentioned loans. 

3. Originals of sundry letters from William Short 
to me, under dates from the 26. of December, 1790, to 
the 2d of November, 1792, inclusively, relating to the 
same subject. 

4. Copy of an authority from me to Messrs. Wil- 
hem and John Willink, Nicholaas and J. Van Stap- 
horst and Hubbard, bankers of the United States at 
Amsterdam, dated the 28th of August, 1790, relating 
to the first of the loans made under the above-men 
tioned acts, and copies of sundry letters to the said 
bankers, of dates from the 28th of August, 1790, to 
the 3ist of December, 1792, inclusively. 

5. Originals of sundry letters from the said bank 
ers to me, of dates from the 25th of January, 1790, to 
the 5th of November, 1792. 

6. Copies of sundry letters of dates from the i8th 
of June to the 24th of September, 1792, inclusively, 
between G. Morris and W. Short, Esquires, having 
relation to the above subjects. 

The general power from the President to the Secre 
tary of the Treasury, of the 28th of August, 1790, and 
the communications from William Short, Esquire, who 
has been the only commissioner, would, it is presumed, 
have fulfilled the terms of the resolution of the Sen 
ate of the 23d of last month, and are transmitted, 
pursuant to the request contained in that resolution. 

But the President has been pleased to direct the 
transmission of the other documents also, in the sup 
position that they will serve to throw light upon the 
general subject of that resolution. 

VOL. III.— 6. 

82 Alexander Hamilton 

With perfect respect, I have the honor to be sir, 
yours, etc. 

ALEXANDER HAMILTON, 

Secretary of the Treasury. 

The Vice-President of the United States and 
President of the Senate. 

[NOTE. — Of the papers referred to in this report, none are now to be 
found, except those published with the Secretary's second report, of the 
1 3th of February, 1793, which follows.] 

LOANS 
Communicated to the House of Representatives, February 13, 1793. 

SIR: 

The next most important article of inquiry in 
volved in the resolutions of the House of Repre 
sentatives of the 23d of January last, and in the 
observations which have been made respecting the 
conduct of this Department, relates to the loans 
negotiated under the acts of the 4th and i2th of 
August, one thousand seven hundred and ninety. 

The papers which have been transmitted to the 
House by order of the President disclose the following 
particulars : 

i. That the immediate superintendence of the 
business of the loans was confided to the Department 
of the Treasury, being naturally connected with it. 
This trust, besides the original instructions for regu 
lating the execution of it, which have been com 
municated, was of course subject to such directions, 
from time to time, as the President should think fit to 

Loans 83 

give, or as occasions should require. A considerable 
latitude of discretion, nevertheless, from the very 
nature of the case, attended it, so as justly to leave, 
on the head of this Department, a complete respons 
ibility in all instances where special exceptions do 
not appear. 

2. That the first loan which was obtained was un 
dertaken and completed by the agency of Wilhem 
and Jan Willink, and Nicholaas and Jacob Van Stap- 
horst and Hubbard, who, both under the former and 
present Government, have been, and are, the bankers 
of the United States, at Amsterdam. 

3. That, with the single exception of the first loan, 
William Short, Esq., then Charge des Affaires at the 
court of France, now Resident Minister at the Hague, 
was constituted the sole agent of this Department for 
carrying into effect the powers confided to it; with 
this qualification only, that, if any negotiation with a 
prince or state, to whom any part of the debt to be 
discharged by the loans was due, should be requisite, 
the same was to be carried on through the person who, 
in capacity of Minister, Charge des Affaires, or other 
wise, then was, or thereafter might be, charged with 
transacting the affairs of the United States with such 
prince or state. 

4. That all payments, which have been made out 
of the proceeds of the loans, have been made by the 
immediate and special order of Mr. Short, except 
those upon the bills of the Treasurer for the moneys 
drawn to this country, and those to the money 
lenders in Holland, which were made in course by our 
bankers, at the periods they respectively became due. 

84 Alexander Hamilton 

This consequently embraces all the payments to 
France; the very last of which, though agreed for by 
Mr. Morris, in consequence of his having been em 
ployed for a special purpose by Mr. Short, was not, 
and could not, be completed, but by the same im 
mediate and special direction of Mr. Short. 

It moreover appears, from the same papers, and 
more fully from the correspondence at large, now be 
fore the Senate, that, except in the particular in 
stance which has been just stated, with regard to Mr. 
Morris, there has been no other agency in the whole 
business than that of Mr. Short, and of the bankers at 
Amsterdam and Antwerp, whom he necessarily em 
ployed as instruments in the negotiations with the 
money-lenders, and in the receipt and disbursement 
of the moneys borrowed. These, as already men 
tioned, were, at Amsterdam, the two houses of Wil- 
hem and Jan Willink, and of Nicholaas and Jacob 
Van Staphorst and Hubbard; at Antwerp, a Mr. G. 
De Wolf was the banker. 

It may not be without its uses to add, that the 
moneys proceeding from the loans have constantly 
remained in the hands of the respective bankers, till 
they have been paid over to the creditors ; namely, 
the French treasury or their bankers, the money 
lenders or their representatives, the holders of the 
bills drawn from this country by the Treasurer. 
Neither Mr. Short nor Mr. Morris has ever had posses 
sion of a single guilder. The latter, indeed, has 
never had power over one, excepting merely a sum of 
105,000 guilders, by letter of mine, dated the i3th of 
September last, placed at his disposal for paying, at 

Loans 85 

Paris, according to stipulation, the interest on the 
debt due to foreign officers. The fact is, and it is so 
demonstrated by the correspondence already referred 
to, that I never wrote a line to Mr. Morris on the sub 
ject of the loans or their proceeds, but in reference to 
the case just mentioned, of the interest payable to 
foreign officers, in respect to which, local situation 
governed. 

One more circumstance only is necessary to be 
noticed in this place, with a view to the elucidation 
intended. It is this : that the last payment, though 
originating prior to the change in the political posi 
tion of France, of the loth of August last, not having 
been consummated till the 6th of September follow 
ing, fell, of course, under the disposition of those then 
in possession of the power of the nation. 

It could not but have been unexpected to me, that 
exception should be taken to the report lately made 
by me on the subject of foreign loans, for the omission 
of details which I did not, at the time, and do not yet 
conceive to have been called for, by the terms of the 
resolutions upon which it was founded. The request 
addressed to the President, by those resolutions, was, 
that he would cause to be laid before the House a 
particular account of the sums borrowed, under his 
authority, by the United States; the terms on which 
each loan was obtained; the applications which 
had been made of the moneys, agreeably to appro 
priations; the balances, if any, which remained 
unapplied; specifying, also, at what times interest 
commenced on the several sums obtained, and at what 
times it was stopped by the several payments made. 

86 Alexander Hamilton 

It was not natural to imagine that these expressions 
were designed to comprehend a specification of the 
precise authorities under which the loans were ne 
gotiated, of the names of the persons by whom they 
were negotiated, of the particular place or places where 
the balances unexpended of the sums that had been 
drawn for to the United States were deposited. Still 
less natural was it for me to anticipate surmises, 
which could give to such particulars the shadow of 
importance. But, as animadversions have attended 
the omission of those details, I ought to regard it as 
an admonition to me to be more full and precise in 
my present communication — a motive which co 
operates with my desire to throw all possible light 
upon the subject. 

The first general circumstance which requires to be 
noticed and explained, after the particulars that have 
been communicated, is this : that all the loans which 
have been hitherto obtained have been made under 
the authority of both acts, without particular refer 
ence to either. 

The idea originally entertained was to conduct 
them on a different plan, founding each loan upon one 
or the other of the acts, as will be seen by my letter of 
the 28th of August, 1790, to our bankers at Amster 
dam ; at the same time that it will appear, from the 
same letter, that the separation did not appear to me 
a matter of consequence, and that I anticipated the 
possibility of a difficulty in adhering to it in the par 
ticular case. That difficulty proved, in the opinion 
of the bankers, to be of sufficient moment to render 
the arrangement contemplated, under the circum- 

Loans 87 

stances of the case, unadvisable, as they inform me in 
their answer to the above-mentioned letter. 

But, prior to the receipt of that answer, further in 
quiry and reflection had determined me to abandon 
my original idea, as likely to produce embarrassment 
and inconvenience, both in the negotiation of the 
loans and in the application of their proceeds. It 
was accordingly concluded to let the loans proceed 
indiscriminately, upon both acts. 

These loans were to have reference to two pur 
poses : first, the reimbursement of the foreign debt ; 
second, the purchase of the domestic debt at its 
market price. 

There were weighty reasons for carrying on both 
these operations concurrently. The arrears to 
France had been a considerable time accumulating. 
It was, in every sense, proper that a reimbursement 
of them should begin without delay, and desirable, 
for obvious reasons, that it should go on without any 
very considerable chasms or intermissions. This 
manner of proceeding could not but have the fair 
est chance of being the most satisfactory and con 
venient to France; unless, indeed, the business were 
to have proceeded upon the principle of an entire 
postponement of the domestic object to that of the 
reimbursement. 

But very cogent reasons rendered this course not 
the most eligible; the early commencement of pur 
chases of the debt was a matter of real and great 
importance. 

It was important in two relations: as it regarded 
the advantages to the Government, from redeeming a 

88 Alexander Hamilton 

portion of the debt at low prices; and still more, as 
it regarded the savings to the country from raising 
the price of stock on foreign purchasers; the bene 
ficial influence upon the credit of the nation, abroad 
and at home, to be expected from a quick apprecia 
tion of the public obligations; the benefit to the pub 
lic creditors in general, and to the most meritorious 
classes of them in particular, which would result from 
the same cause; all which objects were suggested 
from the Treasury, as motives to the provision re 
specting purchases, and are evidently contemplated 
in the preamble of the act which makes that 
provision. 

Exclusive of the other advantages which have been 
cited, and which are of a nature truly precious and im 
portant, that of preventing foreigners from acquiring 
the property of our citizens, at a great undervalue, is 
too obvious not to be estimated, as it ought to be, at 
first sight. It cannot require argument to show how 
great an evil it was, that foreigners should be able to 
acquire, with nine or ten, that for which the country 
would ultimately have to pay them twenty, with full 
interest in the interval; nor how much it merited the 
attention of the Government to prevent or lessen so 
serious an evil. 

But the influence which the purchases by the Gov 
ernment may have had upon this event may not be 
equally obvious. It is, however, not difficult to 
be traced. Price naturally keeps pace with compe 
tition and demand; whatever increases the latter 
necessarily tends to an augmentation of the former. 
Merely, then, as another purchaser, by adding to the 

Loans 89 

competition and demand, the purchases of the Gov 
ernment were calculated to influence a rise of price. 
But they had an effect more than proportioned to 
their real extent. Imagination has much to do in all 
such questions, and in scarcely any thing so much as 
in what relates to public funds. Experience proves 
that it is here exerted with uncommon effect. The 
appearance of the Government, as a purchaser, has 
not failed to excite the expectation of a greater de 
mand than was real, because the extent of the re 
sources to be employed might be very great, and was 
unknown; which, by stimulating the zeal of those 
who wanted to buy, lest the price should rise suddenly 
and considerably upon them, and by encouraging 
those who wanted to sell, under the hope of a better 
price, to hold back the commodity, has, in both ways, 
generally contributed to give a spring to the market. 
Prices once raised, when founded on intrinsic value, 
tend to maintain themselves ; because those who have 
given them are, for the most part, interested in keep 
ing them up; and every new impulse which they 
receive serves to carry them rapidly to their just 
level. 

Those who have been most attentive to the opera 
tion of the public purchases will have the least doubt 
that they had a material agency in accelerating the 
appreciation of the public stock. 

An inquiry naturally arises here : Were the moneys 
which were drawn from Europe, on account of the 
foreign loans, the instrument of the purchases to 
which these beneficial effects are ascribed? 

I answer, that these purchases are to be attributed 

90 Alexander Hamilton 

to the instrumentality of that fund ; that, had it not 
been for this resource, they could not have been made 
at the early periods when most of them were made. 
The course of the transaction will be fully, and with 
more propriety, explained in another place. 

An attention to both objects — to the reimburse 
ments to France, and to the purchases of the debt, 
rendered expedient a submission even of the first 
loan. Considerations of the moment seconded those 
of a general nature, to induce an immediate payment 
to that country. The loan had been undertaken 
without previous authority from hence, with a view 
to such payment; this was known, and a correspond 
ent expectation excited. The immediate situation of 
the French finances rendered a payment, at the par 
ticular juncture, more than ordinarily interesting. 
In such a state of things, there could be no hesitation 
about applying a large part of the loan to that object. 
Another part of it was, of necessity, applied to the 
payment of the sums that were falling due on the 
Dutch loans; and it is presumed that the reasons 
which have been assigned will appear to have been 
sufficiently powerful to have dictated the drawing of 
a part of it to the United States. 

Accordingly, a million and a half of the three mil 
lions borrowed were appropriated to France ; some 
thing more than eight hundred thousand guilders 
were drawn for here, and the remainder of the loan 
was left to be disbursed in Holland. 

It shall not be concealed, though I am aware that 
the acknowledgment may be a subject of criticism, 
that the conduct which was pursued, both with re- 

Loans 91 

gard to this and to the succeeding loan, was, in some 
degree, influenced by a collateral consideration. The 
Government had but just adopted a plan for the re 
storation of public credit. The periodical payment 
of interest was to commence on the ist of April, 1 791 . 
A considerable part of the revenue, out of which 
the moneys were to arise, was only to begin to accrue 
on the ist of January preceding. This revenue was 
liable to credits of four, six, and twelve months. 

How far its eventual product would answer ex 
pectation ; how far the punctuality of payments could 
be relied upon, were points unascertained, and which 
required, to their ascertainment, much more experi 
ence than had been obtained. In such a situation it 
was not only natural, but necessary, for an adminis 
trator of the finances to doubt; and, doubting, it was 
his duty to call to the aid of the public credit every 
auxiliary which it was in his power to command. He 
was bound to reflect, that a failure in any stipulated 
payment would be fatal to the dawning credit of the 
country ; to the reputation of the Government, just 
beginning to rise. That a wound inflicted upon 
either, at so early a stage, under all the circumstances 
of opposition to the Constitution, which had existed 
in the community, would have been deeply felt, and 
might either not have admitted of a cure at all, or 
not till after a length of time, and a series of mis 
chiefs ; that it could not but be an important service 
rendered to the country to ward off so great a mis 
fortune by the temporary use of any extraordinary 
resource which might be at hand, till time was given 
for more effectual provision. 

92 Alexander Hamilton 

If, in the course of such reflections, a doubt had 
occurred about the strict regularity of what was con 
templated as a possible resort, a mind sufficiently 
alive to the public interest, and sufficiently firm in the 
pursuit of it, would have dismissed that doubt, as an 
obstacle, suggested by a pusillanimous caution, to the 
exercise of those higher motives which ought ever to 
govern a man invested with a great public trust. It 
would have occurred that there was reasonable 
ground to rely, that the necessity of the case, and the 
magnitude of the occasion, would insure a justifica 
tion, and that, if the contrary should happen, there 
remained still the consolation of having sacrificed 
personal interest and tranquillity, no matter to what 
extent, to an important public interest, and of having 
avoided the humiliation which would have been 
justly due to an opposite and to a feeble conduct. 

The disposition which was resolved upon with re 
gard to the first loan involved, necessarily, a decision 
of the point, that the loans might be placed on the 
joint foundation of both acts. That loan having been 
undertaken, as already mentioned, without previous 
authority, and, consequently, without a particular 
eye to either act, it was probable that it would be 
found too late to make an apportionment of one part 
of the sum borrowed to one act, of another part to the 
other act. In that case, the distributive application 
of the fund to the different objects was to be relin 
quished, or the possibility was to be admitted of the 
loan being left to stand upon the authority of both 
acts. The same disposition of the first loan will also 
illustrate the convenience and expediency of the plan 

Loans 93 

which was finally adopted — that is, of placing the 
loans on the basis of both acts. 

The idea of a concurrent execution of both the ob 
jects to which the loans were destined could not, con 
veniently, have been pursued upon the plan of a 
separation of the loans, which, to be effectual, would 
include the strict application of the proceeds of each 
to the purposes of the particular act upon which it 
was founded. 

Amsterdam was naturally looked to as the great 
scene of the intended loans. There, as everywhere 
else, there is but a certain quantity of money floating 
in the market, from time to time, beyond the neces 
sary demands of trade and industry, seeking for em 
ployment in loans. This quantity, of course, varies 
at different periods, from a variety of causes. Of the 
quantity at any time afloat, but a certain portion can 
be commanded by any one borrowing power, owing 
to the competition of other borrowers, who have, 
each, their connections, through their bankers, with 
different sets of undertakers and money-lenders. 
Nor is it always that considerable loans can be had, 
at any rate. There are certain seasons only, when 
they are practicable. 

To have brought two loans upon the market at one 
time, as an opportunity of borrowing offered, which 
must have been the case in order to make concurrent 
provision for both the objects in question, if the prin 
ciple of a separation of the loans had been adopted, 
would have been to exhibit to the money-lenders a 
very unusual appearance. With men known to be 
much influenced by precedent and habit, such an 

94 Alexander Hamilton 

appearance could not have failed to prove a source of 
speculation and conjecture, and might have led to a 
confused idea that the wants of the United States 
were excessive — a supposition by no means calcu 
lated to promote their credit. It would, moreover, 
have been a departure from that simplicity of pro 
cedure which, where numbers are concerned, is always 
of moment to a right conception of the business to be 
accomplished, and ought not to be abandoned but for 
reasons of real utility and weight. 

To have instituted the loans successively, founding 
each upon one or the other of the acts, would have 
had a tendency to occasion longer intervals between 
the payments to France than was desirable. The in 
tervention of a loan for the purpose of purchases 
would have created, of course, a very considerable 
chasm. It may be objected, that such chasms did 
happen on the plan which was pursued. This is true, 
in two instances; but the most material of the two 
proceeded from casualties foreign to the plan itself, 
which are detailed in the correspondence more than 
once alluded to. 

It is possible, too, that a separation of the loans 
might have rendered it less easy to take advant 
age of a state of the market favorable to their 
extension at a particular juncture. The loan to be 
brought on the market might relate to the pur 
chase of the debt. The moment might be favorable 
to a more considerable loan than was within the 
limits prescribed for that object, and the opportun 
ity might slip before a second could be instituted. 
In this business, moments are often of importance, 

Loans 95 

and are to be embraced with promptitude and 
dexterity. 

Thus, it appears that in different ways the negoti 
ation of the loans might be embarrassed by their 
separation. 

But the most obvious, if not the most serious, of the 
inconveniences which would have attended it, re 
spects the application of the sums borrowed. This 
could not, then, have been moulded as the interest or 
policy of the Government might dictate. A loan for 
the purchase of the debt might have been made, 
under prospects promising a ready and beneficial in 
vestment of it ; but, before the investment was made, 
a change of the market might render it ineligible, in 
volving the alternative, either of a disadvantageous 
investment, or of leaving, perhaps, a large sum of 
money a long time unemployed. Such a state of 
things might have produced, to the banks, an ad 
vantage, and, to the Government, a loss, of magni 
tude sufficient to give color to a surmise that the 
public interest had been sacrificed to the profit of 
those institutions. The contrary course has essen 
tially avoided that evil, which, in this and in other 
instances, would have been incident, in a far greater 
degree, to the modes of proceeding, contrasted with 
those that have been pursued, than has, in reality, 
attended them. 

Or, political considerations might have rendered it 
advisable to transfer the application of the fund from 
one object to the other. 

Of this, the case of St. Domingo presents an ex 
ample. It might have happened, on the plan of 

96 Alexander Hamilton 

separate loans, that there was no fund in hand but for 
the purchase of the debt. Then, on the principle of 
that plan, there would have been no fund in the dis 
position of the Executive, applicable to the other ob 
ject, which would have embarrassed the performance 
of a duty toward a friendly Power, and, in a way 
which included the positive advantage to the country, 
of paying, directly, a part of its foreign debt in its 
own productions. 

Such were the embarrassments avoided, and such 
the conveniences secured, by the plan of making the 
loans indiscriminately, upon the authority of both 
acts. 

In the opposite plan, I can discern no counterbal 
ancing advantage nor convenience. 

Consequently, if both are equally legal, there can 
be no doubt which of them ought to have been 
preferred. 

If there be any want of legality in the plan which 
has been pursued, I was not, at the time, and am not 
yet, sensible of it. 

I know of no rule which renders it illegal in an 
agent, having, from the same principal, two authori 
ties to borrow money, whether for one, or different 
purposes, to unite the loans he may make, upon the 
foundation of both authorities, provided the terms 
of them be consistent with both or either of his com 
missions. If the purposes are different, it will be 
incumbent upon him to take care that the applica 
tion of the moneys borrowed makes the proper 
separation, and, doing this, he will have fulfilled his 
trust. To test this position, it seems only necessary 

Loans 97 

to ask: Whether the principal, in such case, would 
not be fully bound to the lenders? 

In reflecting, originally, upon the regularity of the 
proceeding meditated, there was but one source of 
hesitation — the difference in the funds upon which 
the loans were to rest. But the following reasoning 
satisfied the scruple. The pledging of particular 
funds is for the security of the lenders. If they are 
willing to waive the special security, by lending on 
the general credit of the Government, or to dispense 
with the preference of one fund to another, where two 
are pledged, by lending indiscriminately on the credit 
of both, the one or the other circumstance must be 
alike indifferent to the Government. The authority 
will have been well executed, to the extent necessary 
for public purposes, and if anything remains un 
executed, it will be in enlargement, not in abridg 
ment, of the public rights. It is, however, presumed, 
that the practical construction, in the present case, 
will be, that the two funds pledged will constitute 
an aggregate for the joint security of the moneys bor 
rowed upon both acts. 

The second general circumstance respecting the 
foreign loans, negotiated under the acts of the 4th 
and 1 2th of August, which requires attention, re 
lates to the terms on which they have been obtained. 
These, it appears, have been represented as neither 
honorable nor advantageous. 

The following facts, witnessed by the correspond 
ence before the Senate, more than once referred 
to, and well known to all who have had opportun 
ities of information, demonstrate that the terms of 

98 Alexander Hamilton 

those loans have been both honorable and advant 
ageous. 

1 . There is not one of them, which originated under 
these acts, that was not effected upon conditions 
equally favorable with those attending the loans of 
the contemporary borrowing Powers of the most 
tried resources and best-established credit, and more 
favorable than were obtained by some Powers of 
great respectability. 

2. The United States took a lead in the market, in 
regard to the subsequent reductions of interest, hav 
ing had either earlier or more complete success than 
any other borrowing Power. 

3. From a rate of five-per-cent. interest, and 4^- 
per-cent. charges, which marked the level of the 
market when they began their loans, they, in the 
course of a single year, brought down the terms to 
four-per-cent. interest, and five-per-cent. charges; 
that is, from an interest on the net sum received 
(including an indemnification for charges) of 5.5012, 
something more than 5^ per cent . , to an interest on the 
like sum of 4.4951, something less than 4^ per cent. 

When this state of things is applied to a Govern 
ment only in the third year of its existence, and to a 
country which had so recently emerged from a total 
derangement of its finances, it would seem impossible 
to deny that the issue is not only honorable but flat 
tering — unless, indeed, it can be denied, that a 
sound and vigorous state of credit is honorable to a 
nation. 

I forbear a comparison between the loans of the 
present and of the former Government of this 

VOL. HI.— 7. 

Loans 99 

country, because an immense disparity of circum 
stances would render it an improper one, — further 
than to take notice of a very great error which has 
been on some occasions advanced. It has been al 
leged, to disparage the management under the present, 
that the loans of the former Government, in a situa 
tion comparatively very disadvantageous, have been 
effected upon equal terms; and, in proof of this, an 
appeal has been made to the loan of 2,000,000 of 
guilders, at four per cent., which is that of the gth of 
March, 1784. 

Nothing can manifest more clearly than this the 
very precipitate and superficial views with which 
suggestions on important public subjects are some 
times made. The last four-per-cent. loan obtained 
under the existing laws, including charges, is a real 
44-per-cent. loan, or, more exactly, a 4.495i-per-cent. 
loan. The four-per-cent. loan of March, 1784, is a 
real 6.6468-per-cent. loan. The difference, which ex 
ceeds two per cent., arises principally from extra 
premiums and gratifications which were allowed upon 
this loan, and which are unknown to the other. 

Much praise is, no doubt, due to the exertions 
which effected the loans under the former Govern 
ment. A superiority of merit shall readily be con 
ceded to them from the circumstances under which 
they were made, and their signal utility in the Revo 
lution. But it is not necessary to their eulogium to 
affirm that they were made upon equal terms with 
those of the loans lately obtained, or to deny the 
goodness of the terms of the latter. Truth will not 
justify the one or the other. 

ioo Alexander Hamilton 

The facts which have been stated prove that the 
terms of the loans are advantageous as well as honor 
able. They are comparatively advantageous, be 
cause they are as moderate as other Powers, in the 
best credit, have allowed; and they are absolutely 
advantageous, because the highest real, not nominal, 
rate of interest which has been given does not exceed 
5.5012 — a fraction more than 5^ per cent. ; while the 
lowest real rate is 4.4951 — a fraction less than 4^ 
per cent. 

If the question, whether advantageous or not, be 
tested by the purposes for which the loans have been 
made, the conclusion is equally in their favor. The 
payments on account of the foreign debt were an in 
dispensable obligation. Unless it can be shown that 
they might have been derived from another and more 
advantageous source, it will follow that it was the 
interest of the Government to avail itself of the re 
source which has been employed, because it was its 
duty to discharge its obligations. 

It is sometimes urged that foreign loans, for what 
ever purpose, are pernicious, because they serve to 
drain the country of its specie for the payment of 
interest, and for the final reimbursement of principal ; 
that it would be preferable for that reason to procure 
loans at home, even at a higher rate of interest. 

To this several answers may be given, some of a 
special, others of a general nature. 

In reference to the reimbursement of the foreign 
debt it may be observed, that, as a debt had already 
been incurred abroad, upon which interest was pay 
able, the contracting of new loans there for the 

Loans 101 

reimbursement of that debt would leave us, as to the 
demand for the exportation of our specie, just where 
we originally stood. 

Moreover, if the money could have been borrowed 
at home for that reimbursement, the remittance of it 
would have been ruinous to the country. The mere 
necessity of remitting could not alone have increased 
the foreign demand for our commodities, so as to 
deduce from an extra exportation of them the re 
quisite means of payment ; and, if our specie was to 
perform the office, the country would speedily have 
been exhausted to a degree inconsistent with the sup 
port of its commerce and industry. The quantity of 
coin in the United States has never been considerable 
enough for such an operation. 

But this very state of things would have rendered 
the procuring of the money, from domestic resources, 
impracticable. These, it may be safely affirmed, are 
too limited for extensive loans, of any considerable 
degree of permanency. 

In the last place : The expedient of domestic loans 
would not prevent the evil which is desired to be pre 
vented. Foreigners would either, in the first in 
stance, bring their moneys to subscribe them to the 
loans, or they would afterwards purchase the stock 
arising from them; and, in either case, they would 
equally draw away the money of the country on ac 
count of their interest and principal. The only con 
sequence of giving a disproportionate rate of interest 
for domestic loans would be, that our specie would be 
carried away so much the faster. 

Experience having shown that nations sometimes 

102 Alexander Hamilton 

pay more regard to their external than to their inter 
nal credit, this consideration co-operates with reasons 
of convenience, to induce moneyed men abroad to be 
content with a lower rate of interest, stipulated to 
be paid in their own country, than if the place of pay 
ment be in another country, making even a greater 
difference than is an equivalent for the expense and 
risk of obtaining remittances. 

The clear inference from these observations is, 
that, with regard to the reimbursement of the foreign 
debt, no other expedient than that of foreign loans 
was practicable or eligible. 

The utility of that part of the loans which has refer 
ence to the purchase of the debt has already been 
explained in certain views. So far as their agency 
has been, hitherto, concerned in that operation, it is 
a sufficient demonstration of the advantage of the 
measure to state, that the sum invested in purchases, 
up to the period of the last report to Congress, has 
redeemed what is equal to an annuity of 6.15 per 
cent., including, also, the advantage of sinking a 
capital more than fifty per cent, greater than the 
sum expended. 

A valuable profit will arise from the investment of 
the sums on hand, either in a payment to the bank or 
in the purchase of stock. The liberation of an an 
nuity of six per cent, can be secured, while, upon a 
great part of the fund which is to effect it, no more 
than 4^ per cent, is payable, and less than 5^ upon 
the other part. The mean of these rates being five 
per cent., an annual saving of one per cent, may be 
effected, which, upon 2,000,000 of dollars, interest at 

Loans 103 

five per cent., is equal to a capital or gross sum of 
400,000 dollars — an item certainly of no inconsider 
able consequence. 

Against the advantages which are claimed in favor 
of the loans, it is natural to place the loss of interest 
incident to the delays which have attended their ap 
plication to the purposes for which they were ob 
tained. This leads to an examination of the cases of 
delay, their causes, and the circumstances, if any, 
which counterbalance them. 

There are three instances of material delay: one 
respecting the first loan, another the second loan, and 
a third a part of the two last loans. 

The first loan, it will be seen, was not applied till a 
considerable time after its commencement. It has 
been already intimated, that it was undertaken with 
out previous authority from this country. The 
motives to the measure are detailed in a letter from 
our bankers, of the 25th of January, 1790, a copy of 
which accompanies the communications herewith 
made by order of the President. A regard to those 
motives led to an acceptance of the loan. Nor could 
it have been deemed an unfortunate circumstance, 
that such an auxiliary to the operations of the 
Treasury had been previously prepared. 

The laws authorizing the loans passed the 4th and 
1 2th of August. As early as the 28th of that month, 
the acceptance above mentioned was communicated, 
and the application of 1,500,000 florins, in a payment 
to France, directed. So far, no time was lost, more 
than could not have been avoided. 

But the bills for the sum to be brought here were 

104 Alexander Hamilton 

not drawn till some months after. This proceeded 
from an unwillingness to risk the public credit by 
drawing before there was a certainty of funds to an 
swer the drafts. It was not impossible that the great 
delay which had attended the passing of the law for 
borrowing, might have led the bankers to come to 
some arrangement with the money-lenders for sur 
rendering the moneys paid in, and terminating the 
loan. Independent of this source of apprehension, 
they had expressed themselves, in their letter com 
municating the step they had taken, to this effect: 
" To spare the United States all possible advance of 
interest, while the money shall remain unappro 
priated, we shall issue the recipisses at the option of 
the buyers to take them so late as they please, on the 
expectation the three millions would be placed in a 
few months/* This, though it announced an expect 
ation that the moneys would be paid in, in a few 
months, did not render the event certain. And as 
the bankers appeared, from that precaution, to have 
adverted to the idea of saving the United States an 
advance of interest, it was supposable that they 
might have found means still further to procrastinate 
the payments, or a considerable part of them, till 
they had received a confirmation of the loan. This 
policy would have been the more natural, as they 
risked the loss of interest themselves, if the transac 
tion should not have been finally ratified. 

Under such circumstances, I thought it most pru 
dent to defer the drafts till advice was received of 
the actual progress of the loans. There was no room 
to hesitate between the loss of a small sum in interest 

Loans 105 

and the danger of committing the public credit by a 
permature operation. 

The second case of delay relates to the second loan. 
It was occasioned by a determination to suspend the 
orders for its application till information was received 
of its having been contracted for. 

One motive to this determination has been already 
intimated — namely, the yet untried and immature 
state of our fiscal arrangements. The general reason 
ing on this head was strengthened by an occurrence 
altogether unlocked for, which disclosed itself on the 
23d of August, 1790, eleven days after the rising of 
Congress — an occurrence which they had not con 
templated in their pecuniary dispositions. I allude 
to the commencement of an Indian war, which was 
announced in a letter from Governor St. Clair, dated 
on the above-mentioned day, the progressive extent 
and consequences of which could, of course, not be 
foreseen. Under such circumstances, I judged it for 
the public interest and safety to hold the resource 
which the prospect of a loan presented under the 
power of the Treasury till advice should be received 
of the actual institution of the loan, with intention 
then to dispose of it as should appear advisable under 
a better-matured view of our pecuniary situation and 
prospects. 

Hence the delay which attended the application of 
the second loan; the first, in fact, that originated 
subsequent to the laws for borrowing. But after 
advice had been received of its having been set on 
foot, no time was lost in converting it with due de 
spatch to its proper uses. There was only not an 

106 Alexander Hamilton 

anticipation of its application. As early as May 
24th, 1791, I wrote a letter to Mr. Short (a copy of 
which is in the possession of the House), empowering 
him to apply the proceeds of all future loans, as they 
should accrue, in payments to France, except as to 
such sums as therein were, or afterward should be, 
previously and specially reserved. This arrangement 
was calculated to obviate the inconvenience of leav 
ing the proceeds of the loans for any considerable 
time unemployed. At the period of making it, and 
not sooner, the public prospects appeared to me 
sufficiently unfolded to render a general and per 
manent disposition free from hazard. This instruc 
tion preceded, in due season, all the loans subsequent 
to that of March, 1791. 

Whatever delay, therefore, may have attended suc 
ceeding investments for paying the French debt, is 
not attributable to this Department; and I think it 
will not appear that any has been incurred in respect 
to the sums which were destined for the public service 
here. In judging of this point, it will be proper to 
observe that a latitude of six months for making their 
payments has been reserved to the money-lenders, 
though with liberty to make them earlier. It was, 
however, necessary for the Treasury to regulate its 
bills according to the possible delay, lest they should 
not meet adequate funds. The general policy 
adopted was to let them fall upon the rear of each 
loan, this giving a freer course for early payments to 
France, and best conciliating a certainty of funds for 
answering the bills with as little double interest as 
possible. 

Loans 107 

It will appear that, notwithstanding the arrange 
ment which was made, a considerable time intervened 
between the two last payments to France, while there 
were funds in hand waiting for employment. It may 
be expected that the causes of this procrastination, 
though, as I have said, not imputable to this Depart 
ment, should be unfolded to the House. Particular 
circumstances, however, induce me to confine myself 
to stating generally that the delay proceeded, in the 
first place, from an expectation given to Mr. Short, 
and kept up, from time to time, by the French Minis 
ter of Marine, that a plan would be adopted, to which 
a decree of the National Assembly was requisite, for 
converting a large sum into supplies for St. Domingo ; 
which Mr. Short concluded justly must come out of 
the foreign fund, and consequently suspended its ap 
plication in Europe. In the second place, from a 
desire to settle, previously to further payments, a 
definite rule, by which the moneys paid should be 
liquidated and credited to the United States. 

Both the one and the other appear to have been 
procrastinated from period to period, by the dis 
ordered state of French affairs, and to have finally 
issued contrary to expectation. It would be an un 
necessary commitment of my opinion to declare how 
far the delay appears to me to have been justified by 
the causes; but, being led by the occasion to take 
notice of it, I think it improper to send it abroad, 
liable, perhaps, to misconstruction, without observ 
ing that the inducements appear to me to have been 
weighty ; that the delays naturally grew out of the 
circumstances ; and that I am entirely pursuaded of 

io8 Alexander Hamilton 

the goodness of the motives which governed. The 
correspondence before the Senate contains the par 
ticulars of the transaction. 

Having pointed out the instances of material delay 
which happened, and the causes of them, it remains 
to state what circumstances there are to counter 
balance the loss on that account. 

These circumstances are of two kinds : 

1. Gain by exchange in the sale of the bills drawn 
by the Treasury, and upon the higher rate of interest 
on the credits which were given for those bills, than 
was payable on the fund upon which they were 
drawn. 

2. Gain by exchange on the payments to France. 
According to my calculation, founded on the best 

information extant, the real par of metals, between 
the United States and Amsterdam, makes a current 
guilder equal to 35 ^ ninetieths of a dollar. The 
lowest rate which has been obtained for the bills has 
been 36 T\ ninetieths, with an allowance of sixty 
days' credit, without interest. Making a deduction 
for the interest, the bills were still sold above the true 
par. In some instances, they have been sold as high 
as forty cents and seven mills per guilder, with in 
terest for the whole term of the credit given. 

The rate of interest, for the credits allowed upon 
the bills, was six per cent. ; the mean interest paid 
upon the fund, five per cent. ; producing, conse 
quently, a gain of one per cent. 

With regard to the payments to France, if the 
current rate of exchange between Paris and Amster 
dam, at the moment of each remittance or payment 

Loans 109 

were to govern, a large profit would result to the 
United States; but certain equitable considerations 
will produce deductions, which will greatly lessen 
this advantage; yet, making a liberal allowance for 
them, there is ground to calculate that a saving 
may be made in this particular, more than sufficient 
to indemnify for the loss of interest. Hence any 
positive advantage which will have been other 
wise gained will probably be undiminished by that 
circumstance. 

I proceed, in the next place, to state the views 
which prevailed, respecting the sums that have been 
from time to time drawn for, the purposes they have 
hitherto answered, and the further advantages to be 
expected from the measure. 

The direct object of all the sums drawn for, prior 
to July, 1792, was the purchase of the debt. A col 
lateral consideration, which operated in the first 
stages of drawing, has also been mentioned. It has 
likewise been stated that the early purchases of the 
debt are to be ascribed to the instrumentality of the 
fund derived from the loans. This idea shall now 
be explained. 

Two mistakes appear to have influenced the im 
pressions which have been entertained in relation, 
directly or indirectly, to this subject. First, it seems 
to have been all along forgotten that a considerable 
part of the duties is always outstanding, on account 
of the credits which are given ; whence the assertion 
that the sinking fund has continually overflowed 
from domestic resources. Second, it seems to have 
been taken for granted that the proceeds of the loans 

no Alexander Hamilton 

have remained apart, distinct from the mass of the 
money in the Treasury; while, in truth, the course 
of the business has been to turn them over to the 
Treasurer by warrants as they have been received, 
so as to form a part of the aggregate, from time to 
time, appearing in his hands and in his accounts. 
The banks have been the agents employed for sell 
ing the bills. Sometimes warrants on account have 
issued upon them for the sums accruing from the 
sales; at other times the warrants have been de 
ferred till the whole proceeds of any parcel have been 
received, and the accounts of the bank settled at the 
Treasury; as the state of the Treasury has happened 
to render the one or the other more convenient. 

The banks of North America and New York were 
the agents for the sale of all the bills which were sold 
prior to April, 1792, amounting to 1,006,526 dollars 
and 36 cents. Of this sum, 361,391 dollars and 34 
cents were passed over to the Treasury in 1791; 
327,136 dollars and 22 cents in March, 1792; and 
140,000 dollars in June following; the residue having 
remained, as heretofore stated, in deposit with the 
Bank of North America, upon a special considera 
tion. This is exclusive of certain bills furnished for 
the use of the Department of State, amounting to 
78,766 dollars and 67 cents. 

The remainder of the bills which have been sold, 
beginning in April, 1792, were sold by the Bank of 
the United States, and its branches at New York and 
Baltimore. The accounts of the sales had just been 
made out for settlement when the present inquiry 
began, but warrants had not yet issued for placing 

Loans in 

the proceeds in the Treasury. It will be remarked 
that, from the terms of credit allowed, they only 
began to be receivable in October last, the 26th day 
of which month the first return made by the bank 
shows a sum of 127,225 dollars and 53 cents received, 
and that the collection had not been completed when 
the accounts of the sales were rendered. 

There are different views of the subject which will 
enable the House to perceive that the possession of 
the fund in question was necessary to enable the 
Treasury to furnish the means of making all the 
purchases which were made prior to July, 1792. 

It is true that there was a surplus of revenue to 
the end of the year 1790, equal to 1,374,656 dollars 
and 40 cents, which was appropriated to purchases 
of the debt; and, from the credits then given upon 
the duties, this surplus would naturally come into 
the Treasury in the course of the year 1791. 

But the Legislature, foreseeing that the revenue of 
1791, from the same cause, could not actually be in 
the Treasury within that year, to face the appropria 
tions upon it (which, it is to be observed, were nearly 
commensurate with the fund), inserted a clause in 
the law appropriating the surplus of 1790 to the 
purchase of the debt, which authorized a reserv 
ation of so much of that surplus as might be 
necessary to make the payments of interest during 
1791, in cases of a deficiency in the receipts into the 
Treasury, on account of the current revenue of the 
year. 

It will appear to the House, upon a recurrence to 
the Treasurer's quarterly account, ending the 3oth 

H2 Alexander Hamilton 

of September, 1791, that the balance of cash then on 
hand was 662,233 dollars and 99 cents. 

At that time there had been paid into the Treas 
ury, upon warrants, from the proceeds of the bills 
drawn upon the foreign fund, 361,391 dollars and 34 
cents; consequently the balance of cash, had it not 
been for that auxiliary, would have been only 
300,842 dollars and 65 cents, considering the whole 
balance in the Treasury as representing an equal 
sum of the proceeds of the bills. 

Even in a time of complete peace, in a country 
where a small extent of moneyed capital forbids a 
reliance upon large pecuniary aids to be suddenly 
obtained, a prudent administrator of the finances 
could not feel entirely at ease with a less sum, at all 
times in the certain command of the Treasury, than 
500,000 dollars, for meeting current demand and 
extra exigencies, which, in the affairs of a nation, are 
every moment to be expected. But, with a war 
actually on hand, and a possibility of its extension 
to a more serious length, he would be inexcusable in 
leaving himself with a less sum at command, unless 
from an impracticability of doing otherwise. It 
would be always his duty to combine two considera 
tions — the chance of extra calls for money, and a 
possibility of some failure in the receipts which were 
expected. Derangements of various kinds may hap 
pen in the commercial circle, capable of interrupting, 
for a time, the punctual course of payments to the 
Treasury. It is necessary, to a certain extent, to be 
prepared for such casualties. 

But during the year 1791 there was a circum- 

Loans 113 

stance which operated as an additional reason for 
keeping a respectable sum always on hand. The 
loans of the domestic debt were going on till the last 
of September of that year; while, at the same time, 
the interest was in a course of payment. It was, 
therefore, always uncertain what sum would be pay 
able at the end of a quarter, this depending on the 
eagerness or backwardness of the public creditors in 
bringing forward their subscriptions or their claims 
as non-subscribers. The omissions at the end of a 
preceding quarter might be expected to fall upon a 
subsequent one ; and it was necessary to be prepared 
for that possibility; of course, to keep in hand a 
larger fund for contingent demands. This necessity 
extended to the termination of the period for receiv 
ing subscriptions; because the Treasury was to be 
prepared on the supposition that the whole of the 
domestic debt would then be in a state to receive 
interest, either as subscribed or unsubscribed But 
this did not, in fact, happen. A part of the sums 
which were presented were crowded into the last 
days of the quarter, and were too late for a dividend. 
A considerable sum remained ultimately in a form 
which, according to the terms of the provision, did 
not entitle it to interest, either as subscribed or as 
unsubscribed debt. 

Hence the cash in the Treasury on the ist of October, 
1791, was by a considerable sum greater than was to 
have been counted upon, or thanmight have happened. 

The conclusion which results from the foregoing 
observations is this: that the purchases which pre 
ceded the ist of October, 1791, and which amounted 

VOL. III.— 8. 

H4 Alexander Hamilton 

to 699,984 dollars and 23 cents in specie, could not 
have been hazarded, but for the aid of the sums 
which had actually accrued from the proceeds of the 
bills and the expectation of those which were to 
accrue from the yet uncollected proceeds of others. 

Had it not been for this aid, the Treasury would 
have been left more bare than was consistent with 
the security of public credit and the certain execu 
tion of the public service. 

There is, however, a later period in the state of 
the Treasury, which will more completely illustrate 
the idea intended to be established. This is the 26. of 
July, 1792. 

On that day the balance of cash in the Treasury, 
comprehending the deposits in all the banks, and 
including a sum of 200,000 dollars received on loan 
of the Bank of the United States, together with a 
sum of 220,900 dollars in bills drawn upon domestic 
funds, the proceeds of which had not been received, 
was 623,133 dollars and 61 cents. 

Prior to this period a further sum of 545,902 dol 
lars and 89 cents, arising from the sales of foreign 
bills, had been placed in the Treasury by warrants, 
making, with the former sums placed there from the 
same source, 907,294 dollars and 23 cents. 

Had it not been for this auxiliary and that of the 
loan from the bank, the Treasury would then have 
been in arrear 484,160 dollars and 62 cents. It, 
therefore, necessarily follows that for the purchases 
to that period, which amounted in specie to 942,672 
dollars and 54 cents, at least 484,160 dollars and 62 
cents must have come from the foreign fund. 

Loans 115 

But when it is considered, for the reasons which 
have been stated, and which will hereafter be forti 
fied by others, tending, as I conceive, to give them 
conclusive force, that the sum in the Treasury at 
the period in question was barely what ought to have 
been there for safety and for a due supply of current 
demands, it will follow that the whole, or nearly the 
whole, of the purchases which were made previous 
to July, 1792, were made by the means or instru 
mentality of the foreign fund. 

A similar view, extended to the subsequent quar 
ter, will exhibit this point in a still clearer light. The 
balance then in the Treasury, including a further 
loan from the bank of 100,000 dollars, was only 
420,914 dollars and 51 cents. 

What, then, it may be asked, became of the sur 
plus revenue to the end of the year 1790? what was 
the office performed by that fund during the period 
in question? 

The answer is that it served exactly the purpose 
which was anticipated by the Legislature. It came 
in aid of the current receipts for satisfying the cur 
rent expenditures of 1791, with particular reference 
to the interest of the debt. This will easily be com 
prehended when it is recollected that the appropria 
tions made during 1791 upon the revenues of that 
year, and some small surpluses of antecedent appro 
priations, amounted to 3,637,058 dollars and 34 
cents ; that the revenues themselves amounted to no 
more than 3,553,195 dollars and 1 8 cents; and that, 
at the end of 1791, there were outstanding, in bonds 
for the duties on imports, besides the chief part of 

n6 Alexander Hamilton 

the proceeds of the duties on spirits distilled within 
the United States, then also uncollected, 1,828,269 
^dollars and 28 cents. 

On this point, likewise, of the surplus of revenue 
to the end of 1790, it is presumable a misappre 
hension has been entertained. It seems to have 
been supposed that that surplus, as well as the 
proceeds of the foreign fund, have been kept sep 
arate and distinct from the common mass of the 
moneys appearing from time to time to be in the 
Treasury. 

It has been already observed that this was not the 
case with regard to the foreign fund. It is now 
proper to add that it has not been the case either 
with regard to the surplus question. That surplus, 
as received by the collectors of the customs, has regu 
larly passed into the Treasury, and appears in the 
quarterly accounts of the Treasurer for the periods 
to which they relate. 

It is the course of the Treasury, resulting from the 
constitution of the Department, for all moneys, from 
whatever source, to be brought into it, to constitute 
an aggregate, subject to the dispositions prescribed 
by law. The moneys to be employed in the sinking 
fund have consequently only been separated, as 
they have been called for, for actual investment. 
The only exception to this relates to that part of the 
sinking fund which is created by the interest of the 
debt purchased. This has been included in the quar 
terly dividends, and covered by the warrants in 
favor of the cashiers of the banks for paying those 
dividends, after which they have passed into a dis- 

Loans 1 1 7 

tinct account in the books of the bank opened with 
Samuel Meredith as agent to the commissioners of 
the sinking fund. 

To the foregoing representation it may seem an 
objection that the purchases to the end of 1791 
appear to have been carried to the account of the 
surplus at the end of 1790. 

The ultimate form which it has been judged con 
venient to give to the transaction in the accounts of 
the Treasury cannot change what was truly the 
course of facts. The proceeds of the above-men 
tioned surplus and of the foreign loans formed to 
gether the fund for purchases. In the accounts of 
the Treasury the thing was susceptible of various 
modifications at pleasure. The two parts of the 
fund might have been united in one account, or 
divided into distinct accounts. Being separated, 
moneys issued for purchases might have been legally 
carried to either of them. 

It was judged most advisable in the forms of the 
Treasury to place the purchases to the end of 1791 
to the account of the domestic fund, because it was 
calculated to give greater latitude and energy to the 
sinking fund. Had not this course been pursued 
the business would have taken the following shape: 
the foreign fund, to the extent of the purchases, 
would have been exhausted; the whole, or the 
greater part of the surplus of 1790, would have con 
tinued wrapt up in the expenditure of 1791, not 
liable to be liberated till the receipts into the Treasury 
should yield a correspondent surplus beyond the 
actual disbursements — which could not have been 

u8 Alexander Hamilton 

the case while the war with the Indians continues to 
call for extraordinary expenditures. 

From the form into which the thing has been 
thrown, the foreign fund has been set free to be 
applied to further purchases; and a necessity pro 
duced of anticipating the outstanding duties by tem 
porary loans for the current service. 

I trust there can be no doubt that the course pur 
sued was regular and within the discretion of the 
Department. I hope, also, that it will appear to the 
House to have been the most eligible. The expedi 
ency of giving the earliest and greatest possible 
extent and activity to whatever concerns the sink 
ing fund will, it is presumed, unite all opinions. 

What has been said hitherto respecting the em 
ployment of the foreign fund is applicable only to 
that part of it which was drawn for prior to April, 
1792; the residue standing in a different situation, 
and requiring a separate examination. 

From the statement which has been given, it may 
be perceived that the fund in question has neither 
been idle nor useless. A confirmation of this will be 
found in the following details : 

The whole sum successively received on account of 
Amsterdam bills, up to the iyth of August, 1791, 
was 361,391 dollars and 34 cents. The amount of 
the moneys invested in purchases prior to that day 
was 350,000 dollars, chiefly by anticipation of those 
receipts. 

The whole sum successively received on account of 
Amsterdam bills, from August 17, 1791, to March i, 
1792, was 408,722 dollars and 69 cents. The amount 

Loans 119 

of the moneys invested in purchases between those 
periods was 349,984 dollars and 23 cents, chiefly in 
the month of September, and by anticipation of 
those receipts. 

The whole sum successively received on account of 
Amsterdam bills, subsequent to the ist of March, 
and prior to July, 1792, was 235,412 dollars and 33 
cents. The amount of the moneys invested in pur 
chases between those periods was 242,688 dollars 
and 31 cents. 

It was stated in my first letter, that 177,998 dol 
lars and 80 cents of the proceeds of the foreign bills 
were left in deposit with the Bank of North America ; 
and in a note upon statement B, accompanying that 
letter, the occasion of it was shown to be an advance 
without interest, made by that bank, for the use of 
the Department of War; which could not yet be 
covered, in consequence of a doubt still remaining, 
whether the fund appropriated for satisfying that 
object was adequate to it — the sufficiency of that 
fund depending in part on certain unexpended re 
sidues of antecedent appropriations, which it was 
expected would not be finally necessary for satisfy 
ing the purposes of those appropriations. 

It is to be remarked, that the delay of the employ 
ment of this part of the proceeds of the foreign fund 
has been compensated by a saving of interest on the 
sum advanced by the bank, which otherwise must 
have been procured upon a loan with an allowance 
of interest, probably at the time of the advance, at a 
rate of six per cent. ; so that, even in this particular, 
the fund, though temporarily suspended from its 

I2O Alexander Hamilton 

destination, has not been idle or unproductive. I 
reserve for another place some additional observa 
tions and statements, which will be calculated to 
shew that opportunities of investing the moneys at 
any time on hand, applicable to purchases of the 
debt, were not suffered to pass unimproved, and that 
as much in this respect was done as the state of the 
Treasury and the state of the market would permit. 

It has been said, that a distinct examination would 
be proper with regard to the bills which have been 
drawn upon the foreign fund subsequent to March, 
1792. I proceed now to this examination. 

The expediency of what has been, in this respect, 
done, seems to have been called in question, under a 
suggestion, that an application of the fund to pur 
chases had ceased to be advantageous. 

The drawing of these bills has been at different 
periods influenced by various considerations. A 
leading motive was always the purchase of the debt. 
And a correct view of the subject will, I doubt not, 
satisfy the House, that the measure was recom 
mended by an adequate prospect of advantage. 

It is to be observed, that all these drafts were pre 
dicated upon the two four-per-cent. loans; being, as 
already stated, real 4-J-per-cent. loans. 

There was good ground to presume, that oppor 
tunities would be found of investing the moneys 
drawn for in purchases which would yield at least 
five per cent, with a possibility of doing still better. 
The difference of £ per cent, was alone an object of 
importance; but it would be coupled with the fur 
ther benefit of reducing a principal sum materially 

Loans 121 

exceeding the sum invested. When the three per 
cents are purchased at 125. in the pound, there is not 
only a redemption of an annuity of five per cent, but 
a sinking of a capital of 205. for 125. And though 
this might not be material, if the market rate of 
interest should never fall below five, because in that 
case the three per cents might always be purchased 
at the same rate; yet if it should at any time hap 
pen, that interest fell below five, it would be a gain 
to the Government to have purchased at five, in 
exact proportion to the difference between five and 
the then market rate. Add to this, that the three 
per cents have generally a value in the market more 
than proportioned to the income they produce, 
which arises from the capacity of the capital to ap 
preciate even to par. These observations are also 
for the most part applicable to the deferred, with 
this circumstance in addition, that, when interest 
begins to be payable on that species of stock, the 
money invested, and which, in the meantime, would 
have produced five, would then begin to produce to 
the Government six per cent., with the advantage of 
having anticipated the redemption of a species of 
stock of right only gradually redeemable. Combin 
ing these considerations, it appears to be clearly and 
even eminently for the interest of the Government 
to purchase within the limit suggested, with a fund 
which does not cost more than 4^- per cent. 

That this was the view of the subject which gov 
erned, is deducible not only from the circumstances 
of the fact, but from my letter of the 2d of April, 
1792, to Mr. Short, announcing my intention to draw, 

122 Alexander Hamilton 

in which I assign as the ground of that intention, 
" that I considered it for the interest of the United 
States to prosecute purchases of the public debt with 
moneys borrowed on the terms of the last loan/' 
meaning the loan of the ist of January, 1792, at 
four per cent. 

If the event be taken as a criterion, the anticipa 
tion will be more than justified, the present junc 
ture offering an opportunity for purchases peculiarly 
advantageous. 

But, without insisting on a state of things occa 
sioned by extraordinary circumstances, it was mor 
ally certain that the common course of events would 
render the operation a beneficial one. And it would 
not argue peculiar foresight, if a calculation was even 
made on the effect which the situation and probable 
progress of affairs in Europe might produce upon our 
market. A pretty general war there, by extending 
the demand for money, would naturally divert from 
our stocks a portion of what might otherwise be 
employed upon them, and affect injuriously their 
prices. It is also a familiar fact that, during the 
winter, in this country, there is always a scarcity of 
money in the towns — a circumstance calculated to 
damp the prices of stock. 

A consideration, which collaterally influenced the 
drawing of the later bills, was the situation of the 
French colony of St. Domingo. 

This not only produced an early application for a 
considerable advance, which was promised, but it 
was to be foreseen, that still further aids would be 
indispensable. 

Loans 123 

Indeed, sundry letters from Mr. Short, the first 
dated at Paris, the 28th of December, 1791, an 
nounced the daily probability of an arrangement 
requiring an advance here of 800,000 dollars for the 
use of that colony. A sum of 4,000,000 of livres has 
in fact been successively stipulated for that object, 
the greatest part of which has been actually furnished. 

It is known that these supplies could proceed from 
no other source than the foreign fund. 

The payment to the foreign officers of near 200,000 
dollars, by which an interest of six per cent, would 
be released, was another object for which provision 
was to be made out of the same fund. 

These several purposes conspired with the object 
of purchasing the debt to induce the latitude of 
drawing which took place. 

But there was still a further inducement which 
came in aid of the others. The time for reimbursing 
the first instalment of the two millions of dollars due 
to the bank was approaching, when, by positive 
stipulation, the Government would have to pay two 
hundred thousand dollars, for which there was no 
domestic fund that could be spared from the current 
exigencies. I thought it incumbent upon this De 
partment to have an eye to placing within the reach 
of the Legislature the means of fulfilling this en 
gagement ; the object of which bore a strict analogy 
to that for which the two millions authorized by the 
act making provision for the reduction of the public 
debt were to be borrowed. 

I did not even scruple to take into the calculation, 
that if, from the extent of the draughts upon the 

124 Alexander Hamilton 

foreign fund, there should happen to be found on 
hand a larger sum than was necessary for, or could 
be advantageously employed towards, the several 
purposes which were the immediate and direct ob 
jects of the operation, the surplus would facilitate to 
the Government a measure manifestly and unequiv 
ocally beneficial — an additional payment to the bank, 
on account of a debt upon which an annual interest of 
six per cent, was payable ; a measure by which a cer 
tain saving of one per cent., to the extent of the pay 
ment that might be made, would be accomplished. 

The possibility of this application of the fund 
afforded a perfect assurance, that the public interest 
could in no event fail to be promoted. 

I felt myself the more at liberty to do it, because 
it did not interfere with a complete fulfilment of the 
public engagements in regard to the foreign debt. 
It could be done consistently with a full reimburse 
ment of all arrears and instalments which had ac 
crued on account of that debt. 

The detail which has been given comprehends a 
full exposition of the views and motives that have 
regulated the conduct of this Department in relation 
to those parts of the proceeds of the foreign loans 
which have been transferred to the United States, 
except as to the last sum of 1,237,500 florins, directed 
to be drawn for on the 3oth of November last; in 
regard to which, circumstances of a special nature 
co-operated, as is explained in a note upon the copy 
of my letter of the 26th of that month to Mr. Short, 
forming a part of the communication herewith made 
by order of the President of the United States. 

Loans 125 

The House will perceive that the variety of matter 
comprised in this letter has not been collected and 
digested into its present form, without much labor 
and unavoidable expense of time. I trust they will 
be sensible that no delay has been unnecessarily in 
curred. It is certain that I have made every exer 
tion in my power, at the hazard of my health, to 
comply with the requisitions of the House as early 
as possible. And it has even been done with more 
expedition than was desirable to secure the perfect 
accuracy of the communication. 

Yet I have still to regret that some part of the 
subject must remain to be presented in a subsequent 
letter. To lessen, however, the inconvenience of 
this further delay, I shall transmit with the present 
letter the statements required by the first and second 
of the resolutions of the 23d of January, which will 
be found in the schedules herewith, marked Nos. I. 
to V. ; those required by the last of the resolutions 
having been already forwarded. 

There remain, however, some particulars to 
complete the information contemplated by those 
resolutions, that must be reserved for another com 
munication. This I may venture to assure the 
House will not be deferred beyond the present, or 
at least the first day of the ensuing, week. 

With perfect respect, I have the honor to be, sir, 
Your most obedient and most humble servant, 
ALEXANDER HAMILTON, 

Secretary of the Treasury. 
The Honorable the Speaker of the 
House of Representatives. 

126 Alexander Hamilton 

No. I. — A statement of the appropriation for reducing the public 
debt, constituted by the act of Congress passed on the i2th day of 
August, 1790. 

No. II. — A statement of the application of the funds drawn on the 
appropriation of the surplus of duties to the end of the year 1790, for 
the reduction of the public debt. 

No. III. — A statement of the application of the fund constituted by 
the act of Congress, passed on the 8th of May, 1792, for reducing the 
public debt, arising from the interest on the sums of said debt purchased, 
redeemed, and paid into the Treasury of the United States. 

No. IV. — Quarterly statement of cash in the hands of the Treasurer 
of the U. S. for the year 1791. 

No. V. — Statement of cash in the Treasury, during the year 1792, 
showing the balance on hand half monthly. — State Papers, " Finance," 
vol. i., 210-214. 

Communicated to the House of Representatives. 

TREASURY DEPARTMENT, February 13, 1793. 

SIR: 

In obedience to an order of the President of the 
United States, founded upon the requests contained 
in two resolutions of the House of Representatives 
of the 23d of January last, I have the honor to lay 
before the House — 

1. The several papers numbered i, 2, 3, 4, being 
copies of the authorities under which loans have been 
negotiated, pursuant to the acts of the 4th and 1 2th 
of August, 1790. 

2. Sundry letters, as per list at foot, from the 
Secretary of the Treasury to William Short, Esq., 
and to Wilhem and J. Willink, N. and J. Van Stap- 
horst and Hubbard, being copies of the authorities 
respecting the application of the moneys borrowed. 

3. Statement A, showing the names of the persons 
by whom, and to whom, the respective payments of 

Loans 127 

the French debt have been made in Europe, specify 
ing the dates of the respective payments and the 
sums. With regard to the precise dates of the re 
spective drafts which may have been drawn, or 
orders which may have been given by Mr. Short to 
our bankers for making those payments, they can 
not be furnished, not being known at the Treasury. 
It is, however, to be inferred from the correspond 
ence and circumstances that they preceded but a 
short time the respective payments to which they 
related. 

Statement B, showing by whom the payments 
have been made, on account of the Dutch loans, the 
dates, and the sums. As to the persons to whom the 
payments were made, no specification is practicable, 
these being the numerous subscribers to the several 
loans, their agents or assignees. It has never been 
considered, either under the former or present Gov 
ernment, as interesting to the Treasury to know who 
those individuals were. Indeed, by the transfers 
always going on, they are continually changing. The 
demand for a communication of their names would 
have been unprecedented, and the disclosure from 
time to time would have been attended with a great 
deal of useless but expensive trouble. 

The statement desired in reference to the Spanish 
debt cannot be furnished. In a note upon statement 
No. i of my late report concerning foreign loans it is 
mentioned, " that advice had been received that the 
payment of this debt was going on, though it had not 
been completed." This appears by letters from Mr. 
Short, now before the Senate, dated August 3oth and 

128 Alexander Hamilton 

October gih and 22d. No advice of the completion 
of the payment has been since received. All that is 
known is that our bankers were procuring bills, 
under orders from Mr. Short, for the purpose of re 
mitting to Spain the sum necessary to discharge her 
debt. 

There will be seen a difference in the statement 
now presented and No. i of my late report concern 
ing foreign loans, as to the date of the last payment 
to France. In one the gih of August is mentioned; 
in the other, the 6th of September. The fact is that 
it had its inception some time in August, but was 
not perfected till the 6th of September. Mr. Morris, 
who had been charged by Mr. Short with endeavor 
ing to adjust with the French Treasury the rule by 
which the payments that had been and might be 
made should be liquidated into livres, having regard 
to certain equitable considerations, made an arrange 
ment with it, provisionally, for the payment of 
1,641,250 x florins, and wrote to Mr. Short requesting 
that he would direct the payment to be completed. 
There appear to have been two letters from Mr. 
Morris on the subject, one dated the 6th, the other 
the pth of August. But Mr. Short, for reasons which 
he explains in his correspondence, now before the 
Senate, did not consummate the payment till the 
6th of September. One statement has reference to 
the beginning, the other to the conclusion, of the 
affair. 

I am instructed by the President to observe that 
there are some circumstances in the communications 

1 1,625,000 Banco. 

Loans 129 

now made which would render a public perusal of 
them not without inconvenience. 

With perfect respect, I have the honor to be, sir, 
Your most obedient and most humble servant, 
ALEXANDER HAMILTON, 
Secretary of the Treasury. 

The Honorable the Speaker of the 
House of Representatives. 

No. i 

George Washington, President of the United States of 
America, to the Secretary of the Treasury for the time 
being. 

By virtue of the several acts, the one entitled " An act 
making provision for the debt of the United States," and 
the other entitled "An act making provision for the re 
duction of the public debt," I do hereby authorize and 
empower you, by yourself, or any other person or per 
sons, to borrow, on behalf of the United States, within 
the said States, or elsewhere, a sum, or sums, not ex 
ceeding, in the whole, fourteen millions of dollars, and to 
make, or cause to be made for that purpose, such con 
tract, or contracts, as shall be necessary, and for the 
interest of the said States, subject to the restrictions and 
limitations in the said several acts contained; and, for 
so doing, this shall be your sufficient warrant. 

In testimony whereof I have caused the seal of the 
United States to be hereunto affixed. 
Given under my hand, at the city of New York, this 
twenty-eighth day of August, in the year of our 
Lord one thousand seven hundred and ninety. 

GEORGE WASHINGTON. 

By the President : 

TH. JEFFERSON. 

VOL. III. — Q. 

Alexander Hamilton 

No. 2 

George Washington^ President of the United States of 
America, to the Secretary of the Treasury for the time 

Having thought fit to commit to you the charge of 
borrowing, on behalf of the United States, a sum, or 
sums, not exceeding, in the whole, fourteen millions of 
dollars, pursuant to the several acts, the one entitled 
"An act making provision for the debt of the United 
States," and the other entitled " An act making provision 
for the reduction of the public debt," I do hereby make 
known to you that, in the execution of the said trust, 
you are to observe and follow the orders and directions 
following, viz.: Except where otherwise especially di 
rected by me, you shall employ, in the negotiation of any 
loan, or loans, which may be made in any foreign country, 
William Short, Esq. You shall borrow, or cause to be 
borrowed, on the best terms which shall be found prac 
ticable (and within the limitations prescribed by law as 
to time of re-payment and rate of interest), such sum, or 
sums, as shall be sufficient to discharge, as well all instal 
ments, or parts of the principal of the foreign debt which 
now are due, or shall become payable to the end of the 
year one thousand seven hundred and ninety-one, as all 
interest and arrears of interest which now are or shall 
become due, in respect to the said debt, to the same end 
of the year one thousand seven hundred and ninety-one. 
And you shall apply, or cause to be applied, the moneys 
which shall be so borrowed, with all convenient despatch, 
to the payment of the said instalments, and parts of the 
principal and interest, and arrears of the interest of the 
said debt. You shall not extend the amount of the loan 
which you shall make, or cause to be made, beyond the 
sum which shall be necessary for completing such pay- 

Loans 131 

ment, unless it can be done upon terms more advant 
ageous to the United States than those upon which the 
residue of the said debt shall stand or be. But if the 
said residue, or any part of the same, can be paid off by 
new loans, upon terms of advantage to the United States, 
you shall cause such further loans as may be requisite 
to that end to be made, and the proceeds thereof to be 
applied accordingly. And for carrying into effect the 
objects and purposes aforesaid, I do hereby further 
empower you to make, or cause to be made, with 
whomsoever it may concern, such contract or contracts, 
being of a nature relative thereto, as shall be found 
needful, and conducive to the interest of the United 
States. 

If any negotiation with any prince or state to whom 
any part of the said debt may be due should be requisite, 
the same shall be carried on through the person who, in 
capacity of Minister, Charg6 des Affaires, or otherwise, 
now is, or hereafter shall be charged with, transacting 
the affairs of the United States with such prince or state ; 
for which purpose I shall direct the Secretary of State, 
with whom you are in this behalf to consult and concert, 
to co-operate with you. 

Given under my hand, at the city of New York, this 
twenty-eighth day of August, in the year of our 
Lord one thousand seven hundred and ninety. 

GEO. WASHINGTON. 

No. 3 '..=• 

To all to whom these presents shall come: 

Whereas by an act passed the fourth day of 
August, in this present year, entitled " An act mak 
ing provision for the debt of the United States," it 

i32 Alexander Hamilton 

is, among other things, enacted, that the President 
of the United States be authorized to cause to be 
borrowed, on behalf of the United States, a sum, or 
sums, not exceeding, in the whole, twelve millions 
of dollars, and that so much of that sum as may be 
necessary to the discharge of the said arrears and 
instalments, and (if it can be effected upon terms 
advantageous to the United States) to the paying 
off the whole of the said foreign debt, be appropriated 
solely to those purposes; and that the President be, 
moreover, further authorized to cause to be made, 
such other contracts respecting the said debt as shall 
be found for the interest of the said States: Pro 
vided, nevertheless, that no engagement or contract 
shall be entered into, which shall preclude the 
United States from reimbursing any sum or sums 
borrowed, within fifteen years after the same shall 
have been lent or advanced: 

And whereas, by another act, passed the twelfth 
day of August, in the present year, entitled " An act 
making provision for the reduction of the public 
debt," it is also, among other things, enacted, that 
the President of the United States be authorized 
to cause to be borrowed, on behalf of the United 
States, a sum, or sums, not exceeding in the whole 
two millions of dollars, at an interest not exceeding 
five per cent. : 

And whereas, by virtue of the said several acts, 
the President of the United States of America hath 
been pleased, by a certain commission or warrant, 
under his hand, to authorize and empower the Sec 
retary of the Treasury for the time being, by him- 

Loans 133 

self, or any other person or persons, to borrow, on 
behalf of the United States, within the said States, 
or elsewhere, a sum, or sums, not exceeding, in the 
whole, fourteen millions of dollars, and to make, or 
cause to be made, for that purpose, such contract or 
contracts as shall be necessary, and for the interest of 
the said States, subject to the restrictions and lim 
itations in the said several acts contained: And 
whereas Messrs. Wilhem and Jan Willink, and Nicho- 
laas and Jacob Van Staphorst and Hubbard, have, 
by letter, bearing date the twenty-fifth day of Jan 
uary, 1790, communicated to me, that they have 
entered into a certain provisional agreement, or 
arrangement, for a loan of three millions of florins, 
for the use of the United States of America, bearing 
an interest of five per centum per annum, and reim 
bursable by yearly instalments of six hundred thou 
sand florins, commencing in the year one thousand 
eight hundred and one, and ending in the year one 
thousand eight hundred and five: And whereas it 
appears to me for the interest of the said United 
States to accept the said loan: 

Now, therefore, be it known: That I, Alexander 
Hamilton, Secretary of the Treasury of the United 
States for the time being, by virtue of the power 
and authority in me vested, by the said President of 
the United States, and in his name, and on behalf of 
the United States of America, and to their use, do, 
by these presents, accept, agree to, ratify, and con 
firm the loan aforesaid, provisionally undertaken 
by the said Wilhem and Jan Willink, and Nicholaas 
and Jacob Van Staphorst and Hubbard. And I do 

134 Alexander Hamilton 

hereby authorize and empower the said Wilhem 
and Jan Willink, and Nicholaas and Jacob Van Stap- 
horst and Hubbard, or, in case of the death of any 
of them, the survivors, to borrow, on behalf of the 
United States, either by way of confirmation of the 
said provisional agreement, or otherwise, as need 
may be, a sum, or sums, not exceeding, in the whole, 
three millions of florins, subject to the restrictions 
and limitations in the said several acts contained 
and above recited; and for that purpose, in the name 
of the said President, on behalf of the United States 
of America, to execute such contracts, obligations, 
and instruments as shall be necessary, and conform 
able to usage, in the like cases, and the faith of the 
United States to pledge for the performance of the 
terms thereof; and if the same shall be deemed 
requisite, to stipulate for the ratification thereof by 
the President of the United States; hereby giving 
and granting to the said Wilhem and Jan Willink, 
and Nicholaas and Jacob Van Staphorst and Hub- 
bard, and the survivors of them, all my power and 
authority in the premises, and ratifying, allowing, 
and confirming whatsoever they shall lawfully do 
therein. 

In testimony whereof, I have caused the seal of the 
Treasury to be affixed to these presents, and 
have hereunto subscribed my hand, the twenty- 
eighth day of August, in the year of our Lord 
one thousand seven hundred and ninety. 

ALEXANDER HAMILTON, 
Secretary of the Treasury. 

Loans 135 

No. 4 

To all to whom these presents shall come: 

Whereas, by an act passed the fourth day of Au 
gust, in this present year, entitled " An act making 
provision for the debt of the United States," it is, 
among other things, enacted, that the President of 
the United States be authorized to cause to be bor 
rowed, on behalf of the United States, a sum, or 
sums, not exceeding, in the whole, twelve millions 
of dollars, and that so much of that sum as may be 
necessary to the discharge of the said arrears and 
instalments, and (if it can be effected upon terms 
advantageous to the United States) to the paying off 
the whole of the said foreign debt, be appropriated 
solely to those purposes ; and that the President be, 
moreover, further authorized to cause to be made 
such other contracts respecting the said debt as 
shall be found for the interest of the said States: 
Provided, nevertheless, that no engagement or con 
tract shall be entered into which shall preclude the 
United States from reimbursing any sum or sums 
borrowed, within fifteen years after the same shall 
have been lent or advanced: 

And whereas, by another act, passed the twelfth day 
of August, in the present year, entitled " An act mak 
ing provision for the reduction of the public debt, " it 
is, also, among other things, enacted that the Presi 
dent of the United States be authorized to cause to 
be borrowed, on behalf of the United States, a sum, or 
sums, not exceeding, in the whole, two millions of 
dollars, at an interest not exceeding five per cent. : 

136 Alexander Hamilton 

And whereas, by virtue of the said several acts, 
the President of the United States of America hath 
been pleased by a certain commission or warrant, 
under his hand, to authorize and empower the Secre 
tary of the Treasury for the time being, by himself, 
or any other person or persons, to borrow, on behalf 
of the United States, within the said States, or else 
where, a sum, or sums, not exceeding, in the whole, 
fourteen millions of dollars, and to make, or cause to 
be made, for that purpose, such contract or con 
tracts as shall be necessary, and for the interest of 
the said States, subject to the restrictions and lim 
itations in the said several acts contained: 

Now, therefore, know ye: That I, Alexander 
Hamilton, Secretary of the Treasury of the United 
States for the time being, by virtue of the said com 
mission, power, or warrant of the President of the 
United States of America, have authorized and em 
powered, and by these presents do authorize and 
empower, William Short, Charg6 des Affaires of the 
United States at the court of France, to borrow, on 
behalf of the United States, in any part of Europe, 
a sum, or sums, not exceeding, in the whole, fourteen 
millions of dollars, and to make, or cause to be made, 
for that purpose, such contract or contracts as shall 
be necessary, and for the interest of the said States, 
subject to the restrictions and limitations in the 
said several acts contained; and for so doing this 
shall be his sufficient warrant. 

In testimony whereof, I have caused the seal of the 
Treasury to be affixed to these presents, and 
have hereunto subscribed my hand, the first 

Public Funds 137 

day of September, in the year of our Lord one 
thousand seven hundred and ninety. 


A. — Statement showing the dates and sums of the respective pay 
ments which have been made on account of the debt due to France, out 
of the Dutch and Antwerp loans; and by whom, and to whom, the 
moneys were remitted or paid. 

B. — Statement showing the respective payments which have been 
made by William and John Willink, Nicholas and Jacob Van Staphorst 
and Hubbard, in Amsterdam, to individuals, upon the several loans 
made in Holland, on account of the United States. 

PUBLIC FUNDS 

Communicated to the Senate, February 14, 1793. 

TREASURY DEPARTMENT, February 14, 1793. 

SIR: 

I have the honor to transmit, herewith, in further 
pursuance of the order of the Senate of the 23d of 
January past, three several statements, marked A, 
B, C.1 

A being a general account of revenue and appro 
priations : exhibiting, on one side, all the income of 
the United States, except from the proceeds of loans, 
foreign and domestic, to the end of the year 1792; 
on the other, the respective amounts of all the ap 
propriations which have been made by law, to the 
same period. 

B being a general account of appropriations and 
expenditures to the same end of the year 1792. 
This statement takes up the excess of the appropria 
tions beyond the expenditure, to the end of the year 

1 See State Papers, " Finance," vol. i.,p. 218. 

138 Alexander Hamilton 

1791, as contained in the account of receipts and 
expenditures, reported to the House of Representa 
tives during the present session; and, including all 
the subsequent appropriations and expenditures to 
the end of 1792, shows the balance unsatisfied of 
each head of appropriation. 

C being an explanatory statement, for the purpose 
of showing a conformity between the aggregate of 
the balances of appropriations unsatisfied, and the 
balance of the public income beyond the public ex 
penditure, to the end of the year 1792, as repre 
sented in the statement B, heretofore reported. 

It will be observed, that the most considerable 
item among the balances of appropriations is for 
interest on the public debt — amounting to one mil 
lion three hundred and ninety-five thousand eight 
hundred and twenty-four dollars and sixty-five 
cents. This happens in three ways. ist. The in 
terest on the foreign part of the debt has been paid 
in Europe, out of the proceeds of the loans; the sum 
paid will consequently require to be replaced out of 
the domestic funds, and will operate as if an equal 
sum had been transferred here by drafts. 2d. The 
payment of interest to certain States, upon the differ 
ence between their quotas of the assumed debt and 
the sums subscribed upon the first loan, has been 
suspended, in consequence of the opening of the 
second loan, to avoid a double payment of interest, 
first to the States, and next to the subscribers, 
which might otherwise happen. 3d. There is a part 
of the public debt which has continued in a form 
that has not entitled the holders, under the existing 

Loans 139 

laws, to receive interest either as subscribers or 
non-subscribers. 

There are certain arrears of interest, on the part 
of the debt entitled to interest, which did not come 
into the accounts of the year 1792. 

This balance of interest, however, will be a real 
future expenditure, as, indeed, will be the case with 
regard to most of the other balances of appropria 
tions. There will be surpluses, but these surpluses 
cannot exceed, if they equal, the sum mentioned in 
my letter of the 4th instant, to the House of Repre 
sentatives. 

With perfect respect, I have the honor to be, 
Sir, your obedient servant, 

ALEXANDER HAMILTON, 
Secretary of the Treasury. 

To the Vice-President of the United States and 
President of the Senate. 

A. — Statement of the revenue of the United States, and appropria 
tions charged thereon to the end of the year 1792. 

B. — General statement of the appropriations made by law, and of the 
expenditures of the United States in relation thereto, from the first 
day of January to the last day of December, 1792. 

C. — Statement exhibiting the debts charged upon the unexpended 
and uncollected income of the United States on the last day of the year 
1792- 

LOANS 

Communicated to the House of Representatives, February 20, 1793. 
TREASURY DEPARTMENT, February 19, 1793. 

SIR: 

The last letter which I had the honor to address to 
the House of Representatives contained a pretty full 

140 Alexander Hamilton 

exposition of the conduct and views of this Depart 
ment in regard to the foreign loans. There remain, 
however, some incidental topics which it may not be 
expedient to pass over in silence. 

In order to carry the attention of the House imme 
diately to a just application of the remarks which 
will be submitted, it is necessary to premise that it is 
known to have been suggested that the proceeds of 
the foreign bills drawn for to this country had no 
object of public utility — answered none — and were 
calculated merely to indulge a spirit of favoritism 
toward the Bank of the United States. 

It has already been shown, clearly, I trust, that, but 
for the instrumentality of the parts of the loan drawn 
for prior to April, 1792, amounting nearly to one half 
of the whole sum, the purchases of the debt which 
were made to that time could not have been made; 
and that these purchases, besides being the object de 
signated by law, for the application of the fund, were 
productive of positive and important advantages. 

How far the operation could have been influenced 
by motives of favor to the Bank of the United States, 
the following facts will still more completely decide. 

That bank did not begin its operations till the 1 2th 
of December, 1791. 

The banks of North America and New York were 
the agents of the Treasury for the sale of the bills in 
question. They sold them, collected and, with the 
exception which will be presently stated, disbursed 
the proceeds. 

The receipts on account of those bills began in 
March, 1791, and concluded in March, 1792. 

Loans 141 

On the 3ist of December, 1791, as the Treasurer's 
account before the House will show, the public cash 
was deposited as follows: 

In the Bank of the United States . . $133,000 oo 

Bank of North America . . . 471,972 28 

Bank of New York . . . 224,677 35 

Bank of Massachusetts . . . 65,578 22 

Bank of Maryland .... 50,665 29 

Bank of Providence . . . 7,969 61 

Making, together . . $953,862 75 

There was then also some moneys in the banks of 
North America and New York, in a course of re 
ceipt, which had not been passed over to the Treas 
urer; but all the public moneys, of whatever kind, 
in the Bank of the United States, are included in the 
above sum of 133,000, which had arisen from the 
duties on imports and tonnage. 

It appears, then, that, on the 3ist of December, 
1791, no transfer for the benefit of the Bank of the 
United States had been made ; and that the deposits 
of the Government there (exclusive of the proceeds 
of the bills remaining in the two banks, of North 
America and New York) amounted to little more 
than one fourth of the deposits in the Bank of North 
America, and little more than one half of those in the 
Bank of New York. 

As late as the ist of February, the State banks 
continued to share with the Bank of the United 
States a large proportion of the public deposits. 
The state of the Treasury then was as follows, viz. : 

i42 Alexander Hamilton 

In the Bank of the United States . . $456,278 90 

Bank of North America . . . 151,51632 

Bank of New York . . . 128,708 21 

Bank of Massachusetts . . . 71,215 55 

Bank of Maryland . . . . 49,583 25 


Making, together . . $865,271 84 

A concentration of the public deposits in the Bank 
of the United States was a measure which grew out 
of the relation between that establishment and the 
Government. Yet, instead of hastening it through 
favor, it was resolved to let it have a gradual course ; 
so as to consult, in a due degree, the convenience of 
the other banks, and to effect it rather by letting the 
public disbursements fall upon the moneys in those 
banks than by direct transfer. 

But a state of things took place in the month of 
February, between the banks of the United States 
and North America, which rendered a more ex 
peditious transfer than was meditated, for the 
mutual convenience of the two institutions. 

The effect of this was, that the state of the Treas 
ury, on the ist of March, stood as follows: 

In the Bank of the United States . . $692,959 06 

Bank of Massachusetts . . . 31,769 05 

Bank of New York . . . 32,352 52 

Bank of North America . . . 31,515 74 

Bank of Providence . . . 8,404 94 

Bank of Maryland . . . . 34,752 85 

Making, together . . $831,754 16 

Loans 143 

But at this time there was in the Bank of New 
York, from the proceeds of the foreign bills, 121,984 
dollars and 7 1 cents, not transferred to the account 
of the Treasurer. 

This accumulation, however, in the Bank of the 
United States, was of very short duration. 

On the ist of April ensuing, the state of the public 
cash was as follows: 

In the Bank of the United States . . $359,643 64 

Bank of New York . . . 254,930 41 


Bank of Massachusetts . . . 37,712 58 

Bank of Providence . . . 7,156 65 

Bank of Maryland .... 60,418 32 

Making, together . . $75I»377 34 

A similar state of things lasted to the ist of June, 
comparatively more disadvantageous to the Bank of 
the United States. The receipts of public revenue 
continued to go into the Bank of New York till the 
ist of April, 1792, when a branch of the Bank of the 
United States began to operate in that city; which 
is the reason of the sum in the Bank of New York 
bearing so near a proportion to that of the United 
States, and so far exceeding the Bank of North 
America. By this time, also, the balance of the 
proceeds of foreign bills had been passed to the ac 
count of the Treasurer ; yet still remaining in deposit 
in the Bank of New York. 

These views of the state of the public cash are 
conformable to the Treasurer's statement of half- 

144 Alexander Hamilton 

monthly balances, accompanying my letter of the 
1 3th instant, No. V. 

The same statement will show, that a proportion 
of the public deposits has continued, since the ist of 
April, 1792, in the State banks; in those of North 
America and New York down to the end of the 
period which that statement embraces. 

From these details the following inferences are 
deducible. 

That, as far as any advantages may have accrued 
from the deposits on account of the foreign bills 
drawn prior to April, 1792, they accrued substanti 
ally to the banks of North America and New York, 
not to the Bank of the United States, or to its 
branches. That, in transferring the pecuniary con 
cerns of the Government from the pre-existing banks 
to that of the United States and its dependencies, a 
cautious regard has been paid to the convenience of 
the former institutions, and the reverse of a policy 
unduly solicitous for the accommodation of the Bank 
of the United States has prevailed. Indeed, so 
much has this been the case, that it might be proved, 
if it were proper to enter into the proof, that a criti 
cism has been brought upon the conduct of the De 
partment, as consulting less the accommodation of 
the last-mentioned institution, than was due to its 
relation to the Government and to the services ex 
pected from it. 

But further examination will demonstrate an 
other point; which is, that none of the establishments 
in question have received any accommodations 
which were not in perfect coincidence with the pub- 

Loans 145 

lie interest, and in the due and proper course of 
events. 

This examination will be directed toward two 
objects: one, the state of the Treasury at the com 
mencement of each quarter during the years 1791 
and 1792; the other, the state of the market in re 
gard to the prices of stock during the same years. 

These periods are selected, because they afford the 
truest criterion of the state of the Treasury, from 
time to time, being those at which the principal 
public payments are made ; and for which it is neces 
sary to be prepared by intermediate accumulations. 

The state of the Treasury at the periods in ques 
tion was as follows : 

IN THE YEAR 1791 

January i . . . . . . . $569,886 55 

April i 373,434 53 

July i . 533,638 24 
October i 662,233 99 

IN THE YEAR 1792 

January i . 953,862 75 

APril i ... . 75i,377 34 

July i ..... . 623,133 61 

October i 420,914 51 

January i, 1793 • • 783,212 37 

This appears from the statements Nos. 4 and 5, 
forwarded with my last letter. 

The state of the stock market, during the several 
quarters of the same years, was as follows: 

VOL. III. — 10. 

146 Alexander Hamilton 

FIRST QUARTER OF 1791 

Six per cents from . . 165. gd. to 17$. 6d. 

Three per cents from . . 8s. 6d. to 9*. ^d. 

Deferred, from . . .8s. 6d. to gs. \d. 

SECOND QUARTER OF 1791 

Six per cents from . .175. to 17$. gd. 

Three per cents from . . gs. to xos. 

Deferred, from . . . 8s. i id. to 9*. 4^. 

THIRD QUARTER OF 1791 

Six per cents from . . ijs. lod. to 2 is. $d. 

Three per cents from . . gs. gd. to i2S. $d. 

Deferred, from . . . gs. gd. to i2S. 

As early as the 6th of August, the six per cents had 
a temporary rise to 2 is., but by the i6th they had 
fallen to 205.; on the 2oth they had risen to 205. 6d., 
and were sometimes above that rate, but never 
lower, during the rest of the quarter. 

As early as the 23d of July the three per cents had 
reached 125., and were sometimes higher, but never 

On the 23d of July the deferred also reached 125., 
and afterwards rose to 125. 6d. 

FOURTH QUARTER OF 1791 

Six per cents from . . 205. 4^. to 22s. 40?. 

Three per cents from . . 125. 2d. to 13^. Sd. 
Deferred, from . . .us. Sd. to 135. 6d. 

The prices were lowest in the early, and highest in 
the latter, part of the quarter. 

During the whole of the month of December, the 

Loans 147 

deferred was at 125. 8J. and upwards — the greatest 
part of the time at 135. 

FIRST QUARTER OF 1792 

Six per cents from . . .215. to 255. 

Three per cents from . . .125. 6d. to 155. 
Deferred, from . . . .125. to 155. 

The low prices were in the last ten days of March. 

SECOND QUARTER OF 1792 

Six per cents from . . 205. to 225. 6d. 

Three per cents from . .125. to 135. gd. 

Deferred, from . . .115. 6d. to 135. ^d. 

THIRD QUARTER OF 1792 

Six per cents from . .215. to 225. $d. 

Three per cents from . .125. ^d. to 135. 6d. 
Deferred, from . . .125. 3^. to 135. yd. 

FOURTH QUARTER OF 1792 

Six per cents from . . 205. 2d. to 215. gd. 
Three per cents from . .125. $d. to 135. 6d. 
Deferred, from . . .115. icd. to 135. 6d. 

In October the deferred was at the highest. The 
lowest prices were in the month of December. 

This view of the subject is derived from a state 
ment of prices, pursuant to actual purchases and 
sales, furnished by a dealer of this city, respectable 
for his intelligence and probity, combined with the 
accounts from time to time published in the Gazette 
of the United States. The papers marked (A x.) and 
(B y.) are transmitted for the more particular in 
formation of the House on this head. 

148 Alexander Hamilton 

The market-prices of stocks no doubt varied at 
•other places; at some may have been higher, at 
others lower. At Philadelphia, too, 't is believed that 
small sums were obtainable at particular periods, 
from necessitous individuals, below the prices in 
the statement. 

But there is good ground of reliance that it is sub 
stantially a just representation of the state of the 
stock market during the periods to which it refers. 

The state of the Treasury from the ist of January 
to the ist of October, 1791, may be said to have been 
at its proper level, exhibiting none, or an incon 
siderable excess beyond the sum which has been 
mentioned as necessary to be there, and concerning 
which a further explanation has been promised, and 
will be given in the course of this letter. The public 
purchases in August and September, 1791, amounted 
to 349,744 dollars and 99 cents. 

In the last quarter of the year 1791, beginning 
with the month of November, and the first quarter 
of the year 1792, there appears to have been an ex 
cess of some magnitude in the Treasury, being from 
about 250,000 to about 450,000 dollars. Taking the 
first quarter of 1792 as the truest criterion (which it 
certainly was, because at the expiration of that 
quarter the payment of interest on the assumed debt 
began, and was to be provided for), the real excess 
ought to be considered as 250,000 dollars; with the 
addition of about 80,000 dollars then in the Bank of 
North America from the proceeds of Amsterdam bills, 
beyond the advances of the bank for the public serv 
ice, which had not been passed into the Treasurer's 

Loans 149 

account. It is proper to remark that the course of 
importations occasions large receipts in the latter 
part of each year, which circumstance contributed 
to the accumulation in question. 

From the last of November to about the 2ist of 
March an investment of the excess on hand in pur 
chases was impracticable. 

To enable the House to understand what is meant 
by saying that purchases were impracticable during 
that period, it is necessary to add that the prices of 
stock exceeded the limits which the commissioners 
of the sinking fund had prescribed to themselves. 
Indeed, a large proportion of the time those prices 
were manifestly artificial, and such as predicted a 
great fall not far distant. The delay incurred was 
accordingly well compensated by the prices at which 
investments were afterward made. 

From the 2ist of March to the 25th of April pur 
chases were effected to the extent of 242,688 dollars 
and 31 cents in specie; within 80,000 or 90,000 
dollars of what could have been spared, consistently 
with the rule which has been mentioned, as proper 
to regulate the arrangements of the Treasury. 

But two circumstances operated against a further 
investment: a sudden rise of prices, and a state of 
temporary disorder in the two principal mercantile 
scenes of the country (occasioned by the excessive 
speculations that had preceded), which admonished 
the Treasury to be cautious in its disbursements. 

It results from the foregoing view of the subject 
that, as far as any extraordinary sum may appear to 
have remained unemployed in the banks a longer 

15° Alexander Hamilton 

term than was desirable, it proceeded essentially 
from a state of things which did not permit its em 
ployment, and is in no degree attributable to that 
spirit of favoritism toward those establishments, or 
any of them, which has been imagined as the solu 
tion of appearances not rightly understood and much 
overrated. 

The only question, then, of which the matter is 
susceptible, is this : Was not the state of things that 
did take place to have been foreseen, so as to have 
influenced the drawing for a proportionably less 
sum? 

This question may safely be answered in the 
negative. 

The bills, the proceeds of which contributed to 
constitute the excess, which remained unemployed 
during the two quarters were drawn in May, 1791. 
In that month the highest prices of stock were 175. 
2d. for six per cents, 95. 2^., for three per cents, and 
gs. $d. for deferred. 

No reasonable anticipation, at this juncture, of 
the progressive rise of stock could have carried it in 
so short a time to the height which it attained, or 
beyond the limits within which purchases were 
deemed advantageous. The rapid and extraordin 
ary rise which did ensue was, in fact, artificial and 
violent ; such as no discreet calculation of probabili 
ties could have presupposed. It therefore cannot 
impeach the prudence or expediency of having made 
provision, on a different supposition, for an extension 
of purchases. 

The proceeds of the bills which were drawn subse- 

Loans 1 5 1 

quent to May only began to be collected about the 
beginning of February, and continued in collection 
until the 29th of March. On the 2d of February, 
the sum received amounted to no more than 13,431 
dollars and 33 cents. 

These last bills were drawn when the rapid rise of 
stock commenced, and were sold upon a credit of 
three months. It was a natural conjecture, that a 
rise so sudden and violent could not be of long dura 
tion; and that a declension would shortly succeed, 
which would afford an opportunity of purchasing 
with advantage, and render the intervention of 
public purchases advantageous in more than one 
respect. The event fully corresponded with the 
anticipation. 

With regard to the bills drawn in April last, it has 
been stated that they were directed to be sold upon 
a credit of six months ; that those drawn in July, 
August, and October were made payable, one moiety 
in two, the other moiety in four months. Hence, 
with a moderate allowance for delay in the sales, the 
period contemplated by the arrangement for the com 
mencement of receipts was the month of October; 
that for their consummation, the month of February. 

The inducements to the drawing of these bills 
have been stated. The present examination has 
relation merely to the question, whether the Bank 
of the United States, by premeditation of this De 
partment, or subsequent omissions, had enjoyed any 
undue advantage from the deposits of the proceeds 
of the bills at the end of the year 1792, the point of 
time to which this inquiry has reference. 

152 Alexander Hamilton 

The statement which has been made, as to the 
time the moneys received to that period had re 
mained in deposit, might alone be relied upon as a 
sufficient answer. If delinquency can be attached 
to the non-employment of one or two hundred 
thousand dollars for a few weeks, in the money op 
erations of a nation, it implies a minuteness of re 
sponsibility which could never be encountered with 
prudence, and never will be fulfilled in practice. 
The distractions of attention, incident to a great and 
complicated scene of business, would alone disappoint 
the expectation. 

But I have more than this to offer upon the present 
occasion. The opportunity for investing the moneys 
on hand, during the period in question, was not 
favorable. This was experienced by the Treasurer, 
in his endeavors to invest the fund arising from the 
interest on the purchased debt. There was no part 
but the deferred which could be had at all within 
the limits prescribed. Several indications of an ap 
proaching season, more advantageous for purchases, 
were discernible, and a better employment of the 
money than at the then prices presented itself to 
the option of the Legislature. This mode of em 
ploying it, formed, in my mind, part of a general 
plan for the regular redemption of the public debt, 
according to the right reserved to the Government. 
The one per cent, which might be saved was re 
garded as one means of constituting the proposed 
annuities. 

Accordingly, on the 3oth of November last, pur 
suant to a reference of the 226. of that month, and 

Loans 153 

connected with the plan of redemption contemplated, 
I submitted to the House of Representatives a pro 
position for applying the moneys in question toward 
discharging the debt which the Government owes to 
the bank, and upon which an interest of six per cent, 
is payable. This was manifestly, at the time of the 
proposition, the most profitable use that could be 
made of the fund. It has been already stated, that 
it would produce a saving, if extended to the whole 
two millions, worth to the Government an annual 
sum of 20,000 dollars — equal to a capital of 400,000 
dollars. 

This proposition tended to accelerate the employ 
ment of the moneys on hand, in a way the most 
beneficial to the Government; and consequently to 
shorten the duration of the advantage to the banks 
of holding them, by way of deposit. I submit it to the 
candor of the House, whether it be not full evidence 
that there was no disposition, on my part, to prolong 
to those institutions a benefit at the expense of the 
Government. 

The proposition itself has not yet received the 
decision of the House. 

Another ground upon which the suggestion of 
mismanagement and undue concession to the in 
terest of the banks has been founded, respects the 
domestic loans which have been obtained. Those 
of them which have been made of the Bank of 
the United States are represented as unnecessary, 
tending to afford an emolument to that institution, 
for which the United States had no equivalent 
advantage. 

154 Alexander Hamilton 

It will conduce to a correct judgment of this mat 
ter, to resume a point already touched upon, and to 
add here the further illustrations of it which have 
been promised, to wit: that it ought to be a general 
principle to have constantly in the command of the 
Treasury, at its different places of deposit, a sum of 
about 500,000 dollars — a principle, too, which must 
be understood with reference to the beginnings of 
the quarters of a year, when the chief public pay 
ments are made and making. 

The following observations will apply generally to 
the balances which appear at the commencement of 
each quarter. The greatest part of the interest for 
the preceding quarter will have been then deducted; 
but a part is always in a different situation. 

The payment of interest upon a public debt, at 
thirteen different places, is an operation as difficult 
and complicated as it is new. In carrying it into 
execution, it is of necessity to lodge, for some time 
previous to the expiration of each quarter, at several 
of the loan offices, drafts of the Treasurer, for the 
sums estimated to be necessary at those offices, with 
blanks for the direction, and with liberty to the re 
spective officers to dispose of them upon different 
places, as a demand accrues. This arrangement has 
an eye to two purposes : to avoid large previous ac 
cumulations at particular points; to facilitate the 
placing of the requisite sums, where they are wanted, 
without the transportation of specie. The allowing 
of the drafts to be disposed of on several places gives 
larger scope to a demand for them, and renders them 
more easily salable. But it is a consequence of this 

Loans 155 

that a part of the drafts are often not placed and 
brought into the accounts of the Treasurer, till some 
time after the expiration of the quarter. The fund 
for them of course appears on hand till the transac 
tion is completed. 

Connected with the circumstance of paying the 
interest upon the public debt at different places, is 
this further consequence. The transfers continually 
going on from one office to another render it im 
possible to know, at any moment when provision for 
the payment of interest is to be made, what sum is 
requisite at each place. Estimate must supply the 
want of knowledge; and, to avoid disappointment 
anywhere, the estimate must always be large, and a 
correspondent sum placed in the power of the com 
missioners. This circumstance alone requires an 
extra sum at the different places of payment, which 
ought not to be computed at less than fifty thousand 

Again, the sums payable on account of the civil 
list, at the end of each quarter, which amount to 
about fifty thousand dollars, exclusive of what re 
lates to the two Houses of Congress, are always in a 
course of payment for some time within the succeed 
ing quarter. The fund for them consequently ap 
pears in the moneys on hand at the beginning of such 
quarter. 

Again, there are constantly considerable arrears of 
existing appropriations, for which demands on the 
Treasury are at every moment possible; the times 
when they will be presented, and to what extent, at 
any given time, being in a great degree contingent. 

156 Alexander Hamilton 

The arrears for the different objects of the War 
Department can seldom be estimated at less than 
150,000 dollars. 

It is presumed to be a clear principle, that the 
Treasury ought to be always ready to face such 
arrears as may be claimed at every instant, or 
within any short period. An hour's distress or em 
barrassment to make good a public payment, already 
due, would be baneful to public credit. It has been 
a uniform maxim of the present administration of 
the Treasury never to risk such distress or embar 
rassment. 

Independently, therefore, of the weighty considera 
tion of being prepared (especially with a war on 
hand liable every moment to greater extension) for 
future casualties, the mere satisfaction of arrears 
ought to cause the constant reservation of a sum, 
that would be moderately stated at half the sum 
which it has been alleged ought always to be in the 
Treasury. It is to be observed, that it does not 
often happen that the current receipts to be ex 
pected in any immediately succeeding quarter are 
likely to exceed the probable expenditure of the 
quarter. The reverse is as often the case. Hence 
the greater necessity of maintaining a constant 
surplus. 

There are still other considerations of weight, in a 
just estimate of the point in question. 

The sum stated as necessary to be always in the 
command of the Treasury is never in fact at the seat 
of the Government, where far the greatest part of 
the public disbursements are to be made. The 

Loans 157 

depositories of it are the several banks from Charles 
ton to Boston. The whole sum, therefore, can 
never be brought into immediate action for answer 
ing the claims upon the Treasury. No part can be 
properly viewed as in this situation, beyond New- 
York on the one side, and Baltimore on the other. 
Whatever part is more remote than these points 
ought not to be regarded as capable of being com 
manded in less time, upon an average, than sixty 
days, making allowance for the usual delays in the 
sale of bills, and the usual terms of credit, which 
experience has shown to be convenient. 

In estimating the effective sum at any time on 
hand, in the Bank of the United States, it is neces 
sary to be known, that a practice for the simplifica 
tion of the Treasurer's bank account, begun with the 
Bank of North America, has been continued with 
the Bank of the United States, of this nature : The 
bills drawn by the Treasurer upon distant places, 
and deposited with the bank for sale, are immediately 
passed to his credit as cash, though they are allowed 
to be sold at credits from thirty to sixty days; and 
it is understood, that the proceeds are not demand- 
able of the bank till they are collected. Hence the 
apparent sum in the Bank of the United States is 
always greater than the real; sometimes to a large 
amount. 

The deductions to be made for this circumstance 
are shown in the Treasurer's half monthly statement 
of balances No. 5, beginning with the first of June, 
1792, and ending with the first of January, 1793. 
The period begun with is that when the first 

158 Alexander Hamilton 

instalment of the loan from the bank was payable 
and has been selected for this reason. 

The propriety of these deductions appears to have 
been objected to, by anticipation, on two grounds: 
one, that the bills deposited answer all the purposes 
of cash, and ought to be credited as such, on the re 
ceipt of them; the other, that " there is a regular and 
constant influx of moneys into the bank, by the 
operation of these bills, and that it is not very 
material whether a bill lodged in the bank to-day 
should be paid to-day, provided something like the 
same sum should be paid in consequence of a bill 
lodged in bank one or two months ago, and the bill 
of to-day should be paid one or two months hence." 

Neither the one nor the other of these two posi 
tions is correct. 

In no sense are the notes of the purchasers of the 
bills, which are taken payable in thirty, forty-five, 
and sixty days, the same thing to a bank as cash. It 
is evident it could not pay its own bills with those 
notes. In this primary particular, therefore, the 
comparison fails; neither could it make discounts 
upon the basis of those notes as cash. Because 
every discount gives a right to a borrower to call and 
receive in coin, if he pleases, the amount of the sum 
discounted. Notes are not coin, nor do they confer 
an equal power to pay. It is true that a bank will, 
in its discounts, make some calculation on expected 
receipts; but it can never consider them as equiva 
lent to cash in hand, nor operate upon them in any 
degree to the same extent as upon equal sums in 
cash. If notes payable at future periods were 

Loans 159 

equivalent to cash, then every discount made by 
a bank would confer a faculty to make another for 
an equal sum; for there is always a note deposited 
for the sum discounted, and the power of discounting 
might, by the mere exercise of it, become infinite. An 
hypothesis of this kind will never be acted upon by 
any prudent directors of a bank, and could not be 
long acted upon without ruin to the institution. It 
is to be observed that the great profitable business 
of a bank, consists in discounting. 

There is but one light in which the position under 
examination is in any degree founded. It is this, 
that, were it not for the instrumentality of the bills, 
the specie of the bank would be sometimes remitted 
for purposes which are answered by the bills. As 
often as this happens they are a substitute to the 
bank for cash, because they prevent equivalent sums 
from being carried away. 

But this only sometimes happens. In numerous 
instances the enterprises to which the bills are sub 
servient would not be undertaken at all were it not 
for the power of anticipation which the credits upon 
them afford. In many other instances the bills of 
the bank itself would be remitted instead of specie ; 
in others, private bills would be substituted; in 
others, mutual credits between the merchants, to be 
liquidated in the course of mutual dealings, would 
supply the call. 

Hence it is only true that Treasury bills some 
times answer the purpose of cash to the bank, whence 
it does not follow that they ought always to be con 
sidered and credited definitively as cash. It is also 

160 Alexander Hamilton 

true, though in a less degree, that notes deposited 
with the bank by individuals, for collection, some 
times answer to it the purposes of cash; but it will 
be readily perceived that it would be inadmissible, 
as a general rule, to receive and credit them as such. 

The effect in both cases would be that the bank 
would make an advance of a present sum without in 
terest, for a sum to be received in future. 

An arrangement, indeed, has been for some time 
depending between the Bank of the United States 
and the Treasury, for securing to the Government 
the advantage of an immediate absolute credit for 
the bills deposited, as so much cash, to be coupled 
with some collateral accommodations to the bank. 
But it has not yet been carried into effect. The 
fact heretofore has been as stated, and the reasoning, 
to be just, must proceed on that basis. 

The last of the two positions which have been 
cited has still less foundation than the first. 

A sum received to-day, for a bill deposited two 
months past, can in no view be deemed a substitute 
for the amount of a bill deposited to-day to be 
received two months hence. It is to be remembered 
that the amount of the first bill was itself credited 
at the time of the deposit; and that the sum received 
to-day on that account can only realize the antecedent 
credit. It cannot represent or be an equivalent for 
the future receipt upon a different bill. To affirm 
that it could, is to make one sum the representative 
of two. The consequence of the reasoning would be 
that the Government ought to receive the money 
paid in to-day as a satisfaction, as well for the bill 

Loans 161 

deposited to-day, as for that which was deposited 
two months past. 

Making the proper deductions on account of the 
bills, the amount of the effective cash in the banks 
of Philadelphia, New York, and Baltimore was, on 
the first of June, 587,091 dollars and n cents; in 
other banks there was then also the further sum of 
9,591 dollars and 89 cents, making together 596,683 
dollars. The amount of the effective cash on the 
second of July in the banks of Philadelphia, New 
York, and Baltimore was 217,234 dollars and 76 
cents: there were then also in the other banks 
184,998 dollars and 85 cents; making, together, 
402,233 dollars and 61 cents. The amount of the 
effective cash on the first of October in the banks at 
Philadelphia, New York, and Baltimore was 244,394 
dollars and 27 cents; there were then also in the 
other banks 145,420 dollars and 24 cents; making, 
together, 389,814 dollars and 51 cents. 

The deductions for bills at the several periods 
were, June ist, 157,508 dollars and 33 cents; July 
second, 220,900 dollars; October first, 31,100 dol 
lars; so that, including the bills at that epoch, the 
whole sum in the banks at Philadelphia, New York, 
and Baltimore amounted to no more than 275,494 
dollars and 27 cents; the sums in the other banks, 
to 145,420 dollars and 24 cents. 

On the first of June there were paid on account of 
the debt to France 100,000 dollars; the day follow 
ing, the first instalment of 100,000 dollars, on ac 
count of the loan from the bank, was received. On 
the 3oth of June the second instalment of 100,000 

VOL. III. — II. 

1 62 Alexander Hamilton 

dollars was received. These two instalments, 
amounting to 200,000 dollars, are included in the 
sum of 217,234 dollars and 76 cents, which, on the 
^d of July, constituted the cash in all the banks at 
Philadelphia, New York, and Baltimore. 

About the beginning of August another instal 
ment on account of the loan of the bank was re 
ceived, and on the 2 9th of September another, 
making, with the preceding ones, 400,000 dollars. 
This sum was involved in the balance in the Treasury 
on the first of October, which, it has been seen, did 
not exceed in the banks at and near the seat of the 
Government, including even unsold and unpaid bills, 
275,494 dollars and 27 cents; and, comprehending 
the sums in all the other banks, amounted to no 
more than 420,914 dollars and 51 cents. 

From the foregoing detail it appears that, exclud 
ing the 200,000 dollars received on loan of the Bank 
of the United States, in the month of June, there 
would have been, on the 2d of July, 1792, in the 
command of the Treasury at those places, from 
which immediate supplies may be derived, no 
greater sum than 17,234 dollars and 76 cents; that, 
excluding the 400,000 dollars, before that time re 
ceived on loan of the same bank, there would have 
been on the ist of October, 1792, an absolute de 
ficiency within the scene described of 124,505 dollars 
and 73 cents; that the whole balance then in the 
Treasury, wheresoever deposited, amounted only to 
420,914 dollars and 51 cents, and, excluding the loan 
of the bank, would not have been more than 20,914 
dollars and 51 cents. 

Loans 163 

There must be some very radical error in my 
conceptions of the proper condition of the Treasury, 
if it was not in a sufficiently low state, during the 
whole period under consideration; and if it be not 
demonstrated that the moneys taken of the bank on 
loan were necessary for the public service, and were 
obtained with a due regard to economy. 

There are circumstances which still further mani 
fest the attention which has been paid to this point. 
The powers given to make loans for domestic pur 
poses at different times, up to the 8th of May, 1792, 
comprehend an aggregate of 1,053,355 dollars and 
74 cents; the sums which have been actually ob 
tained upon interest amount to no more than 455,- 
ooo dollars. 

The contract upon which the 400,000 dollars were 
obtained was made on the 25th of May, 1792, ex 
tending to 523,500 dollars, and contemplating the 
payment of 400,000 dollars of that sum by the bank, 
in equal monthly instalments, beginning on the ist 
of June, and ending the ist of September; the 
residue on the ist of January, 1793. 

Previous to the making of that contract there had 
been stipulated to be paid on account of the French 
debt, for the supplies of St. Domingo, 400,000 dol 
lars, of which one fourth was paid in March, another 
fourth was payable on the ist of June, another 
fourth on the ist of September, another fourth on 
the ist of December. 

Particular causes render it an accommodation 
to the agents of France to postpone and subdivide 
the September instalment. A similar postponement 

164 Alexander Hamilton 

took place with regard to the instalment payable by 
the bank on the ist of September, which was not de 
manded till the latter end of the month, and the 
remainder of the sum contracted for has not yet 
been demanded. The spirit of the precaution, 
which secured to the public the privilege of making 
or forbearing its calls, according to circumstances, 
needs no comment. 

There remain to be noticed two circumstances, 
which will serve to throw additional light upon the 
conduct which has been observed with regard to 
the sums from time to time kept on hand. A com 
parison of the sums in the Treasury, during the years 
1791 and 1792, will contradict the idea of any dis 
position to suffer the public moneys to accumulate, 
for the benefit of the Bank of the United States, and 
its subdivisions, and will at the same time indicate 
the general rule which has governed. In this com 
parison, it is necessary to recollect that larger opera 
tions were to be performed in 1792. 

It may be objected, that the rule laid down has 
been on several occasions exceeded. How this has 
happened at certain periods has been explained. 
But there is a view of the subject which will throw 
further light upon it. 

The sums which appear on hand at the end of any 
quarter are always larger on a retrospective than on 
a previous view. This proceeds from the following 
cause : 

The judgment to be formed beforehand of the sums 
which will be received within any future period must 
of necessity be regulated by the returns in posses- 

Loans 165 

sion of the Treasury at the time the examination is 
made. As these come forward with more or less 
punctuality, that judgment will be more or less 
accurate; but, the appearance on the returns will 
always be short of the fact, because a certain number 
of returns, at any period of examination, will neces 
sarily be deficient. What does not appear, must 
of course be essentially excluded from the calcula 
tion of the receipts to be expected within any near 
period. Because the extent of the sums which may 
have accrued, beyond those shown by the returns 
in hand, is unknown, and it is still more uncertain 
in what months the payments of them may fall; 
and the combinations of the Treasury, as to the 
means of fulfilling the demands upon it, ought to 
proceed as little as possible upon conjectures and 
uncertainties. 

Monthly abstracts of the bonds taken at each port 
are the documents which serve to inform the Treas 
ury of the progress of the receipts upon the duties of 
imports. From these a general abstract is made up 
once a month at the Treasury, for the information 
of the head of the Department, showing the amount 
payable in each month. 

But very considerable differences appear from 
one month to another. The statement CZ, will 
serve as an illustration. 

It contains a comparison of the sums shown by 
two successive abstracts, one of the 7th of Novem 
ber, the other of the yth of December last, for a 
term of ten months, distributed into monthly sub 
divisions. The aggregate difference upon the whole 

1 66 Alexander Hamilton 

term between the two abstracts is 495,308 dollars 
and 73 cents; upon two months, beginning with 
November and ending with December, it is 151,789 
dollars and 40 cents ; upon a quarter beginning with 
January and ending with March, it is 174,471 dol 
lars and 66 cents; upon a subsequent quarter, it is 
81,055 dollars and 81 cents; upon a still subsequent 
quarter, it is 87,991 dollars and 86 cents. 

Hence it is evident, that an arrangement founded 
upon the abstract of the 7th of November would 
suppose a receipt during any part of the time em 
braced by it, even the most proximate, considerably 
less than would appear by the abstract only one 
month later; and it must always happen, from this 
circumstance, that the actual receipts, while punc 
tuality is preserved, will exceed the anticipations of 
them, and that greater balances will be found to 
exist at any given period than could have been be 
forehand safely calculated or acted upon. This cir 
cumstance, duly considered, will be a further and 
powerful justification of the conduct pursued gener 
ally, in relation to the moneys from time to time 
kept on hand, and particularly with regard to the 
loans of the bank. Low as the state of the Treasury 
appears to have been on a retrospective view, when 
the moneys upon those loans were called for, the 
prospect, at each time, must have presented the 
appearance of a less competent supply, or a greater 
deficiency, than was afterwards realized. 

I am not sure but that I owe an apology to the 
House for taking up so much of its time in obviating 
the imputation of partiality or favoritism towards 

Loans 167 

the banks; the aspect under which I view it ad 
monishes me, that I may have annexed to it greater 
importance than was intended to be given to it by 
its authors. 

That a disposition friendly to the accommodation 
of those institutions, as far as might be consistent 
with official duty and the public interest, has charac 
terized the conduct of the Department, will not be 
denied. 

No man, placed in the office of the Secretary of the 
Treasury, whatever theoretic doubts he may have 
brought into it, would be a single month without 
surrendering those doubts to a full conviction, that 
banks are essential to the pecuniary operations of 
the Government. 

No man, having a practical knowledge of the 
probable resources of the country, in the article of 
specie (which he would with caution rate beyond the 
actual revenues of the Government) , would rely upon 
the annual collection of 4,500,000 dollars, without 
the instrumentality of institutions that give a con 
tinual impulse to circulation, and prevent the stag 
nation to be otherwise expected from locking up 
from time to time large sums for periodical disburse 
ments; to say nothing of the accommodations, 
which facilitate to the merchant the payment of 
the considerable demands made upon him by the 
Treasury. 

No man, practically acquainted with the pecuniary 
ability of individuals, in this country, would count 
upon rinding the means of those anticipations of the 
current revenue for the current service, which have 

1 68 Alexander Hamilton 

been, and will be necessary, from any other source 
than that of the banks. 

No prudent administrator of the finances of the 
country, therefore, but would yield to the disposition, 
which has been acknowledged, as alike essential to 
the interest of the Government, and to the satisfac 
tory discharge of his trust; a disposition which 
would naturally lead to good offices, within the 
proper and justifiable bounds. 

After the explanation which has been offered, to 
manifest the necessity and propriety of the loans 
made of the bank, it can scarcely be requisite to 
enter into a refutation of the process by which it has 
been endeavored to establish that the Government 
pays seventeen per cent, upon those loans. The 
state of the Treasury rendered it expedient to bor 
row the sums which were borrowed; they have been 
duly received, and the rate of interest stipulated 
upon them is five per cent. The Government then 
pays upon them five per cent, and no more. 

The history which was given, in my last letter, of 
the course and situation of the foreign fund, proves 
that the supposition from which the inference, of pay 
ing seventeen per cent, upon the domestic loan, has 
been drawn, is erroneous. The balances on hand, 
at the respective periods in question, are the residues 
of the moneys which had been received from every 
source, including the loans, foreign and domestic. 

But if the supposition which appears to have been 
made had been true, it was still impossible that 
seventeen per cent, could have been paid. By no 
construction can the rate be extended beyond ten. 

Loans 169 

The mean interest of the money borrowed abroad, 
including charges, is five per cent.; the interest 
stipulated to be paid on the loan from the bank is 
also five; the sum of the two is ten. It is imma 
terial for what purpose the foreign fund was ob 
tained, whether to pay to France or to purchase the 
debt ; the worst consequence that can result is double 
not treble interest. The interest payable to France 
is payable for moneys borrowed and spent during the 
war. It can never be truly said, that that interest 
is now payable on any existing fund, whether bor 
rowed in Holland or borrowed in the United States, 
or borrowed there and re-borrowed here. It can 
never serve to make an addition to the cost or 
charges of any such fund. 'T is payable upon one 
long since procured and used. 

But it is not obvious how the supposition came to 
be entertained, that all the moneys drawn here from 
the foreign fund had been borrowed for the payment 
of the debt to France. The presumption would seem 
to have been more natural, that they had been prin 
cipally, if not wholly, introduced with a view to pur 
chases of the debt, and consequently had a more 
special reference to the act authorizing a loan for 
that purpose. And the fact is, that this was the 
destination of far the greatest proportion of the 
sums drawn for. It has been stated that a part had 
an eye to the supplies to St. Domingo, and that an 
other part was introduced with a view to the pay 
ment of the foreign officers. 

The additional observations to which I shall re 
quest the attention of the House will apply to the 

17° Alexander Hamilton 

course and state of the sinking fund, concerning 
which I transmitted with my last communication 
three statements, numbered I., II., III.1 

To give a more collected view of this part of the 
subject, it may be of use to include here a recapitula 
tion of some ideas which have been stated in other 
places. 

It is the course and practice of this Department, 
for all public moneys, from whatever source proceed 
ing, to pass into the Treasury, and there form a com 
mon mass, subject, under the responsibility of the 
officers of the Department, to the dispositions which 
have been prescribed by law. 

The surplus at the end of the year 1790, appropri 
ated to the sinking fund, amounting to 1,374,656 
dollars and 40 cents, went, as it was received, into 
the Treasury. 

All the proceeds of the bills drawn upon the 
foreign fund prior to April, 1792, except the sum of 
177,998 dollars and 80 cents, left in deposit with the 
Bank of North America for reasons which have been 
explained, passed from time to time into the Treas 
ury. The whole amount of the sums paid in is 907,- 
294 dollars and 23 cents. 

The proceeds of the bills drawn for, in and sub 
sequent to April, 1792, have not yet passed into the 
Treasury, for reasons which have been likewise as 
signed. It would have been done before this time, 
as far as the receipts had gone, but for the present 
inquiry, which temporarily suspended it. I thought 
it best to make no alteration in the state of things as 

1 For these statements see State Papers, vol. i., pp. 210,211,212. 

Loans 171 

they stood when it began, at least till all the in 
formation desired had been given. Measures will 
now be taken for a settlement of the accounts, and 
for a transfer of the proceeds. The whole amount 
of those bills, paid and unpaid, including an esti 
mated sum of interest, will be, as heretofore stated, 
1,220,476 dollars and 10 cents. 

The whole amount of the bills drawn is 2,305,769 
dollars and 13 cents. 

Out of the sinking fund, composed of the surplus 
of the revenue to the end of 1790 and the proceeds 
of the foreign bills, there were issued from the 
Treasury and expended in purchases, to the end of 
1792, 957,770 dollars and 65 cents. 

For reasons which have been stated, it was finally 
deemed advisable to place those purchases wholly to 
the account of the surplus of 1790. 

Consequently, there remained on the ist of Janu 
ary of the present year 416,885 dollars and 75 cents 
of the above-mentioned surplus unapplied to pur 
chases; and the whole of the foreign fund, except 
the sum of 726,000 dollars paid and reserved to be 
paid for the use of the colony of St. Domingo, and 
the sum of 191,316 dollars and 90 cents paid and 
reserved to be paid to the foreign officers, became 
free for future application. The balance of the pro 
ceeds of the bills, after deducting for those reserva 
tions, is 1,388,452 dollars and 22 cents. 

Since the ist of January, 1793, there have been 
issued, on account of the foreign fund, for purchases, 
284,901 dollars and 89 cents. 

The practice has uniformly been not to separate 

172 Alexander Hamilton 

any of the moneys belonging to the sinking fund 
from the common mass of the moneys in the Treas 
ury, but in proportion to the occasions of investing 
them in purchases. 

Hence the sum of 957,770 dollars and 65 cents, 
issued previous to the present year, and the sum 
of 284,901 dollars and 89 cents, issued during the 
present year, making, together, 1,242,672 dollars and 
54 cents, are all the moneys which have been ever 
separated from the common mass of the Treasury 
for the purpose of the sinking fund; the whole of 
which, except 49,282 dollars and 74 cents, has been 
actually expended in purchases. 

The unapplied sum remains deposited in the Bank 
of the United States, except a small balance of 61 
dollars and 76 cents, in the hands of William Heth. 

From the above rule, the part of the sinking fund 
arising from interest on the debt extinguished by 
purchases or otherwise is to be excepted. The 
practice hitherto has been to include this interest in 
the general dividend of each quarter, and the war 
rant issued to the cashier of the bank for paying it. 
The statement No. 3,' accompanying my last letter, 
shows the application of this fund hitherto. 

The law directs that this fund shall be invested 
within thirty days after each quarter. This pro 
vision began to take effect on the ist of July last. 

But the investments were not made within the 
respective times prescribed. This proceeded partly 
from the state of the market, and partly from the 
regulations adopted by the commissioners, who were 

1 For statement No. 3, see State Papers, " Finance," vol. i., p. 212. 

Loans 1 73 

the Secretary of State, the Attorney-General, and 
the Secretary of the Treasury. 

Their regulations, applying to the two first 
quarters, limited the prices to certain rates, and 
prescribed the mode of sealed proposals. The Treas 
urer was appointed agent for the commissioners. 

The proposals, with regard to the first quarter, 
were receivable till the 28th of July inclusively; 
none were offered, as the Treasurer reported to me, 
and nothing was done. 

The experiment of sealed proposals was again 
tried the second quarter, with somewhat more, 
though with but little, success. The restriction to 
this mode of proceeding was rescinded on the last 
day of the thirty allowed for purchasing, and some 
further purchases were made, but the whole sum in 
vested was only 25,969 dollars and 96 cents. 

The residue of this fund, except some small sums 
noted at foot of statement No. 3, was in January past. 

The unapplied part of the surplus of 1790 having 
been expended in aid of the receipts of 1791, accord 
ing to the provision which was made for that pur 
pose, will remain suspended until the future receipts 
shall so far exceed the current disbursements as to 
produce a surplus for replacing it. 

In computing the amount of the unapplied foreign 
fund, it is necessary to take into the account the 
payments made from it during the years 1791 and 
1792 on account of the interest of the foreign debt. 

Provision having been made for paying this in 
terest out of the domestic revenues, the sums which 
have been paid on that account from the foreign 

174 Alexander Hamilton 

fund are to be considered in the same light as if they 
had been transferred here by drafts. 

The amount paid at Amsterdam is 1,633,189 
guilders and two stivers, equal, at 36^- ninetieths 
per guilder, to 659,874 dollars and 34 cents. 

There will be additions to be made, which are not 
at present ascertained. 

Adding this sum to the proceeds of the bills, and 
deducting the sums paid and to be paid for St. 
Domingo and the foreign officers, and those applied 
to purchases during the present year, there will re 
main a sum of 1,763,424 dollars and 68 cents, subject 
to a future application. 

Of this sum 1,715,098 dollars and n cents will 
be properly applicable to the purchase of the debt. 
But circumstances may render it eligible to appro 
priate a part of it toward the discharge of the 
foreign debt. 

From the plan which has been pursued, it is also 
liable to this application. 

I have the honor to annex to the statements here 
tofore transmitted those in the printed schedules 
marked A, B, and C.1 

A exhibits the relative state of revenue and appro 
priations to the end of 1792 ; B, the relative state of 
appropriations and expenditures to the same period, 
showing the balance unsatisfied of each head of ap 
propriation; C applies these statements to an ex 
planation of the demands or charges upon the excess 
of income beyond the disbursements to the end of 
1792. 

1 For A, B, and C see State Papers, " Finance," vol. i., pp. 219 to 222. 

Loans 1 75 

In addition to these are two statements, marked 
D and E. 

D, showing what proportion of the balances un 
satisfied of the several appropriations are likely to be 
real expenditures, and what part are not likely to be 
so. In this, however, in several instances, prob 
ability must guide, the nature of the thing not ad 
mitting of certainty, 

E, showing the cash on hand upon the first of 
January last, and likely to be received from that day 
to the first of April next, and the sums paid and pay 
able during that period. 

The result, founded upon facts, contradicts very 
essentially that statement which aims at showing 
the ability of the Treasury, besides defraying the 
current expenses of the quarter, to pay off two 
million dollars to the bank, still leaving a balance 
in favor of the Treasury of 664,263 dollars and 54 
cents. 

It shows that, after satisfying the demands for 
which the Treasury is bound to be prepared, includ 
ing a payment to the bank of only one tenth part 
of the two million dollars of which the statement 
alluded to supposes the complete payment, there 
would remain a balance in favor of the Treasury of 
no more than 664,180 dollars and 89 cents. 

It could answer no valuable purpose to delay the 
House with a particular examination of the various 
misapprehensions which have led to a result so 
different from the true one. It will be sufficient, as 
an example, to state a single instance. It is as 
sumed, as an item in the calculation, that a sum of a 

176 Alexander Hamilton 

million of dollars will come into the Treasury by the 
first of April, on account of the revenue of the current 
year, while the probability is, that the sum received 
may not exceed ten thousand dollars ; this presump 
tion of a million is evidently founded upon two mis 
takes, i st. It proceeds on the basis of an annual 
revenue of four millions of dollars, and supposes this 
sum equally distributed between the different quar 
ters of the year, a million to each quarter, when, in 
fact, there are two seasons of the year incomparably 
more productive than the other parts of it, viz.: 
those portions of the spring and fall which are em 
braced by the second and third quarters; the first 
and fourth being far less productive. 2d. It sup 
poses all the duties which accrue are immediately 
paid, whereas the cases of prompt payment are con 
fined to those in which the duties on particular 
articles, imported in one vessel, by one person or co 
partnership, do not exceed fifty dollars; in all other 
instances, a credit of not less than four months is 
allowed, which carries the payment on the importa 
tions, upon the very first day of the quarter, a month 
beyond the expiration of it. 

If the whole amount of the duties which accrued 
during the first quarter of 1792, in cash and bonds, 
was no more than 307,163 dollars and 84 cents, 
adding one seventh for the additional duties, it 
ought, by analogy, to be during the first quarter of 
the present year 322,472 dollars and 94 cents; less, 
in totality, than the sum which it has been com 
puted would be actually in money in the Treasury, 
by 677,527 dollars and 6 cents; and less, by the whole 

Loans 177 

million, nearly, than will probably be in money in the 
Treasury on that account. With perfect respect, 

I have the honor to be, sir, 
Your most obedient and most humble servant, 
ALEXANDER HAMILTON, 

Secretary of the Treasury. 
The Honorable the Speaker of the 
House of Representatives. 

A x. — Market-prices of public stocks, taken from actual purchases 
and sales. 

B y. — Prices of the public stocks, taken from the Gazette of the 
United States. 

C Z. — Comparative statement of bonds for duties becoming due from 
November, 1792, to September, 1793, inclusive, as per monthly ab 
stracts thereof, taken 7th November and 7th December, 1792. 

D. — Statement showing the sums of appropriation, to the end of the 
year 1792, which will probably not be required to satisfy the same. 

E. — Probable state of cash, from the last of Dec. 1792, to the ist of 
April, 1793. — See State Papers, "Finance," vol. i., p. 230. 

[In State Papers, "Finance," vol. i., page 281, may be seen a Report 
of a Committee of the House of Representatives, on "The Condition 
of the Treasury," explanatory of the matters to which this and several 
of the preceding papers relate. f 

OBSERVER ' 

March, 1793. 

Among the observations which have appeared as 
containing the debates in Congress respecting the 
official conduct of the Secretary of the Treasury, Mr. 
Findley is represented as having made the following 
assertions : " That the Secretary of the Treasury had 
acknowledged that he had not applied the money 
borrowed in Europe agreeably to the legal appropria 
tions of the President. That he had acknowledged his 

1 The speech of Mr. Findley, here referred to, was made March i, 
1793, and this reply probably appeared immediately afterwards, but 
I have not been able to discover in what newspaper it was published. 

VOL. III. — 12. 

178 Alexander Hamilton 

having drawn to this country, and applied in Europe 
to uses for which other moneys were appropriated, 
three millions of dollars. That he had acknowledged 
his having drawn from Europe more money than 
the law authorized him to do. That he was influ 
enced to do so by motives not contemplated by the 
law, and had either applied it, or drawn it from Eu 
rope, with the design of applying it to uses not au 
thorized, and that he had broken in upon the fund 
appropriated for the discharge of the French debt." 
Before I read this speech I had carefully perused 
the different communications made by the Secretary 
of the Treasury to the House of Representatives, and 
after reading it I was led to revise them. The result 
has been that I have found all these assertions at 
tributed to Mr. Findley either direct untruths or 
palpable misrepresentations, and I challenge Mr. 
Findley or any of his friends to produce the passages 
which will warrant them. The truth is, that Mr. 
Findley has palmed upon the Secretary his own 
reasonings and inferences for points conceded by 
him. The commentary has been substituted for the 
text. OBSERVER. 

HAMILTON TO THE SPEAKER OF THE HOUSE OF REPRE 
SENTATIVES 
TREASURY DEPARTMENT, December 16, 1793. 

SIR: 

It is known that in the last session certain ques 
tions were raised respecting my conduct in office, 
which, though decided in a manner the most satis 
factory to me, were nevertheless unavoidably, from 

Loans 1 79 

the lateness of the period when they were set on 
foot, so accelerated in the issue, as to have given 
occasion to a suggestion that there was not time for 
a due examination. Unwilling to leave the matter 
on such a footing, I have concluded to request of the 
House of Representatives, as I now do, that a new 
inquiry may without delay be instituted in some 
mode, the most effectual for an accurate and thorough 
investigation; and I will add, that the more com 
prehensive it is, the more agreeable will it be to me. 

I cannot, however, but take the liberty of assuring 
the House that a like plan to that which was pursued 
in the last session will never answer the purpose of a 
full and complete inquiry, while it would lay on me 
a burthen, with which neither a proper discharge of 
the current duties of my office, nor the present state 
of my health, is compatible. The unfavorable effect 
upon the business of the Department of the very con 
siderable portion of my time which was engrossed by 
the inquiry of the last session has not yet entirely 
ceased. 

With perfect respect, I have the honor to be, etc. 

LOAN 

Communicated to the House of Representatives, February 25, 1794. 

Mr. Sedgwick, from the committee appointed to 
report whether any, and what, sum may be neces 
sary to be loaned for the purpose of carrying on the 
public service for the year one thousand seven hund 
red and ninety-four, made the following report: 

180 Alexander Hamilton 

That, in their opinion, it is expedient that the President 
be authorized to borrow, on the credit of the United States, 
a sum not exceeding one million dollars, if, in his opinion, 
the public service shall require it. 

PHILADELPHIA, February 22, 1794. 


A committee of the House of Representatives, having in 
charge "to report whether any, and what, sum may be 
necessary to be loaned for the purpose of carrying on the 
public service for the year 1794," have directed me to re 
quest of you answers to the following questions. 

1. Whether money collected on account of the United 
States, and deposited in banks, is, from the time of de 
posit, considered as in the Treasury. 

2. Are any, and, if any, what, means necessary to sub 
ject money, so deposited, to the control of the Treasurer? 

3. In case money, so deposited, is not considered as in 
the Treasury from the time of deposit, who is, from that 
time, until it passes into the Treasury, responsible to the 
United States? 

4. Is any money now so deposited, and, if any, is the 
probable amount such as to render a present provision for 
a loan inexpedient or unnecessary? 

With much esteem, etc. 

THEODORE SEDGWICK. 

The Honorable the Secretary 
of the Treasury. 

TREASURY DEPARTMENT, February 25, 1794. 

SIR: 

The following are answers to the questions stated 
in your letter of the 22d instant, viz. : 

Answer to question the first. 

All moneys collected on account of the United 

Loans 181 

States, and deposited in banks, to the credit of the 
Treasurer, are considered as in the Treasury from the 
time of deposit. The steady course with regard to 
the standing revenue is, that the money deposited 
in banks passes immediately to the credit of the 
Treasurer. But it is necessary, to discharge the 
payers, that receipts of the Treasurer should be en 
dorsed upon warrants signed by the Secretary, 
countersigned by the Comptroller, and registered by 
the Register, which is the course regularly observed. 

Answer to question the second. 

After moneys are deposited in banks to the credit 
of the Treasurer, they are in his control, though they 
may not legally be disbursed but upon warrants of 
the above description. If deposited without passing, 
in the first instance, to the credit of the Treasurer, 
the means used for placing them in his custody and 
disposal are warrants of the like kind. 

Answer to question the third. 

In respect to any moneys of the United States 
deposited in banks, but not passed to the credit of 
the Treasurer, the banks are considered as directly 
responsible to the United States; in the case of de 
posits to the credit of the Treasurer, they are re 
sponsible, in the first instance, to him; ultimately, to 
the United States. 

Answer to question the fourth. 

Only two cases are recollected, in which moneys 
of the United States may be considered as having 
been deposited in bank, without passing, in the first 
instance, to the account of the Treasurer. These re 
late— 

1 82 Alexander Hamilton 

1. To the proceeds of foreign bills sold for the 
Government, and received by the bank (all accounts 
of which are finally closed). 

2. To the sum of two hundred thousand dollars, 
being the only sum now so deposited, which arises from 
the last loan had of the bank. It is left (subject to 
the eventual decision of the Legislature) as an offset 
against the second instalment of the two-million loan 
from the bank. The effect of the operation will be 
this: An interest of six per cent., payable to the 
bank, upon the instalment, will be extinguished, from 
the 3ist of December last, by an interest of five per 
cent., payable to the bank, upon the sum borrowed 
of itself, and left in deposit. And it has been en 
deavored, thereby, to preserve consistency and regu 
larity in the arrangements of the Treasury. The 
first instalment, by leaving in deposit an equal sum 
of the proceeds of foreign bills, was considered as 
effected on the 3ist of December, 1792, though there 
was not power to consummate the payment till some 
months after. Hence it becomes regular, that each 
succeeding instalment should be paid on the last of 
December of each year. The provisional measure 
thus adopted was the only expedient in the power 
of the Treasury to reconcile, as far as practicable, 
considerations relative to the public interest and 
credit, with legality of procedure. Neither the sum 
in deposit, on the one hand, nor the instalment pay 
able to the bank, on the other, is brought into the 
probable state of cash, lately presented to the House 
of Representatives, because they balance each other, 
and leave the result the same. 

Hamilton to Washington 183 

There are no existing sources from which moneys 
can come into bank, on account of the United States, 
except from the proceeds of the revenue, which, as 
far as known, are comprised in the statement before 
the House of Representatives. So that there is no 
resource, but a loan, which can supply the deficit of 
a receipt, in the course of the present and succeeding 
quarter, compared with the expenditure. Without 
one, a failure in the public payments is inevitable. 

If what has been said should not give the commit 
tee all the light they desire, it is imagined that per 
sonal explanations would lead more fully to their 
object, than the course of written interrogatories 
and answers, which can only partially embrace the 
subject, and may procrastinate a right understand 
ing of it. I am, sir, etc., 

ALEXANDER HAMILTON. 

THEODORE SEDGWICK, Esq., 

Chairman of a Committee. 

HAMILTON TO WASHINGTON 

March 24, 1794. 

SIR: 

A committee of the House of Representatives, ap 
pointed to inquire into the state of the Treasury 
Department, is charged, among other things, to in 
quire into the authorities from the President to the 
Secretary of the Treasury respecting the making 
and disbursement of the loans made under the acts 
of the 4th and i2th August, 1790. You will per 
ceive by the inclosed copy of a paper of this date, 

184 Alexander Hamilton 

delivered to the committee, the opinion I entertain 
of the proper limits of a legislative inquiry on that 
subject. 

But, in the event of a determination that the in 
quiry should be general, it becomes proper to fix 
with the President the true view of facts. 

The real course of the transaction has been this. 
Before I made the disposition of any loan, I regu 
larly communicated to the President my ideas of the 
proper disposition, designating how much it would 
be expected to pay to France — how much to draw to 
the United States — and always received his sanction 
for what was adopted and afterwards carried into 
execution. The communication and the sanction 
were verbal whenever the President was at the seat 
of government. In a case of absence, they were in 
writing. This will appear from my letters of the 
loth and i4th April, 1791, and from the President's 
answer of the yth of May, following. My letters of 
the 29th July and 226. September, 1791, and of the 
27th August and 22d September, 1792, contain a 
further illustration of the general spirit of proceed 
ing in the case, in regard to the consultation of the 
President. 

The sanctions of the President were sometimes ex 
pressly, and always, as I conceived, in their spirit, 
founded in a material degree in the confidence that 
the measures proposed were guided by a just estim 
ate on my part of circumstances which, from situa 
tion, must have been best known to me, and that 
they would be always in conformity to the law. 

With the most perfect respect, etc. 

Hamilton to a Committee 185 

HAMILTON TO A COMMITTEE OF CONGRESS 

April i, 1794. 

In the course of the present examination, respect 
ing the point of authority under which any portion 
of the moneys borrowed abroad had been drawn into 
the United States, the Secretary of the Treasury did 
make the following question: 

" I ask the committee appointed to inquire into 
the state of the Treasury Department, whether they 
expect from the Secretary of the Treasury the pro 
duction of any authorities from the President to 
him, in reference to the loans made under the acts 
of the 4th and i2th of August, 1790, except such as 
regard merely the making of said loans, and the ap 
plication and disbursement of such part of the pro 
ceeds of those loans as were to be disbursed in 
foreign countries. 

" I object to the being required to produce any 
other authorities than those excepted, for the follow 
ing reasons, viz. : 

" i st. Because it results, from the constitution of 
the Treasury Department, that all receipts and ex 
penditures of public money, within the United 
States, must pass through that Department, under 
the sanction of warrants from the Secretary, counter 
signed by the Comptroller, and registered by the 
Register; consequently, whenever a loan is made, 
either abroad or at home, on account of the United 
States, destined for disbursement within the United 
States, it becomes, eoo officio, the province of the 
Treasury Department to draw the proceeds of such 

1 86 Alexander Hamilton 

loan into the Treasury, and to disburse from thence, 
according to law. 

" 2d. Because, when it once appears that the 
President has constituted the head of a department 
his agent, for any general purpose, intrusted to him 
by law, all intermediate authorities from the Presi 
dent to the agent, being conformable with law, are 
to be presumed. The proper inquiry for the Legis 
lature must be, whether the laws have been duly 
executed or not; if they have been duly executed, 
the question of sufficiency or deficiency of authority, 
from the President to his agent, must be, to the 
Legislature, immaterial and irrelevant. That ques 
tion must, then, be a matter purely between the 
President and the agent, not examinable by the 
Legislature, without interfering with the province 
of the Chief Magistrate, to whom alone the respons 
ibility is. 

"All authority from the President to do any 
thing not warranted by the laws of the 4th and i2th 
of August, is disclaimed. A complete responsibility 
for the due and faithful execution of those laws is 
admitted to rest on the head of the Department. 
He claims no protection from any instruction or au 
thority of the President, for any thing which may 
have been irregular or wrong, but he respectfully 
conceives that the competency of his authority from 
the President to do, what being done, is conformable 
with the laws, is not, under the circumstances of the 
case, a proper object of legislative inquiry/' 

Upon the consideration of which question, the 
Committee came to the following resolution: 

Hamilton to a Committee 187 

"Resolved, That the Secretary of the Treasury be 
requested to state to the committee, by what au 
thority any portion of the moneys borrowed abroad 
have been drawn to the United States." 

In consequence of which resolution the Secretary 
of the Treasury laid before the committee a paper in 
the following words: 

HAMILTON TO A COMMITTEE OF CONGRESS 

April i, 1794. 

Principles and course of proceeding with regard to the 
disposition of the moneys borrowed abroad, by 
virtue of the acts of the 4th and I2th of August, 
1790, as to the point of authority. 

It was conceived by the Secretary of the Treasury 
to be a clear principle, resulting from the spirit of 
the act constituting the Treasury Department, and 
from the several provisions of that act, collectively 
considered, that all public moneys once obtained, 
and destined for disbursement within the United 
States, came, of course, under the direction of the 
officers of that Department, according to their 
respective functions, and that no special authority 
extrinsic to the Department was, in strictness, neces 
sary to enable them to draw money, from whatever 
source originating, into the Treasury, or to issue 
them thence for the purposes designated by law. 

It was also conceived by him to be, though a less 
clear principle, one most agreeable to the true spirit 
of the constitution of the Department, as well 
as essential to the preservation of order and due 

1 88 Alexander Hamilton 

accountability in the money transactions of the coun 
try, that even moneys procured abroad, and to be 
disbursed abroad, were, as to their application, to 
be under the direction of the same Department. 

Under the influence of these principles, thus en 
tertained with different degrees of assurance (the 
President having determined to place the procuring 
of the loans under the direction of the Secretary of 
the Treasury), the following course of proceeding 
was pursued : 

The Secretary obtained from the President, in the 
first place, a general commission to him to make the 
loans authorized by the two acts of the 4th and 1 2th 
of August. A copy of this commission was com 
municated to the House of Representatives in the 
last session. No. i is dated the 28th of August. 

He also obtained from the President an instruc 
tion, dated same day, to guide and justify him — ist, 
with regard to the person to be employed in Europe 
in negotiating the loans; 2d, with regard to the ex 
tent to which the loans under the first act, and pay 
ments on account of the foreign debt, should be 
carried, at all events, exclusively of the considera 
tion of the advantageousness of the terms of the 
loans. 

Nevertheless, from the special connection of the 
President with the subject, owing to the authority to 
borrow being immediately vested in him; from the 
circumstance of the existence of a particular dis 
cretion to be exercised by the President as to anticip 
ated payments of the foreign debt, and from the 
official relation of each head of a department to the 

Hamilton to a Committee 189 

President, the Secretary of the Treasury considered 
it as his duty, from time to time, to submit the dis 
positions of each loan to the consideration of the 
President, with his reasons for such disposition, and 
to obtain the sanction of the President previous to 
carrying it into effect, which was always had. 

The communications to the President and his 
sanctions were for the most part verbal. Two ex 
ceptions appear, from letters (herewith shown) of 
the Secretary to the President, of the loth and i4th 
of April, and 226. of September, 1791, and from the 
President to him of the 7th of May, 1791, relating to 
a case of absence from the seat of government. 
These letters are evidence of the course and spirit of 
proceeding. 

It is to be understood that the sanctions of the 
President were always bottomed upon the representa 
tions of the Secretary, and were always expressly 
or tacitly qualified with this condition, that " what 
ever was to be done was to be agreeable to the laws. " 

Whereupon the committee came to the following 
resolution : 

" Resolved, That it would be satisfactory to the 
committee, that the papers submitted to them April 
i, 1794, by the Secretary of the Treasury, respecting 
the point of authority under which moneys borrowed 
abroad have been drawn to the United States, 
should be presented to the President of the United 
States, and that the Secretary should obtain from 
him, concerning the same, such declaration as the 
President may think proper to make." 

Alexander Hamilton 

WASHINGTON TO HAMILTON 

Tuesday, April 8, 1794. 

DEAR SIR: 

Annexed to your statement of " Principles and Course of 
Proceedings," I have given the certificate required. 
I am, yours always, 

GEO. WASHINGTON. 


PHILADELPHIA, April 8, 1794. 

SIR: 

I cannot charge my memory with all the particulars 
which have passed between us relative to the disposition 
of the money borrowed. Your letters, however, and my 
answer, which you refer to in the foregoing statement, 
and lately reminded me of, speak for themselves, and 
stand in need of no explanation. 

As to verbal communications, I am satisfied that many 
were made by you to me on this subject; and, from my 
general recollection of the course of proceedings, I do not 
doubt that it was substantially as you have stated it in the 
annexed paper, and that I have approved of the measures 
which you from time to time proposed to me for disposing 
of the loans, upon the condition that what was to be done 
by you should be agreeable to the laws. 

I am, etc. 

HAMILTON TO WASHINGTON 

PHILADELPHIA, April 9, 1794. 


I have analyzed the declaration which you have 
been pleased to make upon the copy of the paper of 

Hamilton to Washington 191 

the first instant, delivered by me to the Committee 
of Inquiry into the State of the Treasury Depart 
ment, and find, with regret, that the terms used are 
such as will enable those who are disposed to con 
strue every thing to my disadvantage to affirm, 
"that the declaration of the President has entirely 
waived the main point, and does not even manifest 
an opinion that the representation of the Secretary 
of the Treasury is well founded." 

To this it would be added, that the reserve of the 
President is a proof that he does not think that 
representation true, else his justice would have led 
him to rescue the officer concerned even from sus 
picion on the point. 

That this will be the interpretation put upon your 
declaration I have no doubt; and, in justice to my 
self, I cannot forbear to make this impression known 
to you, and to bring the declaration under your 
revision. 

I am the more certain that this construction will 
be put upon the fact, from what has heretofore 
taken place. In the course of the discussion of the 
last session, an argument of this kind was, in private, 
urged against me: "If Mr. Hamilton had really 
acted by the authority of the President, or in due 
communication with him, would not the President 
take some method, either directly to Mr. Madison, 
or through Mr. Jefferson or Mr. Randolph, to make 
known to him that this ground of accusation did not 
exist? His not doing it, which may be inferred 
from Mr. Madison's urging the point, is a proof that 
there was no co-operation on his part." 

192 Alexander Hamilton 

In addition to this, I have learnt, from an au 
thentic source, that a particular gentleman, sup 
posed to possess good opportunities of information, 
has intimated, in a manner to induce a belief of its 
having come from you, that it never was your inten 
tion that any of the loans which were made should 
have had reference to the act making provision for 
the reduction of the public debt, and that you never 
knew any thing of the operation while it was going 
on. 

Under all that has happened, sir, I cannot help 
entertaining, and frankly expressing to you, an ap 
prehension that false and insidious men, whom you 
may one day understand, taking the advantage of 
the want of recollection, which is natural when the 
mind is habitually occupied with a variety of im 
portant objects, have found means, by artful sugges 
tions, to infuse doubts and distrusts very injurious 
to me. 

My consciousness of what has been the real tenor 
of my conduct, and my conviction of the fairness 
and rectitude of your mind, compel me to this 
conclusion. 

Upon this, as upon every other occasion, my de 
sire is to encounter, directly and without detour, 
whatever embarrassment may stand in my way. If, 
contrary to what I understood from Mr. Lear, during 
the discussion of the matter in Congress, and in 
ferred from the late conversations with you, the af 
fair does not stand well in your mind, I request the 
opportunity of a full and free conference on the 
subject, to recapitulate and go over all the circum- 

Hamilton to Washington 193 

stances which have occurred, in the hope of recalling 
to your memory what may have escaped it, and 
with a wish to abide the result in an explicit form- 
that is, by a declaration which shall render the main 
fact unambiguous, or shall record the doubt. 

As, on the one hand, I expect what is due to the 
situation, so, on the other, I seek no palliation of 
delinquency, no cover for any defect of conduct. 

The situation is indeed an unpleasant one. Hav 
ing conducted an important piece of public business 
in a spirit of confidence — dictated by an unqualified 
reliance, on the one hand, upon the rectitude, candor, 
and delicacy of the person tinder whom I was acting; 
on the other, by a persuasion that the experience of 
years had secured to me a reciprocal sentiment 
(whatever imperfections it may have otherwise dis 
covered) ; and by the belief, likewise, that, however 
particular instances might be forgotten, the general 
course of proceeding in so important an affair could 
not but be remembered — I did not look for a 
difficulty like that which now seems to press me. 
Knowing, too, that there existed in my written 
communications with the President (not only those 
which have been specified, but others), so many 
direct and indirect indications of what was truly the 
course pursued, I still less apprehended a difficulty 
of that nature when the occasion for explanation 
should occur. 

Not seeking to escape responsibility for any im 
proper execution of the laws — if any has happened — 
I do not imagine that want of immediate authority 
from the President to do what they would justify, 

VOL. III. — 13. 

194 Alexander Hamilton 

would be suffered to remain (the appeal being made 
to him) a topic of objection to my conduct. 

In the freedom of these remarks I flatter myself, 
sir, that you will perceive nothing but that just 
sensibility which a man of honor, who thinks his 
veracity exposed to question, ought to feel ; and that 
you will be persuaded I continue yet to retain, un- 
diminished, all that respect which a long-established 
conviction of the existence of an upright and vir 
tuous character ought to inspire. 

With this sentiment, I have the honor, etc. 

HAMILTON TO WASHINGTON 

TREASURY DEPARTMENT, April 25, 1794. 

I beg leave, by way of explanation, to submit the 
grounds of my opinion, that the President may vary 
his instructions of the 8th of August last, in refer 
ence to the application of the last loan obtained in 
Holland. 

A summary of the preceding transactions will 
serve to throw light upon the subject. 

The President, by his commission of the 28th of 
August, 1790, gave full power to the Secretary of 
the Treasury to make the whole of the two loans 
contemplated by the acts of the 4th and the i2th of 
August. 

When, in the beginning of June last, certain con 
siderations rendered it, in my judgment, expedient 
to obtain a further loan; I concluded to address 
myself to the President, not for want of power to 
proceed in the business, but to obtain the sanction 

Hamilton to Washington 195 

of his opinions and instructions as to the eligibility 
of the measure. This will appear from my letter of 
the third of that month. 

After some explanatory communications, I re 
ceived from the President his letter of the 27th of 
July, informing me of the shape the business had 
taken in his mind. 

On the basis of that letter, I prepared the instruc 
tions of the 8th of August, which I considered 
merely as directions to me, from the President, in 
the execution of the general power of the 28th of 
August, 1790, to be understood in connection with 
the letter of the 27th of July. 

The proposition in my report of the i5th of June 
was, that the proposed loan should be made upon 
the authority of both acts, and the letter of the 
President just mentioned precisely declares he did not 
intend by separate instructions to prevent the loans 
from being carried on without distinction in Holland. 

Accordingly, I sent no new powers for making a 
further loan, but merely an additional instruction to 
make a loan of three millions of florins, on the basis 
of the former powers. This additional instruction, 
too, made no special reference to either act, but left 
the matter to proceed as before without distinction. 

The consequence will be that the loan, as in all 
preceding cases, will be founded upon both the acts. 
I send for your inspection all the contracts hereto 
fore made, as the evidence of what will be the form 
of the one not yet forwarded ; all of which expressly 
and indiscriminately refer to both the acts. 

The inference is, that according to the contract 

196 Alexander Hamilton 

itself (the formal obligatory act), the loan will be 
placed upon the joint foundation of the two acts, 
equally applicable, therefore, to the purpose of 
either. 

This being the case, it is in my mind a clear pro 
position that the money remains in that state liable 
to be applied according to either or both the acts, 
till one of two things happens — an actual invest 
ment, or the being carried in the books of the Treas 
ury specifically to the account of the particular 
appropriation. 

It appears to me that there are but two cir 
cumstances which can attach irrevocably a similar 
fund to a particular destination — either its being 
so attached in its original creation by the formal 
obligatory act (to wit, the creation of the loan), or its 
having received in the Treasury its ultimate form 
by being carried to the account of the particular 
appropriation. This last, when the fund in its 
creation is liable to different destinations, is, as I 
suppose, the only thing which consummates and 
fixes the precise destination. It is the record, so to 
speak, of the sentence or direction of the law, ascer 
taining its application. 

If this position be as solid as I believe it to be, it 
will follow that all collateral instructions of the 
President intervening between his original power to 
make the loan and the final application of the loan 
are mere directions to the Secretary of the Treasury, 
binding on him until they are revoked, but revocable 
at pleasure by the President until they are definitely 
acted upon at the Treasury. 

Hamilton to Washington 197 

This is my view of the subject, for troubling the 
President with which I have no other motive than 
merely to explain the ground of an important 
opinion. 

I proceed now to execute the order of the Presi 
dent contained in his letter of yesterday. 

The embarrassments which, I suppose, may pos 
sibly arise from fixing at this time the destination of 
the fund, are connected with the following con 
siderations : 

The laws, except by the means of loans, make no 
provision for the payment of any part of the prin 
cipal of the foreign debt. Instalments of the prin 
cipal of the Dutch debt are falling due yearly; the 
same is the case of the debt to France, deferring the 
computed anticipations, as has been heretofore done. 
Perhaps it may become the policy of the country, in 
a short time, to accelerate in the latter case. 

The state of European affairs forbids a reliance on 
further loans there. The actual situation of the 
United States (and, a fortiori, its possible one) is 
likely to call for all the aid of domestic loans which 
is obtainable for domestic purposes. This resource, 
therefore, could not be depended upon as a sub 
stitute for foreign loans for foreign objects; still less, 
and for the same among other reasons, could addi 
tional taxation be counted upon. 

Our credit, therefore, and in certain events our 
security in a degree, may depend on retaining a part 
of the resource in question in a situation to come in 
aid of both. Our credit entirely, and our security 
in a very small degree, are of far greater consequence 

198 Alexander Hamilton 

than the savings to be made by the investment of 
1,200,000 dollars in purchases. 

Past experience admonishes to caution. The last 
loan of a million of florins, and the present one of 
three millions, are in some sort accidents. Ante 
cedent intelligence has in each case forbidden the 
expectation of either, as the President will see from 
the letters herewith transmitted. Had these not 
happened, and had the moneys originally drawn to 
this country for purchases been hastily so invested, 
our credit would in all probability have been lost; 
and things which we believe it of importance to have 
been done would have been impracticable. 

A considerable defalcation of revenue this year 
seems probable. I feel, in a manner not less inter 
esting to my own reputation than to the public in 
terest, the advantage of extensive purchases at the 
present juncture. And though I think the oppor 
tunity will not escape, it enters into the plan which 
I should approve — to proceed gradually and cir 
cumspectly in availing ourselves of the advantage. 
But I do not incline either wholly to tie up the funds 
at this time, or to precipitate its application to that 
single object. I think the matter had better be 
left open, to be governed by circumstances as things 
shall unfold. 

It appears to me better, at the hazard of some 
criticism, to waive or defer an advantage inferior in 
magnitude, rather than incur a probable risk of dis 
advantage of much greater magnitude. 

It appears by the letter from the Commissioners 
announcing the loan, already communicated to the 

Public Credit 199 

President, that the receipts on account of it may be 
considerably protracted. This is a circumstance of 
some weight in the decision. 

I submit these considerations with all deference to 
the decision of the President, and have the honor to 
be, etc. 

HAMILTON TO THE SPEAKER OF THE HOUSE OF 
REPRESENTATIVES 

December i, 1794. 

SIR: — I beg leave, through you, to make known to 
the House of Representatives, that I have signified 
to the President of the United States my intention 
to resign my office of Secretary of the Treasury on 
the last day of January next. I make this com 
munication in order that an opportunity may be 
given, previous to that event, to institute any fur 
ther proceeding which may be contemplated, if any 
there be, in consequence of the inquiry during the 
last session into the state of this Department. 

With perfect respect, etc. 

PUBLIC CREDIT 

Communicated to the Senate, January 16 and 21, 1795. 

TREASURY DEPARTMENT, January 16, 1795. 

SIR: — I beg leave, through you, to inform the Sen 
ate that, pursuant to the second section of the act 
establishing the Treasury Department, which ex 
pressly makes it the duty of the Secretary of the 
Treasury "to digest and prepare plans for the 

2OO Alexander Hamilton 

improvement and management of the revenue and 
for the support of public credit, " I have digested and 
prepared a plan, on the basis of the actual revenues, 
for the further support of public credit, which is 
ready for communication to the Senate. 

This plan embraces a further provision for the 
subscribed debt; a provision for converting, with 
the consent of the creditors, the foreign into the 
domestic debt ; a provision for augmenting the sink 
ing fund, so as to render it commensurate with the 
entire debt of the United States; suggestions for 
giving effect to the act of the last session, granting a 
million of dollars for the purposes of foreign inter 
course; with some auxiliary propositions. 

With perfect respect, I have the honor to be, 
Sir, your obedient servant, 

ALEXANDER HAMILTON, 
Secretary of the Treasury. 

To the Vice-President of the United States 
and President of the Senate. 

TREASURY DEPARTMENT, January 20, 1795. 

SIR: — Agreeably to the order of the Senate, I have 
the honor to transmit the plan for the support of 
public credit, announced in my letter of the i6th 
instant, together with sundry statements connected 
with it; and to be 

Your most obedient and humble servant, 

A. HAMILTON. 

To the Vice-President of the United States 

Public Credit 201 

The Secretary of the Treasury respectfully makes 
the following report to the Senate: 

The President of the United States, with that 
provident concern for the public welfare which char 
acterizes all his conduct, was pleased, in his speech 
to the two Houses of Congress, at the opening of the 
present session, to invite their attention to the adop 
tion of a definitive plan for the redemption of the 
public debt, and to the consummation of whatsoever 
may remain unfinished of our system of public credit, 
in order to place that credit, as far as may be prac 
ticable, on grounds which cannot be disturbed, and to 
prevent that progressive accumulation of debt, which 
must ultimately endanger all government. 

It was, at the same time, very justly intimated 
that the period which has elapsed since the com 
mencement of our fiscal measures (now more than 
four years) has so far developed our resources as to 
open the way to the important work. And it is 
matter of solid consolation that the result, presenting 
a state of our finances prosperous beyond expecta 
tion, solicits the public councils to enter, with zeal 
and decision, upon measures commensurate with the 
greatness of the interests to be promoted. 

Under the influence of this conviction, in con 
formity with the suggestions of the President, and 
pursuant to the duty which the constitution of the 
Department, as by law established, enjoins upon the 
Secretary of the Treasury, he has employed himself 
in digesting and preparing the materials of a plan 
for the attainment of the invaluable ends which are 

202 Alexander Hamilton 

recommended. And he now respectfully submits 
them to the consideration of Congress. 

Toward a clear and distinct conception of the 
means necessary to the accomplishment of those 
ends, it will be useful, in the first place, to review 
what has been heretofore done. This will be pre 
sented under three heads: 

I. The revenues which have been established; 

II. The provisions for funding the debt, and for 
the payment of interest upon it; 

III. The provisions for reimbursing and extin 
guishing the debt. 

I. The revenues which have been established ap 
pear in the following acts : 

ist. "An act for laying a duty on goods, wares, 
and merchandises imported into the United States," 
passed June the ist, 1789. This act, as its title im 
ports, lays various specific and ad- valorem rates on 
all articles (with exception of a few useful to agri 
culture and manufactures) imported from foreign 
countries. The lowest ad- valorem rate is five per 
cent., with a discount of ten per cent, in favor of our 
own bottoms. The duration assigned these duties 
was the end of the session of Congress next succeed 
ing the first day of June, 1796. 

2d. "An act imposing duties on tonnage," passed 
July 20, 1789. 

This act lays various rates of duty on the tonnage 
of ships and vessels entered in the United States from 
foreign countries, and, in certain cases, in one part of 
the United States from another. 

Public Credit 203 

Its duration was indefinite, no limit having been 
assigned. 

3d. "An act imposing duties on the tonnage of 
ships and vessels," passed July 20, 1790. 

This act is a substitute for the one last mentioned, 
preserving the same rates of duty, but applying 
them, in some instances, differently. It is, like the 
former, of indefinite duration. 

4th. "An act making further provision for the 
payment of the debts of the United States," passed 
August 10, 1790. 

This act repeals, after the last of December, 1790, 
the duties on imported articles, laid by the act above 
cited, and substitutes new and generally increased 
rates, specific and ad- valorem. 

The lowest ad- valorem rate in this, as in the 
former act, is five per cent.; but the number of 
articles to which it applies is much narrowed; and, 
instead of a discount in favor of our own bottoms, 
an addition of ten per cent, is made to the disad 
vantage of foreign bottoms. 

The number of free articles is somewhat extended 
in further encouragement of agriculture and manu 
factures. 

It is declared, that the duties laid by this act shall 
continue till the debts and purposes for which they are 
appropriated shall be satis-fled; reserving, however, a 
right to Congress to substitute other duties or taxes 
of equal value. 

5th. "An act to incorporate the subscribers to 
the Bank of the United States," passed the 25th of 
February, 1791. 

2O4 Alexander Hamilton 

The second section of this act authorizes the 
President to cause a subscription to be made to the 
stock of the bank, on account of the United States, 
to the amount of two millions of dollars; and, with 
a view to the accomplishment of that object, to 
borrow of the bank two millions of dollars, to be re 
imbursed in ten equal yearly instalments. 

The difference between the interest payable on 
the loan and the dividends on the stock constitutes 
an item of annual income to the United States. It 
is unappropriated. 

6th. " An act repealing, after the last day of June 
next, the duties heretofore laid upon distilled spirits 
imported from abroad, and laying others in their 
stead; and, also, upon spirits distilled within the 
United States, and for appropriating the same," 
passed the 3d of March, 1791. 

This act, in conformity with its title, repeals, after 
June, 1791, the duties on imported spirits, laid by 
the act of the loth of August, 1790, and establishes, 
in lieu of them, higher rates, namely, from twenty to 
forty cents per gallon, according to proof. It also 
lays duties, to commence at the same time, upon 
spirits distilled within the United States; namely, 
on those from foreign materials, from eleven to thirty 
cents, according to proof; on those from domestic 
materials, if distilled in cities, towns, or villages, 
from nine to twenty-five cents per gallon, according 
to proof; if distilled in other places, it imposes a 
yearly rate of sixty cents per gallon of the capacity 
of each still, with an option to the distiller to keep 
and render an account of the produce of his still, 

Public Credit 205 

and to pay nine cents per gallon of the quantity of 
spirits distilled therein. 

These duties are appropriated, primarily, in the 
same manner, and to the same purposes, as those laid 
on imported articles by the act of the loth of August, 
1790, and are to continue for the same time, with the 
like reservation of a right to substitute other duties 
or taxes of equal value. There is a further appro 
priation, which will be noticed hereafter. 

yth. " An act for raising a further sum of money 
for the protection of the frontiers, and for other pur 
poses therein mentioned," passed May 2, 1792. 

This act repeals, after June, 1792, the former du 
ties on a number of imported articles, and establishes 
higher duties in their stead. 

It extends, among other things, the duties on 
foreign distilled spirits, laying on those made from 
grain, twenty-eight to fifty cents per gallon; on 
others, twenty-five to forty-six cents per gallon. 
The appropriation and duration of these new duties 
are conformable and coextensive with those repealed. 
There is, likewise, an addition of two and a half per 
cent, to that class of duties ad valorem, which, be 
fore, was rated at five per cent. ; but this additional 
duty is limited to the term of two years. 

Out of the surplus of these duties, after satisfy 
ing the permanent appropriations, certain gross 
sums are appropriated for the service of the War 
Department. 

8th. " An act concerning the duties on spirits dis 
tilled within the United States," passed May 8, 1792. 

This act repeals, after the last day of June, 1792, 

206 Alexander Hamilton 

the former duties on spirits distilled within the 
United States, and on stills, and, instead of them, 
establishes lower duties, namely, on those made of 
foreign materials, from ten to twenty-five cents per 
gallon, according to proof; on those made of do 
mestic materials, if in cities, towns, or villages, or at 
distilleries, where the stills, singly or together, are of 
the capacity of four hundred gallons, or upwards, 
from seven to eighteen cents per gallon of the spirits 
distilled, according to proof; if made in other places, 
or at distilleries where the stills are of inferior capa 
city, the yearly rate of fifty-four cents per gallon of 
the capacity of each still. A new option is given 
to the distiller, which is, instead of paying the yearly 
rate, to take out licenses for the monthly employ 
ment of his stills, paying, each time, ten cents per 
gallon of the capacity of each still. 

These new duties are appropriated in the same 
manner, and for the same purposes, and are to continue 
for the same time, as those for which they are sub 
stitutes: and to make good any deficiency which may 
accrue from lowering the rates, the surplus of the 
duty imposed by the act of the second of the same 
month, is appropriated. 

gth. "An act to promote the progress of useful 
arts, and to repeal the act heretofore made for that 
purpose/* passed February 21, 1793. 

This act ordains certain fees to be paid, by persons 
to whom patents are granted, for inventions, dis 
coveries, or improvements, and appropriates them to 
the purpose of defraying clerk hire in the Department 
of State. Its duration is indefinite. 

Public Credit 207 

roth. "An act to establish the post-office and 
post-roads, within the United States," passed May 8, 

I794- 

This act establishes, to commence on the first of 
June following, various rates of postage on letters, 
and directs that the Postmaster shall render to the 
Treasury Department a quarterly account of receipts 
and expenditures, and shall pay, quarterly, into the 
Treasury, the balance in his hands. 

The duration of this act is, also, indefinite. It 
contains no appropriation of the sums paid into the 
Treasury. 

nth. "An act laying duties upon carriages for 
the conveyance of persons," passed June 5, 1794. 

This act lays different rates of duty, from ten 
dollars down to one dollar, upon carriages for the 
conveyance of persons, kept by or for any person, for 
his or her own use, or to be let to hire, or for the con 
veying of passengers; and to guard against mis 
apprehension, declares, that the duties shall not be 
construed to extend to any carriage actually and 
chiefly employed in husbandry, or for the transporting 
or carrying of goods, wares, merchandise, produce, or 
commodities. 

The duration of the duties is limited to the end of 
the session of Congress which shall be next after the 
term of two years from the time of passing the act. 
It contains no appropriation. 

1 2th. "An act laying duties on licenses for selling 
wines and foreign distilled spirituous liquors, by 
retail," passed June 5, 1794. 

This act requires, that every retail dealer in wines, 

208 Alexander Hamilton 

shall take out a yearly license, and shall pay for it a 
duty of five dollars; and that every retail dealer in 
foreign distilled spirituous liquors shall also take out 
a yearly license, and pay for it a duty of five dollars. 
It defines a retail dealer in wines to be a person who 
deals in the selling of wines, to be carried or sent out 
of the house, building, or place of his or her dwelling, in 
less quantities at one time than thirty gallons, except 
in the original cask, case, box, or package in which it 
is imported. A retail dealer of spirituous liquors, 
to be a person who shall deal in the selling of foreign 
distilled spirituous liquors, to be carried or sent out of 
the house, building, or place of his or her dwelling, in 
less quantities than twenty gallons at one time. No 
difference is made between the dealer in several kinds 
of wines, or several kinds of foreign distilled liquors, 
and the dealer in one kind. 

The same duration is assigned to this act, as to the 
one last cited. It is equally without an appropriation. 

1 3th. " An act laying certain duties upon snuff and 
refined sugar," passed June 5, 1794. 

This act lays a duty of eight cents per pound on 
all snuff which, after the 3oth of September, 1794, 
should be manufactured within the United States, 
and of two cents per pound on all sugar which, after 
that day, should be refined within the United States. 
The remark made upon the two last recited acts is 
applicable to this, as to the duration of the duties, 
and the appropriation of their proceeds. 

1 4th. " An act laying additional duties on goods, 
wares, and merchandises imported into the United 
States," passed June 7, 1794. 

Public Credit 209 

This act lays upon sundry enumerated articles, on 
their importation from foreign countries, certain 
specific and ad- valorem rates of duty, in addition to 
those before charged upon them, and adds, generally, 
a duty of two and a half per centum on all that class 
of articles which were before chargeable with seven 
and a half per centum ad valorem. It also prolongs 
the temporary two and a half per centum laid by 
the act of May 2, 1792, till the first of January, 1797, 
to which period the other duties laid by it are to 
continue. It contains no appropriation. 

1 5th. "An act laying duties on property sold at 
auction," passed June 9, 1794. 

This act lays a duty on sales at auction by persons 
licensed according to the laws of a State, or this act, 
prohibiting others from selling at auction, of one 
quarter per cent, of the purchase money arising 
from the sale of any right, interest, or estate in lands, 
tenements, or hereditaments, utensils in husbandry, 
farming stock, or ships and vessels, of one half per 
cent, of the purchase money arising from the sales of 
any other goods, chattels, rights, or credits. 

The term of these duties is limited to the end of 
the session next after the expiration of two years 
from the time of passing the act, which also is with 
out an appropriation. 

But, by an act entitled " An act making appropria 
tions for certain purposes therein expressed," passed 
the same 9th of June, 1794, certain specific sums, 
amounting together to 1,292,137 dollars 38 cents, 
are charged upon the proceeds of the revenues which 
are created by the five last-mentioned acts, and there 

VOL. 111.— 14. 

2io Alexander Hamilton 

is a reservation made out of them of a sum sufficient 
to pay the interest of whatever moneys may be 
borrowed pursuant to the act entitled " An act mak 
ing further provision for the expenses attending the 
intercourse of the United States with foreign na 
tions/' etc., passed the 2oth of March, 1794, which 
sum is pledged for the payment of that interest. 

These acts comprehend all the current revenues 
of the United States. Their product will appear 
hereafter. 

In addition to them, a fund will be derived from 
the sale of the public lands in the Western territory. 
And there likewise occur, from time to time, pay 
ments into the Treasury on account of old debts; 
but these are too casual, and of too little magnitude, 
to be more than cursorily mentioned. 

The lands in the Western territory, of which the 
Government of the United States has acquired the 
right of soil, are estimated, in a report of the late 
Secretary of State, to amount to 21,000,000 of acres. 
This quantity, at twenty cents per acre, the price 
upon former occasions contemplated, would yield a 
sum of $4,200,000. But it is believed that it would 
be unsafe to count upon so large a sum. Besides the 
uncertainty as to the proportion which may be of a 
salable quality, and as to the price which may be 
obtained for it, the boundary line between the 
United States and the Indians is understood to be 
unsettled with regard to a large part of the tract on 
which the computation is made. If it ultimately 
yields three millions of dollars it will probably equal 
every reasonable expectation. 

Public Credit 211 

II. The provisions for funding the debt, and for 
payment of interest upon it, are comprised in the 
following acts: 

ist. " An act making provision for the debt of the 
United States," passed August 4, 1790. 

This act, commonly called the funding act, con 
tains these several provisions, viz. : 

1. It reserves out of the proceeds of the duties on 
imports and tonnage for the support of the Govern 
ment of the United States, and their common de 
fence, the yearly sum of 600,000 dollars. 

2. It appropriates so much of the same proceeds as 
should be necessary to the payment of interest on 
foreign loans before that time contracted, or which 
should afterward be contracted, for discharging the 
arrears of interest and the principal of anteced 
ent foreign loans, to continue so appropriated till 
the debt created by those loans should be fully 
discharged. 

3. It authorizes the President to borrow any sum 
or sums, not exceeding $12,000,000, to discharge the 
arrears of interest upon, and the instalments of the 
principal of, the foreign debt due and to grow due; 
and, if to be effected on advantageous terms, to pay off 
the whole of that debt; and further authorizes him 
to make such other contracts respecting it as should 
be found for the interest of the United States, so 
that no engagement or contract should preclude from 
reimbursing the sums borrowed, within fifteen years 
after they should be borrowed. 

4. In order to adapt the form of the domestic debt 
to the then circumstances of the United States, as 

212 Alexander Hamilton 

far as should be found practicable, "consistently with 
good faith and the rights of the creditors, which, it 
truly declares, could only be done by a voluntary loan 
on their part,11 it proposes a loan to the United States 
(directing for that purpose books for subscriptions 
to be opened at the Treasury and by commissioners 
of loans in the several States on the ist of October, 
1790, and to continue for a year), the sums sub 
scribed to the loan to be paid in certain enumerated 
evidences of the debt of the United States upon 
these terms, viz. : 

First. That the interest unpaid on the principal of 
those evidences should be computed up to the last of 
December, 1790. 

Second. That, for any sum subscribed and paid in 
the principal of the debt, the subscriber should be 
entitled to one certificate for a sum equal to two 
thirds of the sum subscribed, bearing an interest of 
six per cent, per annum, commencing the first day 
of January, 1791, payable quarter yearly, and subject 
to redemption by payments not exceeding, in one 
year, on account of both principal and interest, eight 
dollars upon a hundred of the original sum so sub 
scribed and paid; and to another certificate for a 
sum equal to the remaining third of that sum, which, 
after the year 1800, should bear a like interest, pay 
able in like manner, and subject to a like rate of 
redemption. But that the United States, though 
having a right to redeem in the above-mentioned pro 
portion, should not be obliged to do it. 

Third. That for any sum subscribed and paid in 
the interest of the debt, the subscriber should be en- 

Public Credit 213 

titled to a certificate for a sum equal to the sum sub 
scribed, bearing an interest of three per cent, per 
annum, from the said last day of December, 1790, 
payable quarter yearly, and redeemable at pleasure, 
by payment of the principal. 

Fourth. That the new stock created by the said 
loan should be transferable on the books upon which 
the credit for it should stand by the proprietor or his 
attorney; these books to be either those kept for the 
purpose at the Treasury, or by commissioners of 
loans in the respective States; a mode being pro 
vided for the transfer from the books at one place to 
those at another. 

Fifth. That the interest should tie payable where 
soever the credit for the stock should exist, when the 
payment of interest should become due ; except that 
the dividend of interest for any quarter of a year, 
which should not be demanded before the expiration 
of a third quarter, should afterwards be demandable 
only at the Treasury. 

Sixth. That, for the regular payment of the in 
terest on the several kinds of stock to arise from the 
loan, as it should accrue, including that which is 
deferred, the proceeds of the public revenues, which, 
before that time, had been, or during the then ses 
sion should be, provided, after reserving, yearly, 
600,000 dollars, for the support of the Government of 
the United States, and their common defence, and such 
sum as should be necessary for payment of interest on 
the foreign loans before mentioned, should be, and 
thereby were, pledged and appropriated, till the final 
redemption of the capital stock. 

214 Alexander Hamilton 

5. Premising that some of the creditors of the 
United States might not think -fit to become sub 
scribers to the loan, this act declares that "nothing 
contained in it should be construed in any wise to alter, 
abridge, or impair the rights of those creditors of the 
United States who should not subscribe to the loan or 
the contracts upon which their respective claims are 
founded, but that the said contracts and rights should 
remain in full force and virtue." And to obviate 
all idea of compulsion on the creditors to subscribe, 
it allows to non-subscribers, during the pendency of 
the loan, and until the end of the year 1791, a rate 
per centum, on their respective demands, equal to 
that which is paid to subscribing creditors; on the 
sole condition, that the evidences of debt holden by 
them, except those which had been issued by the 
Register of the Treasury, for the registered debt, 
should be exchanged for other certificates, specifying 
the specie amount of those in exchange for which 
they were given, and otherwise of the like tenor with 
those which had theretofore been issued by the 
Register of the Treasury, for the registered debt; 
stating, as the grounds of this condition, that some 
of the certificates then in circulation had not been 
liquidated to specie value, that most of them were 
greatly subject to counterfeit, that counterfeits had 
actually taken place in numerous instances, and that 
embarrassment and imposition might attend the 
payment of interest on these certificates in their 
then form. 

6. This act likewise proposes another loan, to the 
amount of $21,500,000, payable in the principal and 

Public Credit 215 

interest, indiscriminately, of the evidences of debt 
of the respective States, according to certain quotas, 
to be conducted in the same manner, and to be open 
for the same time, as that in the domestic debt of 
the United States. The terms of this loan to be: 

First. That, for any sum subscribed, the sub 
scriber should be entitled to one certificate, for a 
sum equal to four ninths of the subscribed sum, 
bearing an interest of six per centum per annum, 
commencing the first day of January, 1791; to an 
other certificate, for a sum equal to two ninths of 
the said subscribed sum, bearing an interest, after 
the year 1800, of six per centum per annum; and to 
a third certificate, for a sum equal to three ninths of 
the said subscribed sum, bearing an interest of three 
per centum per annum, commencing on the same 
first day of January, 1791 ; the interest, in each case, 
to be payable in like manner, and to be subject to 
the like redemption, as that on the correspondent 
kinds of stock to be created by this, the said first- 
mentioned loan. And the stock to be created by this 
second loan to be transferable on the same principles, 
and in the same modes, as that produced by the 
former. 

Second. That, for the regular payment of interest 
on the several kinds of stock to arise from this loan, 
as it should accrue, including that which is deferred, 
the proceeds of the public revenues, which, before 
that time, had been, or during the then session should 
be, provided, after reserving the aforesaid yearly sum 
of $600,000, the sum necessary for payment of interest 
on the foreign loans made and to be made, and the sum 

216 Alexander Hamilton 

necessary for payment of interest on the loan in the 
domestic debt, should be, and thereby were, pledged 
and appropriated; to continue so pledged and ap 
propriated until the final redemption of the capital 
stock. 

7. To secure the due application of these revenues, 
according to the appropriations, an account of them 
is directed to be kept, distinct from that of the pro 
ceeds of any other revenues, except such as should 
be raised to make good a deficiency in those ; and the 
faith of the United States is pledged to appropriate 
additional and permanent funds for satisfying such 
deficiency. 

8. The proceeds of the sales of lands in the Western 
territory, then belonging, or which thereafter should 
belong, to the United States, are pledged and appro 
priated for the discharge of the debts which the 
United States then owed, or by virtue of that act 
should owe. 

There are several collateral and supplementary 
provisions, which are omitted, as immaterial to the 
intended view of the subject. 

2d. "An act repealing, after the last day of June 
next, the duties heretofore laid upon distilled spirits, " 
etc., passed the 3d of March, 1791. 

The proceeds of the duties laid by this act are 
made subject to the same appropriations, and in the 
same order of priority, as those contained in the 
funding act; and, to secure their due application, an 
account is directed to be kept of them, distinct from 
that of any other revenues, except those appro 
priated by the funding act. 

Public Credit 217 

3d. " An act for raising a further sum of money for 
the protection of the frontiers," etc., passed May 2, 
1792. 

This act, which, as has been before noticed, in 
creased permanently the duties on certain imported 
articles, and laid a temporary additional duty on 
some others, appropriates, primarily, the proceeds of 
the permanent augmentations in the same manner, 
and to the same purposes, as the antecedent duties 
were appropriated — that is, in conformity with the 
funding act. 

4th. " An act concerning the duties on spirits dis 
tilled within the United States," passed May 8, 1792. 

This act, which lowers the duties on spirits dis 
tilled within the United States, and on stills, appro 
priates the proceeds of the reduced duties in the same 
manner as were the former duties ; and, to make good 
whatever deficiency might be occasioned by the re 
duction of the rates, pledges, as a substitute, the 
surplus of the augmented duties laid by the last-cited 
act. 

5th. "An act providing for the payment of the 
second instalment due on a loan made of the Bank 
of the United States," passed June 4, 1794. 

This act, in addition to a provision for paying that 
second instalment, appropriates so much of the 
dividends on the stock which the United States hold 
in the bank, as should be necessary to the payment 
of interest on the capital of a loan of $2,000,000, had 
of the bank, pursuant to the nth section of the act 
by which it is incorporated. It also fixes the last 
day of December, in each year, as the annual period 

218 Alexander Hamilton 

for the payment of the successive instalments of that 
loan. 

6th. " An act making provision for the payment of 
the interest on the balances due to certain States," 
upon a final settlement of accounts between the 
United States and the individual States, passed May 

This act directs that interest shall be allowed and 
computed on the balances to creditor States from 
the last of December, 1789, to the last of Decem 
ber, 1 794 ; which, being placed to their credit respect 
ively, shall bear an interest of three per centum per 
annum, from the period last mentioned. 

It further directs that the interest on the prin 
cipal balances, to be funded agreeably to the terms 
of the act for the settlement of accounts, together 
with the interest upon the arrears of interest, com 
puted on those balances, and forming a new capital, 
shall be payable at the offices of the commissioners 
of loans within the States to which the balances are 
respectively due, and shall be paid quarter yearly, 
after the last day of December, 1794, at the same 
epochs in each year, at which interest is payable on 
the other parts of the funded debt; to which end, 
so much of the proceeds of the duties on imports and 
tonnage as may be necessary, and as were not other 
wise previously appropriated, are appropriated; and 
the faith of the United States is pledged to provide 
for any deficiency which may happen by additional 
and permanent funds. 

There are several acts which prolong, from time 
to time, the subscriptions in the domestic and State 

Public Credit 219 

debts, on the same terms as by the funding act, 
those in the domestic debt being continued down to 
the last day of December, 1794; which acts, together 
with the acts particularly cited, comprise all those 
that relate to the funding of the public debt, and the 
payment of interest thereupon. The result of these 
acts is exhibited in the tables A, B, C, and D, which 
show the amount of the foreign debt, that of the 
funded debt, the probable amount of that which re 
mains unfunded, of what composed, and the annual 
amount of interest upon the different portions of 
debt, according to contract, and according to the 
plan of this report. 

III. The provisions for reimbursing and redeem 
ing the public debt are contained in the following 
acts, and are as follows, viz. : 

i st. " An act making provision for the debt of the 
United States/' passed the 4th of August, 1790. 

This act, which is the one that regulates the fund 
ing of the debt, by the last section appropriates the 
proceeds of the sales of the lands in the Western 
territory, then belonging, or thereafter to belong, to 
the United States, to the sinking or discharging of 
the debts for which the United States then were, or 
by virtue of that act should be, holden, to be ap 
plied solely to that use, until they should be fully 
satisfied. 

2d. ''An act making provision for the reduction 
of the public debt," passed August 12, 1790. 

This act, premising that it is desirable, by all just 
and proper means, to effect a reduction of the public 

22O Alexander Hamilton 

debt, and that the application of the surplus revenue 
to that object will not only contribute to this desir 
able end, but will be beneficial to the creditors of 
the United States, by raising the price of their stock, 
and be productive of considerable saving to the 
United States, enacts — 

1. That the surplus of the duties on imports and 
tonnage, to the end of the year 1790, shall be ap 
plied to the purchase of the debt of the United 
States, at its market price, if not exceeding the par 
or true value thereof. 

2. That the purchases to be made shall be con 
ducted under the direction of the President of the 
Senate, the Chief -Justice, the Secretary of State, the 
Secretary of the Treasury, and the Attorney-Gen 
eral, who, or any three of whom, with the approba 
tion of the President, are authorized to cause them 
to be made in such manner, and under such regula 
tions, as shall appear to them best calculated to 
fulfil the intent of this act: Provided that the same 
should be made openly, and with due regard to the 
equal benefit of the several States. 

3. That the accounts of the application of the 
fund should be settled as other public accounts, ac 
companied with returns of the amount of debt pur 
chased, at the end of each quarter of a year; and 
that a full and exact report of the proceedings of the 
commissioners should be laid before Congress, within 
the first fourteen days of each session, including a 
statement of the disbursements and purchases, 
specifying the times when, prices at which, and per 
sons of whom, the purchases were made. 

Public Credit 221 

4. That, in addition to this fund, the President 
should be authorized to borrow any sum or sums, 
not exceeding two millions of dollars, at an interest 
not exceeding five per centum, to be applied to pur 
chases of public debt in like manner, and under the 
same direction and regulations, as the first-men 
tioned fund: Provided that, out of the interest of the 
debt to be purchased, there should be appropriated, 
annually, a sum not exceeding eight per centum of the 
sums borrowed, towards paying the interest and re 
imbursing the principal of these sums. 

But to guard against the possibility of a deficiency 
of means to pay the interest on the debt which was 
to accrue in the year 1791, authority is given to 
reserve and apply to that purpose, out of the first- 
mentioned fund, as much as might be necessary to 
supply the defect of receipts, during that year, on 
account of the duties which should accrue after the 
year 1790. 

3d. " An act repealing, after the last day of June 
next, the duties heretofore laid upon distilled 
spirits, etc.," passed the 3d of March, 1791. 

This act appropriates whatever surplus may re 
main, from year to year, of the proceeds of the 
duties which it imposes, after satisfying prior ap 
propriations, to the reduction of the public debt, 
unless such surplus shall be required for the current 
public exigencies, and, by special acts of Congress, 
shall be appropriated thereto. 

4th. "An act supplementary to the act making 
provision for the reduction of the public debt," 
passed the 3d day of March, 1791. 

222 Alexander Hamilton 

This act declares that the terms of a loan of three 
millions of florins, obtained in Holland, bearing five 
per cent, interest, and four and a half per cent, for 
charges, and future loans on the same terms, should 
be deemed to be within the meaning of the act of 
the 1 2th of August, 1790. 

5th. "An act supplementary to the act making 
provision for the debt of the United States," passed 
May 8, 1792. 

This act makes provision for the payment of a 
debt due to certain foreign officers who had served 
the United States (the interest of which was, by 
stipulation, payable at Paris), out of the moneys 
authorized to be borrowed by the funding act. It 
also establishes a permanent sinking fund, to be 
composed — 

1. Of the interest of the public debt purchased, 
redeemed, or paid into the Treasury, in satisfaction 
of any debt or demand. 

2. Of the surplus, if any, which should remain of 
moneys appropriated for paying the interest of the 
public debt, after paying that interest. 

This fund is to be applied, under the direction 
of the commissioners nominated in the act of the 
1 2th of August, with the like approbation of the 
President — 

First. To the purchase of the several species of 
stock constituting the debt of the United States, at 
their respective market prices, not exceeding the par 
or true value thereof, and, as nearly as may be, in 
equal proportions, until the annnal amount of the 
fund shall be equal to two per centum of the whole 

Public Credit 223 

amount of the outstanding funded stock, bearing a 
present interest of six per centum: Thenceforth — 

Second. To the redemption of that stock, accord 
ing to the right reserved to the United States, until 
the whole should be redeemed ; and, lastly, after such 
redemption, to the purchase, at its market price, of 
any unredeemed debt of the United States ; which 
purchases are directed to be made at the lowest 
prices at which they can be effected by open pur 
chase, or by receiving sealed proposals, to be opened 
in the presence of the commissioners, or persons 
authorized by them to make purchases, and of the 
persons making the proposals; and are to be ac 
counted for at the Treasury, and reported to Con 
gress, in the same manner as the purchases before 
authorized to be made. 

6th. "An act making appropriation for the sup 
port of Government for the year 1793." 

This act provides that the President of the United 
States shall cause so much of the loan made of the 
Bank of the United States, pursuant to the nth 
section of the act of incorporation, to be paid off in 
sums not less than 50,000 dollars, as, in his opinion, 
the state of the Treasury may, from time to time, 
admit, out of any moneys which may be in the 
Treasury, having due regard to the exigencies of the 
Government and the appropriations made, and to 
be made, by law. 

yth. "An act making provision for the payment 
of the first instalment due on a loan made of the 
Bank of the United States," passed March 2, 1793. 

This act authorizes the payment of the first 

224 Alexander Hamilton 

instalment of a loan of two millions of dollars, had of 
the Bank of the United States, pursuant to the nth 
section of the act by which it is incorporated, out of 
the moneys borrowed upon the authority of the 
act making provision for the reduction of the public 
debt. 

8th. "An act providing for the payment of the 
second instalment, due on a loan made of the Bank 
of the United States," passed June 4, 1794. 

This act authorizes the payment of that second 
instalment, out of the proceeds of any foreign loans 
before that time transferred to the United States. 
It makes other provisions which have been noticed 
under a preceding head. 

These acts comprise all the provisions which have 
been made for reimbursing and redeeming the debt 
of the United States. The result to the last of 
December, 1794, is presented in the statement E. 

There are two other acts which, though not falling 
properly under either of the foregoing heads, require, 
from their relation to the subject, to be brought into 
view: 

i. An act relative to claims against the United 
States not barred by any act of limitation, and 
which have not been already adjusted, passed 
February 12, 1793. 

This act directs that all claims of the description 
given in the title shall be presented at the Treasury 
for adjustment by the ist of May, 1794, or shall 
be forever after barred; except those for loan-office 
certificates, final settlements, indents of interest, Regis 
ter's certificates, balances on the books of the Treasury, 

Public Credit 225 

loans of money in foreign countries, certificates issued 
under the act entitled "An act making provision for 
the debt of the United States" 

Such of the claims presented as cannot be admitted 
in the course of the Treasury are to be reported to 
Congress by the accounting officers. 

Among the claims inadmissible in the ordinary 
course of the Treasury is a sum of 90,574 dollars of 
the bills of credit, commonly called new emission 
money. 

2. An act making further provision for the ex 
penses attending the intercourse of the United 
States with foreign nations, etc., passed March 20, 

1794. 

This act appropriates, in addition to former pro 
visions, one million of dollars for the purposes men 
tioned in the title, to be paid out of any moneys 
which may be in the Treasury not otherwise appro 
priated, and to be applied under the direction of the 
President of the United States who is also authorized, 
if necessary, to borrow the whole or any part of the 
sum; but there is no special appropriation either for 
paying the interest or reimbursing the principal of 
the loan. 

The act already quoted of the 9th of June, 1794, 
entitled "An act making appropriations for certain 
purposes therein expressed," with a view to remedy 
this defect, appropriates out of the proceeds of the 
taxes laid during the last session such sum as shall 
be sufficient to pay the interest on whatever moneys 
may be borrowed, pursuant to the act of March 20, 

VOL. III. — 15. 

226 Alexander Hamilton 

The foregoing review of the laws which constitute 
the fiscal system of the United States displays these 
prominent points as the leading features of that 
system: 

i st. That all the current revenues of the United 
States are derived from these sources, to wit: IM 
PORTED ARTICLES; the TONNAGE of ships and ves 
sels; SPIRITS distilled within the United States, and 
STILLS; the POSTAGE of letters; FEES ON PATENTS; 
DIVIDENDS of bank stock; SNUFF manufactured 
within the United States; SUGAR refined within the 
United States; SALES AT AUCTION; LICENSES to 
retail wines and distilled spirits ; CARRIAGES for the 
conveyance of persons. 

2d. That, of these revenues, the principal part of 
the duties on imported articles, those on the tonnage 
of ships and vessels, those on distilled spirits and 
stills, those on the postage of letters, patent fees, the 
dividends on bank stock, are permanent (the three 
first being commensurate with the existence of the 
debt for the payment of the interest of which they 
are pledged, the fourth and fifth having no limit 
assigned in the laws, and the last being commen 
surate with the duration of the property in the 
stock), all the others temporary; being limited to 
continue no longer than till the end of the session 
of Congress next after the expiration of two years 
from the respective times of passing the laws which 
established them, except the temporary duties on 
imports and tonnage, which are to continue till the 
ist of January, 1797. 

3d. That the permanent duties on imported art- 

Public Credit 227 

icles, the tonnage duties, the duties on spirits dis 
tilled within the United States, and on stills, are 
subject to these permanent dispositions: 

1. To an annual reservation of 600,000 dollars, for 
the support of the Government of the United States 
and their common defence. 

2. To an appropriation of so much as may be 
necessary to pay the interest on the foreign loans, 
provided for by the funding act. 

3. To an appropriation of so much as may be 
necessary to pay the interest on the stock created 
by the loan in domestic debt, or more properly in 
the original debt of the United States. 

4. To an appropriation of so much as may be 
necessary to discharge the interest on the stock 
created by the loan in the debts of the respective 
States. 

5. To an appropriation of so much as may be 
necessary to pay the interest on the balances due to 
creditor States, which dispositions establish prior 
ities, according to the order in which they are here 
enumerated. 

4th. That the surplus, if any, of the duties on 
spirits distilled within the United States, and on 
stills, has an ultimate appropriation, that is, to the 
reduction of the public debt, but that the surpluses 
of the other duties have no such ultimate appropria 
tion. 

5th. That the duties on the postage of letters, 
and the net dividend on bank stock, have no per 
manent or particular appropriation. 

6th. That the temporary duties are charged with 

228 Alexander Hamilton 

a specific sum of 1,292, 137 dollars and 38 cents; and 
with the payment of interest on a sum of 1,000,000 
of dollars, authorized to be borrowed for the expenses of 
foreign intercourse. 

yth. That the whole of the foreign debt, and all 
that part of the domestic debt, being now nearly the 
whole, which consists of the stock created by the 
loans in the original debt of the United States, and 
in the particular debts of the several States, and by 
the balances due to creditor States, are bottomed on 
certain specified revenues, pledged or hypothecated for 
the payment of the interest upon them; and thus 
constitute the FUNDED DEBT of the United States. 

8th. That the funded DOMESTIC debt of the 
United States consists of three species of stock, one 
bearing a present interest of six per cent, per annum; 
another bearing a like interest after the year 1800; 
a third bearing a present interest of three per centum 
per annum: the interest in each case payable quarter 
yearly. 

9th. That the six per cent, stock, present and de 
ferred, can be redeemed in no greater proportion 
than at the rate of eight per centum per annum of 
the original sum, on account both of principal and 
interest ; but the three per cent, stock is redeemable 
at pleasure. 

zoth. That the provision for subscribing to the 
loan in domestic debt expired on the last of Decem 
ber, 1794, and that no further provision has been 
made for the unsubscribed residue. 

nth. That the funding act expressly confirms the 
contracts and rights of the creditors of the United 

Public Credit 229 

States, who shall not think fit to subscribe to the loan, 
and gives an expectation to them of further and other 
arrangements, upon the event of the propositions 
made to them. 

1 2th. That the proceeds of all the lands of the 
United States in the Western territory are appro 
priated to the redemption of all that part of the 
public debt for which, prior to the funding act, or by 
virtue thereof, the United States were or are liable. 

1 3th. That, in addition to this, a regular SINKING 
FUND has been successively constituted, to be ap 
plied under the direction of five principal officers 
of the United States, with the approbation of the 
President, hitherto composed of three parts: ist. 
The surplus of the duties on imports and tonnage to 
the end of 1790. 2dly. The proceeds of loans not 
exceeding two millions of dollars, authorized to be 
borrowed for the purpose (these two funds to be in 
vested in purchases); and 3dly (in which the two 
former resolve themselves), the interest on the public 
debt, purchased, redeemed, or paid into the Treasury, 
together with the surpluses, if any, of the moneys 
appropriated for interest, to be applied first to pur 
chases of the debt till the fund is equal to two per 
centum of the outstanding stock, bearing a present 
interest of six per cent. ; second to the redemption 
of that stock; and lastly, to purchases of any un 
redeemed residue of the public debt. But there is 
reserved out of this fund a sum not exceeding eight per 
centum per annum, toward the payment of interest 
and reimbursing of the principal of the loans made 
for purchases of the debt. 

230 Alexander Hamilton 

To this recapitulation of the leading features of 
our fiscal system, it may be useful to add a summary 
exhibition of certain results, which appear more in 
detail, or are deducible from the tables or statements 
annexed to this report. 

The particulars and amount of the debt of the 
United States, are as follow: 

Foreign debt, as per state 
ments B and C . . $14,599,129 35 

Deduct instalment of for 
eign debt in the year 
1795, to be paid out of 
proceeds of foreign 
loans .... 853,750 oo 

: $13,745,379 35 

Funded domestic debt, viz. : 

1. Arising from origin 

al domestic debt, 
subscribed to loan 
proposed by fund 
ing act : 
Stock bearing a present 

interest of six per cent. $17,912,138 01 
Stock bearing a future in 
terest of ditto . . 8,538,228 97 
Stock bearing an interest 

of three per cent. . 12,275,347 55 

2. Arising from State 

debts assumed: 

interest of six per cent. 7,908,374 19 
terest of ditto . . 3,940,608 96 

Carried forward . $50,574,697 68 $13, 745.379 35 

Public Credit 231 

Brought forward . $50,574,697 68 $i3>745>379 35 


of three per cent. . 5,944,115 70 
3. Arising from bal 
ances to creditor 
States: 

Stock bearing a present 

interest of six per cent. 2,345,056 oo 

Stock bearing a future in 
terest of ditto . . 1,172,528 oo. 

Stock bearing an interest 

of three per cent. . 703,516 80 

— $60,789,914 18 
Unsubscribed debt, viz. : 

Principal, exclusive of 
loan-office certificates, 
bearing interest on 
nominal value . . $1,072,583 40 

Interest thereupon, in 
cluding indents . . 452,826 74 

Principal of loan-office 
certificates, bearing in 
terest on nominal sum . 2 7>935 °° 

Interest thereon . . 7,830 oo 

$1,561,175 14 

Total unredeemed debt, $76,096,468 67 

This is exclusive of a sum of $1,400,000 due to the 
Bank of the United States, on account of the loan of 
$2,000,000 had of that institution, pursuant to the 
eleventh section of the act by which it is incor 
porated, and which is not included in the mass of 
the debt, because it is more than counterbalanced 
by a greater value in stock. It is also exclusive of 

232 Alexander Hamilton 

those loans which are temporary anticipations of 
the revenue. 

The particulars and amount of the annual current 
revenues of the United States, are as follows: 

APPROPRIATED. PERMANENT. 

Duties on imports and ton 
nage, domestic . . $4,199,791 67 

Duties on distilled spirits 

and stills . . . 400,000 oo 

Fees in patents . . . 660 oo 

UNAPPROPRIATED. 

Postage of letters . . 29,722 16 
Surplus dividends on bank 

stock .... 62,500 oo 

- $4,692,673 83 

TEMPORARY. 

Temporary duties on im 
ports .... $1,479,626 91 

INTERNAL. 

Duties on snuff, refined 
sugar, sales at auction, 
licenses to retail spirits 
and wines, carriages for 
conveyance of persons . 380,000 oo 

$1,859,626 91 

Total annual current revenue, $6,552,300 74 

The particulars and amount of the annual stated 
expenditure of the United States, computing the 
army and navy establishments on the scale of an 
Indian and Algerine war, are as follows: 

Public Credit 233 

Interest on the foreign debt . , 4 ;**. $638,480 58 
Interest on domestic funded debt . . 2,339,241 50 
Interest on unfunded debt . . . 66,031 10 
Interest on temporary loans . . . 100,000 oo 
Expenses of the civil Government, includ 
ing foreign intercourse . . . 475,249 53 
Expenses of military land service . . 1,511,975 29 
Expenses of military naval service . . 441,508 80 
Miscellany 109,357 04 

Total annual expenditure, $5,681,843 84 

This sum is liable to be increased by the interest 
which will begin to accrue on the deferred stock the 
first of January, 1801 ; being, on the present amount 
of that stock, 871,401 dollars and 92 cents. 

The annual force of the sinking fund, as depending 
on ascertained funds, may be stated as follows: 

Interest for a year, on sums already carried 

to its credit $68,225 55 

Interest for a year, on debts of foreign officers, 
in a course of payment, including arrears 
of interest to be carried to the credit of 
this fund .... . 13,439 49 

Interest for a year, on the unexpended surplus 
of the revenues at the end of the year 
1790, being 411,659 dollars 49 cents, sup 
posing this to be invested, by purchase, 
in an equal sum of present six-per-cent. 
stock . . . . . . 24,699 56 

$106,364 60 

It is further liable to be increased by an invest 
ment in purchases of 865,098 dollars n cents, which, 

234 Alexander Hamilton 

together with the sums from that source already in 
vested in purchases and payments will amount to 
2,000,000 of dollars, the sum authorized to be bor 
rowed for purchases of the debt. 

But, as this auxiliary depends on an operation, 
not only future, but, in some degree, casual, it can 
not be taken into an estimate of the actual strength 
of the fund. 

The proceeds of the sales of Western lands must 
also be considered as an eventual resource. 

There are other contingent sources of augmenta 
tion, not computed, because they are contingent. 
But, on the other hand, the fund is liable to be re 
duced by a sum reserved out of it for the payment 
of principal and interest, of the two millions au 
thorized to be borrowed for purchases not exceeding 
eight per centum per annum. 

The sum applicable, in the first instance, to the 
redemption of that portion of the funded debt which 
bears a present interest of six per centum, excluding 
that standing to the credit of the commissioners of 
the sinking fund, is as follows: 

Of transferable stock $516,410 24 

Of untransferable stock, arising from bal 
ances to creditor States . . . 46,901 12 

$563,311 36 

The sum applicable, in the first instance, that is, 
on the ist day of January, 1802, to the redemption 
of that portion of the funded debt, now called 
deferred stock, excluding that standing to the credit 

Public Credit 235 

of the commissioners of the sinking fund, will be as 

follows: 

Of transferable stock . *.,•<, ; , . . $249,576 75 
Of untransferable stock, arising from bal 
ances to creditor States . . . 23,450 56 

$273,027 31 

These sums would complete the redemption of 
the whole amount of the stock to which they are 
applicable, within twenty- three years after the re 
demption in each case was begun; within which 
terms they would discharge the whole of the public 
debt, except the foreign debt, the unsubscribed debt, 
and the three-per-cent. stock. 

If the redemption of the present six -per -cent, 
stock commence the first of January, 1796, and the 
redeeming fund be commensurate with the whole of 
the unredeemed stock bearing a present interest of 
six per cent, and transferable, the revenue set free in 
the year 1818, for operations upon the residue of the 
debt, will be 2,039,394 dollars 36 cents. 

If the redemption of the deferred debt commence 
the first of January, 1802, when it may rightfully 
commence, and the redeeming fund be commen 
surate with the whole of that stock, unredeemed and 
transferable, the revenue set free in the year 1824, 
for operations upon the residue of the public debt, 
if any remain, will be $998,307 02. 

The revenue set free by these successive redemp 
tions would be sufficient to redeem the whole of the 
present foreign debt in six years; that is, within a 

236 Alexander Hamilton 

term of twenty-eight years from the proposed time 
for commencing the redemption, or the ist of Janu 
ary, 1796; and, after extinguishing the foreign debt, 
would more than discharge the whole of the balances 
to creditor States, and the whole of the unfunded 
debt in two years more. 

If the proceeds of the lands in the Western terri 
tory should be equal to three million of dollars, and 
the three-per-cent. stock can be purchased at an 
average of twelve shillings in the pound, that fund 
would suffice to pay off the principal of the three- 
per-cent. stock, in something more than twenty-five 
years. 

It follows that, if the force of the sinking fund be 
rendered equal, exclusive of the proceeds of the 
sales of Western lands, to the redemption of the 
present unredeemed transferable stock, commencing 
the ist of January, 1796, as to that bearing a present 
interest of six per centum, and the ist of January, 
1802, as to that bearing a future interest of six per 
centum; and if the proceeds of the sales of Western 
lands should prove equal to three million of dollars, 
and can be brought into action for purchases of the 
three-per-cent. stock, at the rate above mentioned, 
at any time before the year 1801, the whole of the 
present debt of the United States, foreign and 
domestic (the funds appropriated being, during 
the whole period, adequate in productiveness, 
and inviolably applied), would be extinguished in 
thirty years. And there would then revert to 
the United States an annual income of 4,435,320 
dollars and 89 cents. Some auxiliary provisions, 

Public Credit 237 

which will be proposed, may greatly accelerate that 
result.1 

On the basis of the foregoing data, the Secretary of 
the Treasury proceeds to submit to the considera 
tion of Congress certain propositions which appear 
to him necessary to be adopted to complete our sys 
tem of public credit. These will be followed by 
some explanatory remarks. 

I. PROPOSITION 

That further provision be made, with regard to 
the yet unsubscribed debt of the United States, as 
follows: 

ist. Further time to be given, until the end of the 
year 1795, to subscribe the same to the loan pro 
posed by the funding act ; with liberty to the holders 
to subscribe the arrears of interest up to that period 
separately from the principal, reserving that prin 
cipal on its original footing. 

2d. An appropriation to be made for payment of 
interest on so much of the principal (excepting loan- 
office certificates bearing interest on the nominal 
value) as, at the year 1795, shall remain unsub 
scribed, for the term of one year, according to the rate 
or rates stipulated by the original contracts, and for 
the payment of ten per centum of the arrears of in 
terest thereupon, to the same end of the year 1795. 
This payment to be made on the ist of January, 

1 These results are not stated with fractional correctness, because 
it is not necessary to a satisfactory conclusion, and the minuteness of 
the calculation would have demanded more time than can conveniently 
be spared. 

238 Alexander Hamilton 

1796, at the Treasury, where no particular place of 
payment is stipulated, and at where there 

is one. 

3d. The specie principal of the loan-office cer 
tificates, which bear interest on the nominal value, 
together with the arrears of interest, to be im 
mediately paid off. 

II. PROPOSITION 

That provision be made for taking, upon loan to 
the United States, by subscription at the Treasury, 
the outstanding and unbarred new emission bills of 
credit, the sums subscribed to be paid in the prin 
cipal only of those bills, and the stock of the new 
loan to bear an interest of five per cent, per annum, 
payable quarter yearly at the Treasury, and re 
deemable at the pleasure of the United States by 
payment of the principal, with a stipulation to pay 
the same at the expiration of thirty years. The 
loan to be deemed to commence on the ist of Janu 
ary, 1796, and to rest on funds permanently pledged, 
namely, the permanent revenues. 

III. PROPOSITION 

That provision be made for converting, by a new 
loan, the whole of our present foreign into domestic 
debt, upon these terms, to wit: that, for any sum 
subscribed to the new loan, and paid in the prin 
cipal of the present foreign debt of the United States, 
there be allowed, in addition to the interest now pay 
able upon such principal, the further yearly interest 

Public Credit 239 

of one half per centum, or, in lieu thereof, at the 
option of each subscriber, an equivalent sum in 
capital stock, bearing an interest of five per centum 
per annum. That the whole interest upon the new 
loan, including that upon the capital stock, to be 
given as an equivalent for the additional one half 
per cent., shall remain fixed until the first day of 
January, 1818, at which time, and not sooner, the 
principal of the said new loan, including the said 
capital stock given as an equivalent, may and shall 
be reimbursed, except as to such subscribers as may 
prefer a shorter term of reimbursement, who may 
elect any term not less than fifteen years. That the 
permanent revenues shall be and remain firmly 
pledged for the payment of the said interest, until 
the reimbursement of the said principal, to be paid 
quarter yearly, as that of the present funded domestic 
debt. And, lastly, that the commissioners of the 
sinking fund be empowered, with the approbation of 
the President, to provide, by new loans, for the re 
imbursement of any instalment or part of principal 
of the present foreign debt, or of the loan to be made 
thereupon, as aforesaid, either by direct borrowing 
or by sale in the market, of certificates of stock, so 
as the said loan or the said certificates of stock shall 
bear an interest not exceeding six per centum per 
annum, and shall be liable to reimbursement within 
a term not exceeding twenty-four years. The in 
terest upon the capital reimbursed, and, in aid 
thereof, the permanent revenues, to be pledged for 
the interest upon the loans or stock to be made or 
created by virtue of the said power. 

240 Alexander Hamilton 

IV. PROPOSITION 

That the temporary duties on imports be made 
coextensive, in duration, with those now perman 
ent, and be appropriated in like manner; and that 
the reservation of 600,000 dollars, annually, out of the 
duties on imports and tonnage, for the support of 
the Government of the United States, and their com 
mon defence, be postponed till after the appropria 
tions for the interest of the funded debt, foreign 
and domestic, and for the SINKING FUND. 

V. PROPOSITION 

That the following provisions be added to those 
heretofore made, for reimbursing and redeeming the 
debt of the United States: 

i st. To direct, by law, that so much of the surplus 
of the duties on imports and tonnage, to the end of 
the year 1790, as shall remain uninvested in pur 
chases, on the ist day of January, 1796, shall be so 
invested, one fourth part within the month of April, 
another fourth part within the month of July, an 
other fourth part within the month of October, in 
that year, and the remainder within the month of 
January, 1797. 

2d. To exonerate the FUND established by the act, 
entitled "An act supplementary to the act making 
provision for the debt of the United States," passed 
the 8th of May, 1792, from the payment of the rate, 
per annum, which by the 4th section of the act of 
the 1 2th of August, 1790, entitled "An act making 
provision for the reduction of the public debt/' is 

Public Credit 241 

reserved, on account of the principal and interest of 
the moneys authorized, by that act, to be borrowed 
for purchases of the debt; charging the interest of 
the moneys so borrowed, upon the revenue from 
imports and tonnage. 

3d. To appropriate to the SAME FUND, so much of 
the revenue from imports and tonnage, as, together 
with the other moneys now constituting the fund, and 
which shall accrue to it by virtue of the foregoing pro 
visions, shall be sufficient, from year to year, with the 
interest redeemed, to pay the sums which may, of 
right, be annually paid on account of the principal 
of such funded stock, as, on the ist day of January, 
1796, shall bear a present interest of 6 per centum 
per annum, excluding that which shall stand to the 
credit of the commissioners of the sinking fund, and 
that which shall stand to the credit of particular 
States, on account of the balances reported in their 
favor by the commissioners for settling accounts be 
tween the United States and individual States; to 
continue so appropriated until the whole of the said 
funded stock shall be redeemed, and, thenceforth, un 
til the whole residue of the present debt of the United 
States, foreign and domestic, funded and unfunded, 
shall be redeemed or discharged. 

4th. To appropriate to the SAME FUND, the divi 
dends on the stock of the Bank of the United States 
belonging to the United States, reserving, from time 
to time, so much thereof as may be necessary to pay 
interest on what shall remain unpaid of the loan had 
of the said bank, pursuant to the second section of 
the act of incorporation, and, also, so much of the 

VOL. III. — 16. 

242 Alexander Hamilton 

duties on imports and tonnage as, together with those 
dividends (deducting what may be necessary to pay 
interest), shall be sufficient, from year to year, to pay 
off the instalments of the said loan, hereafter to 
grow due, and as (the said instalments being paid), 
together with any other moneys which on the ist day of 
January, 1802, may belong to the said fund not other 
wise appropriated, shall be sufficient, from year to 
year, with the interest redeemed, to pay the sums 
which may, of right, be annually paid on account of 
the principal of such funded stock, as, at the ex 
piration of the year 1800, shall begin to bear an in 
terest of six per cent, per annum, excluding that 
which shall stand to the credit of the commissioners 
of the SINKING FUND, and that which shall stand to 
the credit of particular States, on account of the 
balances reported in their favor, by the commis 
sioners for settling accounts between the United 
States and individual States; to continue so ap 
propriated, until, as well the last mentioned stock, 
as the instalments of the loan aforesaid, shall be 
fully redeemed and discharged, and, thenceforth, 
until the whole residue of the present debt of the 
United States, foreign and domestic, funded and un 
funded, shall be redeemed and discharged. 

5th. To continue the appropriation to the SAME 
FUND, of the interest of the stock which shall be re 
deemed by virtue of the foregoing provisions (when the 
full redemption in each case is completed), until the 
WHOLE of the PRESENT DEBT of the United States, 
foreign and domestic, funded and unfunded, shall be 
redeemed, by reimbursement, purchase, or otherwise. 

Public Credit 243 

6th. To provide for carrying to the SAME FUND, 
agreeably to the appropriation in the funding act, the 
proceeds of the sales of the lands of the United States 
in the Western territory, to be applied according to 
the said appropriation. 

yth. To appropriate to the SAME FUND, to be em 
ployed for the purposes thereof, all moneys which 
shall be received for debts due to the United States, 
antecedent to the present constitution. 

8th. To provide that the surpluses of all the cur 
rent revenues of the United States, which shall re 
main at the end of any calendar year, beyond the 
amount of the appropriations charged upon them, 
and which, during the session of Congress, com 
mencing next thereafter shall not be otherwise 
specially appropriated or reserved, shall be carried 
to the FUND AFORESAID, to be applied to the pur 
poses thereof. 

gth. To provide for paying annually, out of the 
SAID FUND, the sum which may be rightfully paid in 
each year, toward the redemption of the funded 
stock, which does or shall bear an interest of six per 
centum per annum, excluding that which shall 
stand to the credit of the commissioners of the sink 
ing fund, and that which shall stand to the credit of 
particular States on account of the balances reported 
in their favor by the commissioners for settling ac 
counts between the United States and individual 
States, commencing the redemption of that bearing 
a present interest on the first of January, 1796, and 
of that to bear interest after the year 1800 on the 
first of January, 1802, and pledging, in the firmest 

244 Alexander Hamilton 

manner, the faith of the United States to the credit 
ors thereof, that the SAID FUND shall be inviolably 
applied to the purpose of redeeming the stock afore 
said, and afterward to the redemption of the whole 
of the PRESENT DEBT of 'the United States, foreign 
and domestic, funded and unfunded, until the whole 
shall be fully redeemed and discharged, and to be 
vested in the commissioners of the sinking fund, as 
property in trust for the creditors, until the redemp 
tion of the whole of the present debt of the United 
States shall be completed. 

Provided, always, that whenever THE FUND shall 
be more than sufficient for paying off, as they accrue, 
the remaining instalments of the said loan had of the 
Bank of the United States, and for the complete and 
final redemption of the whole of the aforesaid stock, 
bearing and to bear an interest of six per cent, ac 
cording to the right reserved for that purpose, and 
also for the payment of the instalments of the 
present foreign debt, or of such new loans as may be 
made thereupon, pursuant to the third proposition, 
and for the reimbursement, purchase, or redemption 
of the residue of the present debt of the United 
States, within the term of thirty years, it shall be 
lawful for Congress, if at war with any foreign Euro 
pean Power, to apply so much of the excess as they 
may think fit, the said excess being certified by the 

COMMISSIONERS OF THE SINKING FUND, toward the 

expenses of such war; excepting always so much 
of the said excess as may be requisite to fulfil any 
contracts which shall have been entered into by the 
commissioners of the sinking fund, pursuant to the 

Public Credit 245 

powers vested in them ; and provided that no second 
appropriation of any such excess shall derogate from 
the fund once reserved for the redemption or purchase 
of the said residue of the debt, within the said term 
of thirty years. 

loth. To provide that all reimbursements of the 
capital of the public debt, foreign and domestic, and 
of the remaining instalments of the aforesaid loan 
of the Bank of the United States, be made under the 
superintendence of the commissioners of the sinking 
fund, empowering them, with the approbation of the 
President of the United States, as the instalments of 
principal become due, to borrow, if necessary, the 
sums requisite to pay those instalments. Provided, 
that the ultimate term for the reimbursement of any 
loan they may make shall not exceed twenty-four 
years ; the interest thereof to be charged — first, upon 
the interest of the instalments which shall be re 
imbursed by means thereof, except the instalments 
of funded six-per-cent. stock; secondly, upon the 
revenue from imports and tonnage, to make good 
any deficiency. 

VI. PROPOSITION 

That power be given to the commissioners of the 
sinking fund, with the approbation of the President, 
to borrow, from time to time, such sums as may be 
necessary in anticipation of the revenues appropri 
ated for the purpose, not exceeding in one year one mil 
lion of dollars, to be reimbursed within a year from 
the time of each loan, for the payment of the inter 
est which shall annually accrue on the public debt. 

246 Alexander Hamilton 

The interest upon each loan to be defrayed out of 
the permanent revenues. 

VII. PROPOSITION 

That the internal revenues from snuff and refined 
sugar, sales at auction, licenses to sell by retail 
foreign distilled spirits and wines, carriages for the 
conveyance of persons, be continued to the first day 
of January, 1800, and that the reimbursement of 
the principal of the loan of one million dollars, au 
thorized to be borrowed for defraying the expenses 
of foreign intercourse, be charged upon this fund. 

VIII. PROPOSITION 

That, in regard to any sum which shall have re 
mained unexpended upon any appropriations other 
than for the payment of the interest of the funded 
debt and for the purposes of the sinking fund for 
more than two years after the end of the calendar 
year in which the act of appropriation shall have 
been passed, such appropriation shall be deemed to 
cease and determine — and the sum expended upon 
it shall be carried to an account to be denominated 
"THE SURPLUS FUND." But no appropriation shall 
be so deemed to have ceased or determined till after 
the year 1795, unless it shall appear to the Secretary 
of the Treasury that the object of such appropriation 
has been fully satisfied; in which case it shall be 
lawful for him to cause to be carried the unexpended 
residue thereof to the account aforesaid. 

Public Credit 247 

IX. PROPOSITION 

That provision be made that all priorities hereto 
fore established in the appropriations for the funded 
debt, as between the different parts of said debt, 
shall, after the year 1796, cease with respect to all 
creditors of the United States who do not, before the 
expiration of the period, signify their dissent there 
from ; and that thenceforth, with the exception only 
of the debts of those creditors who shall so signify 
their dissent, the revenues charged with these ap 
propriations shall constitute a common or consolid 
ated fund, chargeable indiscriminately and without 
priority. 

X. PROPOSITION 

That provision be made for calling in all outstand 
ing loan-office certificates, certificates called final 
settlements, and indents of interest, and for issuing 
in lieu of them other certificates of equivalent tenor, 
establishing that all which shall not be presented for 
exchange within the term of two years shall be 
barred. 

Remarks upon the First Proposition 

The experiment has now been fully tried, and 
with nearly complete success, of the disposition of 
the public creditors to accept the terms offered by 
the funding act. Those who still decline have proba 
bly made a final election to abide by their original 
contracts. 

It remains to fulfil them. This, the moral obliga- 

248 Alexander Hamilton 

tion of the contracts, the new and peremptory sanc 
tion given to them by the present Government, and 
the essential maxims of public credit, unite to de 
mand; and, while these cogent motives, affecting 
intimately the permanent character and general in 
terest of the United States, recommend the measure, 
there is now no longer any momentary inducement, 
from situation, to procrastinate. 

The present advanced state of the national 
finances, and the inconsiderable magnitude of the 
still unsubscribed debt, render it of little, if any, 
consequence to obtain upon it the temporary ac 
commodation of deferring the payment of a part of 
the interest accruing according to contract. This 
motive apart, and considering the approximation 
of the period when the payment of interest on the 
deferred debt is to commence, the chance of bene 
fiting by a fall of the market rate of interest, incident 
to a provision for the debt on the terms of the con 
tract, which make it redeemable at pleasure, may be 
found more advantageous to the Government, than 
the partial postponement of interest encumbered 
with an abridgment of the right of redemption. 

To those who should not rightly appreciate this 
circumstance, it might seem an objection, that the 
provision proposed would place those creditors who 
had not consented to accommodate the Govern 
ment, upon a better footing than those who had 
so consented. 

But a scruple of this kind is overruled by several 
considerations. 

i st. It is not improbable that a considerable pro- 

Public Credit 249 

portion of those who may not have accepted the 
terms offered by the funding act, are executors and 
other trustees, who may have doubted their power 
to accept. 

2d. Giving the fullest force to the fact which is 
the ground of the objection, it is one of those cases 
in which the general principles that constitute the 
permanent happiness of society, give the less merit 
orious advantages over the more meritorious. All 
the creditors had a right to conform, or not. Those 
who have not done it have only used their right, and 
it cannot be matter of objection or prejudice to them. 
To delay indefinitely a provision for their claims, ac 
cording to contract, is to annihilate the contract. 

The complying creditors cannot with propriety 
complain. They were informed unequivocally that 
the proposal of a new loan was referred to their free 
choice; that the rights of those who did not assent 
would remain unimpaired; and compensations were 
offered in the new contracts for the surrender of 
the old. A plea that an ultimate provision was not 
relied upon could not be admitted, because it would 
be to convert a distrust of the faith of the Govern 
ment into an argument against its being observed 
towards those who had depended upon it. 

But the complying creditors actually received 
valuable considerations for the modification of their 
claims, instead of annual provision for their interest, 
which alone their contracts, as they stood previous 
to the funding act, required; they have had it se 
cured by adequate funds permanently mortgaged for 
its payment. 

250 Alexander Hamilton 

Instead of the stipulated annuity being redeemable 
at pleasure, whenever a fall in the market rate of in 
terest should render it advantageous to pay off the 
principal, it has acquired a more -fixed character by 
the relinquishment of the right of the Government 
to redeem, except in certain proportions, and a 
capacity to increase in capital value, by a declension 
of the market rate of interest. 

Instead of receiving their interest in one pay 
ment, at the end of a year, they receive it in 
quarter-yearly portions, which makes it, in fact, 
6.15 per cent, in lieu of the stipulated rate of six 
per centum. 

On the first point it has been argued that, suppos 
ing a steady preservation of its faith by the Govern 
ment, it is indifferent to the creditor whether his 
demand stands upon the basis of an annual provision, 
or upon that of mortgaged funds. 

This is to substitute theory to fact. As well with 
regard to a government as to an individual, there 
is, in the nature of things, an intrinsic difference be 
tween the value of a debt bottomed on mortgaged 
funds, and that of a debt resting on what is called, 
in the one case, and may be called in the other, per 
sonal security. The degree of this difference, and 
some of the circumstances on which it depends, may 
be different in the two cases, but the reality of its 
existence can be denied in neither. 

Government, being administered by men, is na 
turally, like individuals, subject to particular im 
pulses, passions, prejudices, vices; of course to 
inconstancy of views and mutability of conduct. 

Public Credit 251 

A kind of property, of which the essence is con 
tract, must necessarily, therefore, be more or less 
valuable, because more or less secure, in proportion 
as it is little or much exposed to the influence of that 
inconstancy or that mutability. 

If a provision is to be made by a new resolution 
every year, that resolution, being always liable to 
be affected by momentary circumstances, is always 
casual. 

If made once for all, it continues, of course, unless 
revoked by some positive act, and has for that 
reason a moral certainty of stability. 

But why, it might be asked, if a disposition un 
faithful to the public engagements, or unfriendly to 
the public credit, should exist, would it not operate 
to produce a violation of a provision made, as well 
as to prevent the making of one ? 

The two things are widely different. To undo, 
which is to act, and in such a case to act with 
violence, requires more enterprise and vigor, and 
presupposes greater energy, or a stronger impulse, 
than not to do or to forbear to act. This is par 
ticularly true where a number of wills is to con 
cur. Many men who will not rouse to the effort, or 
encounter the responsibility of doing mischief by 
positive acts, will readily enough slide into it by 
a negative conduct — that is, by omitting to act. 
Many men, merely from easiness of temper or want 
of active fortitude, will suffer evil to take place 
which they neither desire nor would themselves com 
mit. In collective bodies, votes are necessary to 
ACTION : absences may produce INACTION. It often 

25 2 Alexander Hamilton 

happens that a majority of voices could not be 
had to a resolution to undo or reverse a thing once 
done, which there would not be a majority of voices 
to do. 

This reasoning acquires tenfold force when applied 
to a complex government like ours; that is, to a 
government distributed into departments, acting 
through different organs, which must concur to 
give it motion; as, in our Constitution, the HOUSE 
OF REPRESENTATIVES, the SENATE, and the PRESI 
DENT. 

In delicate and difficult cases, whether to issue in 
good or ill, a suspension of action is far more natural 
to such a government than action. 

It can hardly happen that all the branches or 
parts of it can be infected at one time with a common 
passion, or disposition, so manifestly inimical to 
justice and the public good, as to prostrate the pub 
lic credit, by revoking a pledge, given to the credit 
ors. It is far more probable that such a disposition 
should, at one time, possess one part, at another 
time, another part. Possessing either part, it might 
be sufficient to obstruct a provision which was to 
be made. Without possessing all the parts, it could 
not subvert one which had been made. The last can 
scarcely be supposed, except in one of those extra 
ordinary crises of nations which confound all ordin 
ary calculations. 

Hence the value of property in public debt, which 
rests on specified and competent funds, firmly 
pledged for the satisfaction of the creditor, is in 
trinsically greater, and to a considerable extent, 

Public Credit 253 

than that of property in public debt, which depends 
on annual provision. Hence, too, a creditor to 
whom such a pledge was not stipulated, may be 
justly said to have received a compensation for the 
relinquishment of a portion of his interest. 

On the second point, it has been observed, with 
less plausibility, that, in this country, where it would 
be to the advantage of the creditor to receive his 
principal, rather than a rate of six-per-cent. interest, 
the abridgment of the right of redemption is of no 
value. 

ist. The proposition is not universally true. 

It depends on the particular situation of a creditor, 
whether it be his interest to be reimbursed his prin 
cipal or not. It is believed, owing to the impunc- 
tuality of collections, that in no part of the United 
States does fair lending at private interest, upon 
real security, net six per cent. 

2d. As far as it is true, it does not authorize the 
inference which is drawn, because the creditor can 
not demand his principal when it suits him, but must 
wait till it is convenient for the Government to pay. 
This convenience might not exist till there was a fall 
in the market rate of interest, and then it would not 
be the interest of the creditor to receive. 

Unable to exact the principal when he pleases, it 
is a material point gained to be able to arrest the 
hand of the Government from paying him when it 
is his interest not to receive. It is evident, that 
whenever the rate of interest to which he is entitled 
shall exceed the market rate, if he cannot be obliged 
to receive back his principal, or take the market 

254 Alexander Hamilton 

rate, his stock must rise in value in proportion to 
the difference and degree of its duration. 

Nor is an idea which has been entertained just, 
that this advantage is remote and contingent, to 
accrue only to those who may be holders at the time 
of the fall of interest, at the expense of those who 
were holders when the funding act passed, many of 
whom, as it is alleged, being obliged to alienate then 
or shortly after, suffered loss in the sale, from the 
postponement of a part of their interest, without 
benefiting by the supposed equivalents. 

The fairness of an equivalent ought never to 
be tested by the necessities of particular indi 
viduals. It ought to be estimated by the general 
principles of value; by the natural and real opera 
tion of things. Admitting, therefore, the sugges 
tion, as to such individuals, to be true, it would 
decide nothing. 

But it is not true. The permanency of a high 
rate of interest, and the possibility of a future rise 
of the capital above par, by the fall of the market 
rate below the stipulated rate, were, to the first 
holders of stock, circumstances of present value. 

Foreigners, especially, whose purchases would 
necessarily influence the market, would give higher 
prices for it on these accounts. 

And when to this are added the funding of the 
new stock and the payment of the interest quarter 
yearly, there is solid ground for entertaining an 
opinion that the stock has, from the earliest period, 
borne a better price in the market than upon the 
principle of an annual payment of six per cent. 

Public Credit 255 

on the whole capital depending upon an annual 
provision. 

This opinion would be confirmed, if we should take 
as a guide what actually happened in one or more of 
the States which made annual provision for the pay 
ment of interest upon their debts, at the stipulated 
rate of six per cent. With this provision the market 
price of their stock rarely exceeded thirty-three and 
one third per centum. 

It is probable that greater confidence in the 
ability and constancy of views of the Government 
of the United States might have given a greater 
value to their stock in a like situation. But it is not 
to be doubted that it would have felt, in a great 
degree, a similar effect of that situation. 

This may not appear with respect to the small 
amount of unsubscribed debt, now to be provided 
for, and with the advantage of a confirmation of 
confidence by experience; but it could not have 
failed to have been very apparent, if the whole debt 
had been provided for on this plan. 

These observations serve to render it probable 
that the creditors who have accepted the terms 
offered by the Government have not been injured 
by the acceptance; that, if they had now an option 
to change their ground for that which is now pro 
posed for non-subscribers, it would be an ill-judged 
choice in them to do it; and that, upon these, as 
well as other accounts, they will have no cause to be 
dissatisfied with the proposal under consideration. 

Let it be added, that, whether the non-subscribers 
shall fare better or not by that proposal than the 

256 Alexander Hamilton 

subscribers, it is the interest of all the public credit 
ors upon principle and precedent, that the public 
faith should be preserved toward those non-sub 
scribers. 

But, at the same time, every consideration con 
nected with the question, urges that nothing more 
should be done for non-subscribers than is positively 
due to good faith. Accordingly, the proposition 
contemplates that their debt shall not be funded, 
but that provision shall be annually made. 

With regard to arrears of interest, a tenth part 
only is proposed to be paid on the first of January, 
1796. At this rate they would be paid off in ten 
years. 

In strictness, they ought to be immediately dis 
charged. But to have done this on the whole debt 
would have been impracticable; to do it on what 
now remains unsubscribed would not only be un 
equal, but would, at the present moment, obstruct 
arrangements which are conducive to the general 
interests of the creditors. The state of the Treasury 
in succeeding years will enable Congress to decide 
how far the payment can be accelerated. In the 
meantime, the creditors have an option to separate 
these arrears from the principal, and to fund them 
at three per cent., as has been done generally with 
regard to interest. The case of a large arrear of 
interest, arising from the inability of a former gov 
ernment, which is the present case, is liable to some 
peculiar considerations. 

A difference is made in the special case of the loan- 
office certificates, which, by contract, are entitled to 

Public Credit 257 

interest of six per cent, on the nominal principal, 
redeemable only by payment of the specie principal. 

This is too disadvantageous a footing for the Gov 
ernment. 

The alternative most convenient at this time is to 
pay off the debt, which is proposed. To elude this 
contract, would be to sacrifice a very great principle 
to a very little interest. 

The amount will be seen in the statement A. 

Remarks upon the Second Proposition 

The certificates, or bills of credit, called new emis 
sion money, were emitted pursuant to a resolution 
of Congress, of the i8th of March, 1780, which di 
rects them to be emitted upon the funds of individual 
States, to bear an interest of five per centum per 
annum, payable in specie, at the redemption of the 
bills; or, at the election of the holder, annually, at 
the Continental loan offices, in sterling bills drawn by 
the United States upon their commissioners in Europe, 
and pledges the faith of the United States for the 
payment of the said bills, in case any State on whose 
funds they should be emitted, should, by the events of 
war, be rendered incapable to redeem them; directing, 
also, an endorsement to be made upon each bill, 
in these words: "The United States insure the 
payment of the within bill, and will draw bills of 
exchange for the interest, annually, if demanded, 
according to a resolution of Congress, of the i8th 
of March, 1780." 

These resolutions, and the endorsement upon the 

VOL. III. — 17. 

258 Alexander Hamilton 

bills, engage the absolute promise of the United 
States for the payment of the interest indefinitely, 
and their eventual guaranty of the principal, in case 
any State on whose funds the bills should be emitted 
should, by the events of war, be rendered incapable 
to redeem them; which is, in effect, though not in 
form, an absolute guaranty of the principal : for the 
United States are bound to pay the interest per 
petually till that is discharged. 

Good faith demands that the United States should 
supply the omissions of the States which issued the 
bills, by providing themselves, at least, for the in 
terest upon them. 

But it is not as easy to pronounce on what terms 
they ought to be provided for. 

On their face, and according to the unr evoked 
resolutions of Congress, they are of specie value, 
equal to their nominal amount, and bearing five- 
per-cent. interest. 

But it is known that they were issued by different 
States, at different values, fixed by previous laws. 
The true nature of the contract, therefore, in fact, 
and the true equity of the case, are, from these cir 
cumstances, involved in some question. 

A compromise by a new agreement, seems the best 
road out of the difficulty. 

This is the aim of the proposition, which, it is 
hoped, will, in the main, reasonably consult all 
interests. 

There have been special references of this subject 
to the Secretary, but he purposely declined a report 
till the expiration of the term limited by the act, 

Public Credit 259 

entitled "An act relative to claims against the 
United States not barred by any act of limitation, 
and which have not been already adjusted," passed 
the 1 2th of February, 1793, had obviated a danger 
to which the business was exposed. It is now ascer 
tained that the amount for which the United States 
shall be in future liable, is $90,574. The sums sub 
scribed to the loan will, of course, be a charge against 
the States which respectively issued the bills. 

Remarks on the Third Proposition 

The payment of interest and instalments of prin 
cipal of our foreign debt, in the countries where 
it was contracted, is found by experience to be at 
tended with difficulty, embarrassment, some loss, 
and a degree of casualty which occasionally puts in 
jeopardy the national credit. Loans for reimburse 
ment must be made beforehand, as the market suits, 
and necessarily involve double interest for a greater 
or less time. The procuring of bills to be remitted 
for payment of interest cannot be depended upon 
in coincidence with the periods of payment, which, 
co-operating with distance, renders inconvenient an 
ticipations necessary. 

The remitting in commodities would be liable to 
other casualties and to some peculiar objections; 
and whatever mode be adopted, it may be frequently 
not practicable to deposit in season the necessary 
funds on the spot without great sacrifices. If, there 
fore, the place of these payments could, with consent 
of the creditors, upon an equitable indemnifica 
tion to them for the transfer, be changed to the 

260 Alexander Hamilton 

United States, the operation would be in various 
lights beneficial. It has occurred that the present 
posture of the affairs of Europe might favor a plan 
of this kind, and perhaps produce some collateral 
advantages. Under this idea, an experiment is pro 
posed. The proposed augmentation of interest is 
intended as an indemnification for the expense and 
hazard of agencies in this country, delays in remit 
tance, inconvenience of distant negotiation, renunci 
ation of the facilities which attend the receipt of 
interest at home, risks of loss by exchange, etc., and 
is calculated on a liberal scale, in order to induce an 
acceptance of the proposition. 

If, instead of an increase of interest, the option of 
an equivalent be given by way of premium, in stock 
bearing an interest of five per cent., it would have 
attractions for certain creditors, and would facilitate 
the success of the measure. On strict calculation, 
the equivalent would be six dollars and fifty-eight 
cents per one hundred dollars, of the principal sub 
scribed. It is not perceived that the interests of the 
United States could suffer by allowing the alternat 
ive. The fixing of the rate of interest, by postpon 
ing the reimbursement to the year 1818, would also 
be a powerful inducement, and till the period of 
reimbursement arrives, any surplus of the sinking 
fund which may exist can be invested in purchases, 
so as to prevent the progress of the fund being 
arrested. 

It could not be necessary to observe, except for 
the sake of dispelling jealousy or apprehension on the 
part of the creditors, that, while the plan is in eocperi- 

Public Credit 261 

ment, and afterwards, with regard to all who do not 
embrace it, every thing is to proceed as heretofore, 
and as the contracts respecting the debt require. 

The auxiliary proposition of giving power to the 
commissioners of the sinking fund to remit certifi 
cates for sale is founded upon a belief that this 
operation will sometimes be practicable, where di 
rect loans cannot be effected, and will be occasion 
ally a more beneficial mode of remittance than by 
bills of exchange. 

Remark on the Fourth Proposition 

The object of this proposition is to give moral cer 
tainty to the adequateness of the fund for paying the 
interest upon the debt, and for its ultimate redemp 
tion, making a reasonable allowance for the casual 
ties to which it is exposed. 

Remarks on the Fifth Proposition 

There is no sentiment which can better deserve the 
serious attention of the legislators of a country than 
the one expressed in the speech of the President, 
which indicates the danger to every government 
from the progressive accumulation of debt. A tend 
ency to it is, perhaps, the natural disease of all gov 
ernments; and it is not easy to conceive any thing 
more likely than this to lead to great and convulsive 
revolutions of empire. 

On the one hand, the exigencies of a nation, creat 
ing new causes of expenditure, as well from its own, 
as from the ambition, rapacity, injustice, intemper 
ance, and folly of other nations, proceed in increasing 

262 Alexander Hamilton 

and rapid succession. On the other, there is a gen 
eral propensity in those who administer the affairs 
of a government, founded in the constitution of 
man, to shift off the burden from the present to a 
future day — a propensity which may be expected 
to be strong in proportion as the form of a state is 
popular. 

To extinguish a debt which exists, and to avoid 
the contracting more, are ideas always favored by 
public feeling and opinion : but to pay taxes for the 
one or the other purpose, which are the only means 
of avoiding the evil, is always, more or less, unpopu 
lar. These contradictions are in human nature ; and 
happy, indeed, would be the lot of a country that 
should ever want men ready to turn them to the 
account of their own popularity, or to some other 
sinister account. 

Hence, it is no uncommon spectacle to see the 
same men clamoring for occasions of expense, when 
they happen to be in unison with the present humor 
of the community, whether well or ill directed, de 
claiming against a public debt, and for the reduction 
of it as an abstract thesis; yet vehement against 
every plan of taxation which is proposed to discharge 
old debts, or to avoid new, by the defraying expenses 
of exigencies as they emerge. 

These unhandsome arts throw artificial embarrass 
ment in the way of the administrators of a govern 
ment, and, co-operating with the desire which they 
themselves are too apt to feel to conciliate public 
favor, by declining to lay even necessary burthens, 
or with the fear of losing it, by imposing them with 

Public Credit 263 

firmness, serve to promote the accumulation of debt, 
by leaving that which exists without adequate pro 
vision for its reimbursement, and by preventing the 
levying, with energy, new taxes, when new occasions 
of expense occur. The consequence is, that the pub 
lic debt swells till its magnitude becomes enormous, 
and the burthens of the people gradually increase, 
till their weight becomes intolerable. Of such a state 
of things, great disorders in the whole political eco 
nomy, convulsions and revolutions of government, 
are a natural offspring. 

There can be no more sacred obligation, then, on 
the public agents of a nation, than to guard, with 
provident foresight and inflexible perseverance, 
against so mischievous a result. True patriotism 
and genuine policy cannot, it is respectfully pre 
sumed, be better demonstrated by those of the 
United States, at the present juncture, than by im 
proving, efficaciously, the very favorable situation in 
which they stand, for extinguishing, with reasonable 
celerity, the actual debt of the country, and for lay 
ing the foundation of a system which may shield 
posterity from the consequences of the usual im 
providence and selfishness of its ancestors, and which, 
if possible, may give IMMORTALITY TO PUBLIC CREDIT. 

Fortunately for the first object, the circumstances 
in our foreign affairs, which, during the last session, 
impelled to an extension of the national revenues, 
have left little more to do than to apply the existing 
means with decision and efficacy. 

The second object will depend on the establish 
ment of wise principles in the application, fitted to 

264 Alexander Hamilton 

become a permanent precedent in the fiscal system 
of the country. 

The first report of the Secretary on the subject of 
the public debt, of the gth of January, 1790, sug 
gests the idea of "incorporating, as a fundamental 
maxim in the system of public credit of the United 
States, that the creation of debt should always be 
accompanied with the means of extinguishment; that 
this is the true secret for rendering public credit im 
mortal, and that it is difficult to conceive a situation 
in which there may not be an adherence to the maxim" ; 
and it expresses " an unfeigned solicitude, that this 
may be attempted by the United States, and that 
they may commence their measures for the estab 
lishment of credit with the observance of it." * 

No opportunity has been lost by the Secretary, as 
far as he could contribute to the event, to reduce this 
principle to practice ; and important steps towards it 
have been, from time to time, taken by the Legis 
lature. 

But much remains to be done to give it full effect. 
The present state of things encourages and invites 
to the consummation of the plan. And the Secre 
tary, about to leave the office he holds, feels it a 
peculiar duty to make a final effort to promote that 
invaluable end. 

1 It is understood that the Parliament of Great Britain has, within 
the last four years, formally adopted as a standing rule, the principle 
of incorporating, with the creation of debt, the means of extinguishment. 
How much easier must the execution of this important principle be 
to the United States, than to a nation which, before it began, had 
so deeply mortgaged its resources. Let the United States never have 
to regret, hereafter, that they postponed too long so provident a 
precaution. 

Public Credit 265 

This is the object of the fifth proposition, aided by 
the preliminary provisions of the fourth. This pro 
position aims at two principal points: i. To con 
stitute a fund sufficient, in every supposable event, 
for extinguishing the whole of the present debt of the 
United States, foreign and domestic, in a period not 
exceeding thirty years. 2. To fix its destination 
unchangeably, by not only appropriating it per 
manently, under the direction of commissioners, and 
vesting it in them as property in trust, but by mak 
ing its faithful application a part of the contract with 
the creditors. 

As to the first point: If the temporary duties on 
imports be rendered permanent, the annual reserva 
tion of six millions of dollars postponed, and if 
the additional appropriations which are proposed be 
made to the sinking fund, its intended force will not 
only be equal to the effect meant to be produced, 
but it may be hoped that there is scarcely a casualty 
which can reasonably be taken into calculation, for 
eign war not excepted, which will occasion a defi 
ciency in the fund. 

The whole amount of the duties on imports and 
tonnage, and upon domestic distilled spirits and stills, 
estimated now to amount to $6, 079, 418 58, besides 
the dividends on bank stock, and the items which 
now compose the sinking fund, will then be appro 
priated, primarily, to the interest upon the public 
debt, and to the sinking fund; which, together, in 
cluding the deferred stock, will demand, perman 
ently, from that revenue, $4,373,83603 — little 
more than two thirds of the fund from which they 

266 Alexander Hamilton 

arise. An expectation may be indulged, that even 
foreign war, making due allowance for what will 
always be practicable through neutral Powers, would 
not occasion a defalcation in the revenues greater 
than the difference. This competency of the fund is 
an essential idea. The fulfilment of the object, as 
far as the uncertainty of human affairs will permit, 
ought to be superior to casualty. 

The necessity of a reliance on auxiliary provisions, 
always precarious in those situations which affect the 
productiveness of the public revenues, ought to be, 
as far as practicable, superseded by the ample nature 
of the provision. 

As to the second point : The intent is to secure, by 
all the sanctions of which the subject is susceptible, 
an inviolable application of the fund, according to 
its destination. No expedients more powerful can 
be devised for this purpose than to clothe it with the 
character of private property, and to engage abso 
lutely the faith of the government, by making the 
application of it to the object, a part of the contract 
with the creditors. 

But is this necessary? 

Its necessity rests on these cogent reasons: The 
inviolable application of an adequate sinking fund is 
the only practicable security against an excessive 
accumulation of debt, and the essential basis of a 
permanent national credit. 

Experience has shown, in countries the most at 
tentive to the principles of credit, that a simple 
appropriation of the sinking fund is not a complete 
barrier against its being diverted, when immediate 

Public Credit 267 

exigencies press. The causes which have been stated 
with another view, tempt the administrators of gov 
ernment to lay hold of this resource rather than 
resort to new taxes. This indicates the utility of 
endeavoring to give, by additional sanctions, in 
violability to the fund. 

But, will those proposed answer the end? 

They are the most efficacious that can be imag 
ined, and they are likely to be entirely efficacious. 
They cannot be disregarded, without, by breach 
of faith and contract, destroying credit; and at a 
juncture, too, when it is most indispensable. The 
emergencies which induce a diversion of the fund 
are those in which loans, and, consequently, credit, 
are most needed. 

But will it be safe to put the funds so entirely out 
of the command of the government? May there not 
be situations in which the command of it may be 
requisite to the safety of the State? 

This is not conceivable. The amount of the sinking 
fund will, in the situations which create extraord 
inary demands for money, be always inconsider 
able, compared even with a single year's expenditure. 
The current revenues of a nation do not, in such 
cases, suffice. Plunder or credit must supply the 
deficiency. The first presupposes a subversion of all 
social order. The second will find its best support 
and greatest efficacy in adhering steadily to the 
principles of such a fund. An annuity of seven dol 
lars will pay the interest upon, and discharge a capi 
tal of, one hundred dollars, bearing six per cent, 
interest, in thirty-three and a third years, nearly. 

268 Alexander Hamilton 

The situation of a country must be not a little 
exhausted, if it cannot create yearly, by new re 
venues, during the continuance of a foreign war, an 
annuity on the above scale sufficient to fund the 
loans of which it may stand in need. Ten millions of 
dollars will, with order and economy, maintain in 
this country an army of fifty thousand men for a 
year. Viewing our geographical position, is there a 
prospect of any war expensive beyond this ratio? 
If not, an annuity of seven hundred thousand dol 
lars, created each year of the war, would suffice. But 
it would be wise, in such an event, to carry taxation, 
in the first instance, to the full extent of the ability 
of the state, which would proportionably contract 
the necessity for borrowing, and, consequently, the 
extent of the annuities necessary for loans. 

If a nation can find embarrassment in creating the 
revenues requisite on this scale, it must arise from 
her having reached a stage when, from the neglect 
of the principle now inculcated, the mass of her 
debt has become so enormous as to strain her facult 
ies in order to make a provision for it. 

The United States are in a situation altogether 
different. An inspection of the list of their revenues 
discovers that they have a large field of resource un 
explored. Their youth, and large tracts of unsettled 
lands, and land in the infancy of improvement, assure 
them a great and rapid increase of means. Even 
their actual revenues, without additions, must, with 
the progress of the country, considerably increase. 
And, though war may interrupt, the temporary in 
terruption being removed by the restoration of peace, 

Public Credit 269 

their increasing productiveness, suspended for a 
time, must resume its vigor and growth. In a given 
number of years a considerable augmentation is 
certain. 

The government of this country may, therefore, 
adopt, fearless of future embarrassment, a principle 
which, being adopted, will ultimately furnish re 
sources for future exigencies, without an increase of 
burthen to the community. 

To explain this last idea : It will readily be per 
ceived that the funds pledged for paying the interest 
and sinking the principal of a portion of the debt 
existing or created at a particular time, will, within 
a certain period, extinguish that portion of debt. 

They will then be liberated, and will be ready for 
any future use, either to defray current expenditures, 
or be the basis of new loans, as circumstances may 
dictate. And, after a course of time, it is a reason 
able presumption, that the funds, so successively lib 
erated, will be adequate to new exigencies, as they 
occur. 

Moreover, the last clause of the proposition au 
thorizes the deriving aid from the sinking fund for 
new loans, whenever the state of the fund admits of 
it, consistently with the accomplishment of its pur 
poses — that is, when it is sufficient — ist, to make 
good the payments on account of the principal of the 
debt as they accrue; 2d, to purchase in the market 
all that part of the public debts of which there is no 
stipulation of payment by instalments (as the three 
per cent, stock) within a period of thirty years. 

This, while it secures the extinction of the exist- 

270 Alexander Hamilton 

ing debt within a reasonable term, by preventing too 
great a proportion of the public revenue from being 
tied up by the sinking fund, gives due weight to the 
consideration of providing for future emergencies. 

The same consideration has governed in proposing 
(instead of the appropriation of a definite sum out of 
the revenue from imports and tonnage, which, in cer 
tain years, would be greater than will be permanently 
necessary) that the sum to be applied out of that 
revenue shall be so much from year to year as, with 
the other items of the sinking fund, will suffice for 
the object. It has likewise influenced in postpon 
ing the redemption of that stock which stands to the 
credit of certain States, in consequence of the report 
of the commissioners for settlement of accounts. 

Every system of public credit must assume it as a 
fundamental principle, that the resources of the 
country are equal to its probable exigencies, and that 
it will possess ability to pay the debts which it con 
tracts. If this be so, there is no cause to hesitate 
about the inviolable appropriation of funds to the 
extinction of an existing debt within no less a term 
than thirty years. 

Indeed, as before intimated, it cannot be doubted 
that the resources of a credit, built upon a founda 
tion so solid as that which is recommended, will more 
than replace, even in the earliest stages of our af 
fairs, the use of the additional funds withdrawn 
from the command of the government to effect it, 
and, in the eventual operation, will give a more 
abundant command of funds than it can otherwise 
have. The successive liberation of the revenues, sue- 

Public Credit 271 

cessively pledged, after accomplishing their object, 
will afford resources that may almost be said to be 
inexhaustible. 

It should be recollected, too, that the public ar 
rangements may, under a great pressure, anticipate 
the approaching period of such liberation, by inter 
mediate temporary loans, to be replaced by those 
funds when they are free. 

This proposition exemplifies, as to the past, the 
nature of the maxim which has been supposed cap 
able of giving immortality to credit, namely: that, 
with the creation of debt, should be incorporated the 
means of extinguishment ; which means are twofold : 
i. The establishing, at the time of contracting a debt, 
funds for the reimbursement of the principal, as well as 
for the payment of interest within a determinate 
period. 2. The making it a part of the contract, that 
the fund, so established, shall be inviolably applied to 
the object. 

It is believed that it would be happy for the 
United States, if Congress would adopt this principle 
as a rule in all future loans — never to be departed 
from ; and a good evidence of this determination will 
be, to apply it to the past. 

This would be, at the same time, an antidote 
against what may be pronounced the most plausible 
objections to the system of funding public debts; 
which are, that, by facilitating the means of sup 
porting expense, they encourage to enterprises which 
produce it; and, by furnishing in credit a substitute 
for revenue, likely to be too freely used to avoid the 
odium of laying new taxes, they occasion a tendency 

272 Alexander Hamilton 

to run in debt. Though these objections to funding 
systems, which give the greatest possible energy to 
public credit, are a great source of national security, 
strength, and prosperity, are very similar to those 
which speculative men urge against national and in 
dividual opulence, drawn from its abuses ; and though, 
perhaps, upon a careful analysis of facts, they would 
be found to have much less support in them than is 
imagined, attributing to those systems effects which 
are to be ascribed, more truly, to the passions of 
men, and perhaps to the genius of particular govern 
ments; yet, as they are not wholly unfounded, it is 
desirable to guard, as far as possible, against the 
dangers which they suppose, without renouncing 
the advantages which these systems undoubtedly 
afford. 

It will readily be seen, that the maxim of making 
concurrent provision for the principal as well as in 
terest, in the act of contracting debt, if by precedent 
and habit it can be rendered a rule of administra 
tion, by implicating a greater portion of the revenue 
in every such operation than would be requisite for 
a mere provision for interest, will control proportion- 
ably the disposition to defer the burthen to futurity, 
and create a greater necessity for circumspection in 
incurring expense. 

It is, probably, the true expedient for uniting a 
due regard to the present accommodation of the 
community, with a due care not to overburthen 
posterity — the full energy of public credit, with a 
salutary restraint upon the abuses of it. 

To this explanation of the general principles of the 

Public Credit 273 

fifth proposition, it may be proper to add some brief 
notes on particular parts of it. 

It is proposed that the redemption of the present 
six per cent, stock shall commence on the ist of Janu 
ary, 1796. This time of commencement is recom 
mended by several reasons : i . It ought to be such as 
to admit of sufficient notice to distant creditors. 
2. It will favor order, to date the commencement of 
every new pecuniary operation, where there is an 
option, and no particular reason to the contrary, 
with the commencement of the natural year. 3. The 
moment of payment presupposes that the annuity to 
be paid has actually accrued, which will not be the 
case till the end of the present year. 4. The small 
delay, by not forcing the means, will facilitate the 
future execution. 

It is a part of the plan to make provision for reim 
bursing the remaining instalments of the two-million 
loan, had of the Bank of the United States, pursuant 
to the act of incorporation. The preceding instal 
ments have been reimbursed out of the proceeds of 
foreign loans. This resource cannot, in future, be 
relied upon ; and for such a purpose it is not as eli 
gible as a domestic one, though circumstances have 
hitherto dictated a recurrence to it. By making the 
dividends on the stock auxiliary for this purpose to 
the revenue from taxes, the object is effected with 
little more than half the sum from that revenue; 
and, in the end, a fund is formed from the dividends 
which, with a small addition, suffices for the re 
demption of the deferred stock. As these instal 
ments are yearly falling due, and must be paid as they 

VOL. 111. — 18. 

274 Alexander Hamilton 

accrue, it is essential that a provision for them be 
contemplated in the general arrangement requisite to 
the completion of our system of credit. There is, 
perhaps, no easy alternative to what is proposed, 
except the sale of the stock. But, waiving other 
weighty considerations against such a measure, it is, 
in the view of a true economy, liable to the most 
solid objections. 

It is morally certain that the dividends on the 
stock will increase, and the value of the capital, from 
this and collateral causes, more than proportionably. 
There is no momentary urgency to induce the relin- 
quishment of this future advantage. To sell at 
present would be to abandon the difference without 
necessity. It cannot be expedient in a government 
to part with a capital which, at the time, produces 
as great or a greater revenue than can be realized 
from the proceeds of a sale, however invested; 
and which has an inherent tendency to future 
augmentation. The measure, too, would be to 
renounce, or lessen, a most convenient resource 
for forming the redeeming fund of the deferred 
stock. 

It is proposed to carry the proceeds of the sales of 
the Western lands to the sinking fund. This is to 
execute the intention of the funding act, which has 
not organized the mode of application; and it has 
the advantage of combining in one system all the 
provisions for extinguishing the debt. 

It is proposed that all surpluses of revenue shall, 
at a certain time, be carried to the use of the sinking 
fund. This is to extend and give effect to a principle 

Public Credit 275 

which has already received the legislative sanction. 
It was necessary to fix a time when the appropria 
tion of the surplus should become absolute, and that 
this should be consistent with a due opportunity to 
provide for the exigencies of the public service. 
Both these considerations have been consulted. 
This measure has, besides, reference to a more 
speedy redemption of the debt than it appears 
prudent to attempt by an absolute appropriation 
of more extensive funds. And the legislators of 
to-day would be entitled to the lasting gratitude 
of their country, if they would extend this auxiliary 
resource by all the means which are consistent with 
a due regard to the present accommodation of then- 
constituents. 

It is proposed to authorize the commissioners of 
the sinking fund to provide, by new loans, for the 
reimbursement of the instalments which, from time 
to time, accrue. This is on the ground that it is 
essential to the perfection of the system of redemp 
tion, that all the means of ultimate execution should 
be organized in it, and that there should be no need 
of future provisions. 

The last clause of the proposition excepts from the 
operation of that clause the interest on the six per 
cent, stock. This is because that interest is de 
stined to form the accumulations for paying the suc 
cessive instalments of the principal of that stock, 
which increase each year in a ratio to the interest 
liberated by each payment. 

The statement E exhibits the course of the sinking 
fund, as proposed to be established. 

276 Alexander Hamilton 

Remarks on the Sixth Proposition 

This will be a useful and important provision. It 
has reference to a circumstance repeatedly ad 
verted to — the long credits given upon the principal 
branches of revenue; from which it happens, that, 
though the fund itself, or the product of the revenue, 
is more than adequate to an appropriation, yet the 
receipts upon it come too slowly into the treasury to 
answer the end, without anticipation by temporary 
loans. Its propriety depends on the principle sug 
gested under the last head, of having all the means of 
complete execution organized in the system of public 
credit. 

Remarks on the Seventh Proposition 

It is a good rule of caution, that no more of the 
public revenues should be rendered permanent, than 
is necessary to give moral certainty to the provisions 
which may be regarded as the pillars of public credit. 
This idea will, it is believed, be satisfied, by giving 
permanency to the now temporary duties on im 
ports. Accordingly, it is only proposed to extend 
the duties, mentioned in this proposition to the year 
1800, and thence, to the end of the next ensuing 
session of Congress; which is on the ground that 
they ought to be commensurate in duration with the 
objects which they are to accomplish, and no more. 

It has been already noticed, that they are at 
present chargeable, together with the temporary 
duties on imports, laid in the last session, with an 
appropriation of 1,292,137 dollars and thirty-eight 

Public Credit 277 

cents, and with the interest of one million of dollars, 
authorized to be borrowed with a view to foreign in 
tercourse; having a special eye to an object very 
interesting to the commerce and feelings of the 
United States. 

This business wants a further arrangement; stand 
ing, at present, upon a vague and inefficient footing. 
The reimbursement of the loan is not adequately pro 
vided for, neither is the interest, this being predicated 
on funds which, in their present form, would prob 
ably expire after a product of two years. 

According to the fifth proposition, the temporary 
duties on imports, after the above-mentioned ap 
propriation of 1,292,137 dollars and thirty-eight 
cents shall have been satisfied, will become perman 
ently charged with the interests on the public debt, 
the sinking fund, and the annual reservation of 
$600,000, for the support of government. 

If the duties mentioned in the sixth proposition 
are continued till the first of January, 1800, and the 
reimbursement of the principal of the loan, as well 
as the interest, is referred to them, two good pur 
poses will be answered: the obtaining the loan will 
be facilitated, and its complete reimbursement will 
be effected within the term allotted, without an aug 
mentation of the permanent debt of the country. This 
makes allowance for fulfilling the appropriation for 
the current service already charged upon this fund. 

It is presumed to be a conclusive reason in favor 
of the proposition, that it aims at preventing an in 
crease of permanent debt. If services of this kind, 
when the United States are at peace (at least with 

278 Alexander Hamilton 

civilized Powers), are made causes of permanent 
loans, the progress of new debt will easily exceed the 
extinction of old. 

It appears desirable that there should be a steady 
effort, as a rule of administration, not to increase the 
permanent debt of the country by permanent loans, 
except when it is inevitable, by the existence of a 
war with some European Power. 

The comparative view of revenue and expenditure 
(statement F) establishes, satisfactorily, that these 
duties cannot be dispensed with, unless there be a 
substitute, if the redemption of the public debt is to 
be seriously entered upon; and it is believed that 
there cannot be devised objects of revenue more 
proper in themselves, nor more generally acceptable 
to the people. Whatever interested parties may 
allege, it seems self-evident that there can hardly be 
a reasonable question, except as to the best mode of 
collection. The objection, that part of them falls on 
manufactures, has no weight. The manufactures on 
which they fall are complete luxuries and completely 
established; consequently, fit objects of revenue. 
The increased duties on the rival foreign articles are 
a full protection to the manufacture. Whatever 
may be the appearances in the infancy of the tax, 
it is certain, in principle, that it will finally fall on 
the consumer, as generally as duties on imported 
commodities. 

Remarks on the Eighth Proposition 

This is to terminate an embarrassment which has 
been experienced. Appropriations are frequently 

Public Credit 279 

made for objects, the extent of which is not pre 
cisely known, or in a degree casual. To leave them 
indefinite, as to time, is sometimes to tie up, un 
necessarily, a portion of the public funds, which 
may, ultimately, not be wanted at all for the purpose 
of the original appropriation. 

It will do away this inconvenience, and promote 
perspicuity in the treasury accounts of appropria 
tions, if an ultimate period is fixed when each ap 
propriation shall be deemed to have ceased. Should 
further appropriations appear necessary for the same 
objects, new estimates can be presented, and new 
appropriations made. 

The designating an account with a denomination 
known in the laws, to which the surpluses are to be 
carried, will facilitate future legislative dispositions of 
the resulting fund. It is, however, essential to the 
system of public credit, that this should be with the 
exceptions contained in the proposition. 

Remarks on the Ninth Proposition 

This proposition is calculated to give simplicity to 
the public accounts of stock and revenue, which will 
conduce to correctness, dispatch, and economy. As 
the revenues are manifestly more than adequate to 
the claims of all the creditors, they, none of them, 
have any interest in the distinctions which now 
exist, and which grew out of the course of the busi 
ness; and the rights of none of them will be affected, 
because all who choose may continue on their former 
ground, by signifying their dissent to the present plan. 
It is, however, presumed, there will be no such dissent. 

280 Alexander Hamilton 

Remarks on the Tenth Proposition 

It is important to the fiscal calculations, to ascer 
tain, positively, the extent of every portion of the 
public debt. At present, the amount of these sev 
eral items of it is deduced from accounts of the late 
war, of various officers and offices in some instances, 
conducted with little order. There is not, therefore, 
sufficient certainty; indeed, it is probable, from the 
length of time that has elapsed without their appear 
ing, that the computed amount exceeds the real. 

Besides, they are, from their nature, subject to 
forgeries and counterfeits; which implies a danger 
of loss to the public, till their circulation is finally 
terminated. The proposition, accordingly, besides 
the obtaining of better information, aims at obviat 
ing this danger. 

Allowing sufficient time for bringing them in to be 
exchanged for certificates of equivalent tenor, while 
it is a measure tending to public information and 
security, it can be liable to no reasonable objection 
on the part of the creditors. 

The Secretary of the Treasury has reserved for the 
conclusion of this report, a proposition which appears 
to him of great importance to the public credit, and 
which, after some preliminary observations, will be 
offered to consideration. It relates to the right of 
taxing the public funds, and to that of sequestering 
them in time of war. 

A proposition, on either of those points would have 
been deemed superfluous, had there never been dis 
cussions asserting a right to do the one and the 

Public Credit 281 

other, and even the expediency of exercising that 
right. The negative of both the pretensions, from 
the habit of regarding it as incapable of being dis 
puted, had acquired, in the mind of the Secretary, 
so much the force of an axiom as to have precluded 
even the mention of the subject in the plan which he 
originally submitted for funding the public debt. 
He should, otherwise, have thought it an indispens 
able duty to suggest, as a matter of primary conse 
quence to the system of credit contemplated in the 
plan, the express renunciation of those pretensions; 
for they are (as he believes) not only unwarranted by 
principle or usage, but subversive of the sound 
maxims of public credit. A persuasion that this 
would always be a truth granted in the councils of the 
United States, is his apology for the omission. 

Even now he should think it useless to depart 
from his silence on the point, had not the discussions 
alluded to created some alarm in places where all 
the circumstances are not well understood, which it 
is the interest of the country to dispel. The confid 
ence justly to be reposed in the collective wisdom of 
this government, forbids the supposition, by one 
acquainted with its constitution, that the security of 
the creditor can need, in this particular, a further 
sanction. It is presumed to be impossible, that any 
final act can ever give so deep a wound to the na 
tional interest and character, as to derogate from a 
principle which may be placed among the most 
sacred in the administration of a government. 

Is there a right in a government to tax its own 
funds? 

282 Alexander Hamilton 

The pretence of this right is deduced from the 
general right of the legislative power to make all 
the property of the state contributory to its own 
exigencies. 

But this right is obviously liable to be restricted 
by the engagements of the government; it cannot be 
justly exercised in contravention of them; they 
must form an exception. It will not be denied, that 
the general right in question could, and would, be 
abridged, by an express promise not to tax the 
funds. This promise, indeed, has not been given in 
terms, but it has been given in substance. When an 
individual lends money to the state, the state stipul 
ates to repay him the principal lent, with a certain 
interest, or to pay a certain interest, indefinitely, till 
the principal is reimbursed; or it stipulates some 
thing equivalent, in another form. In our case, the 
stipulation is in the second form. 

To tax the funds, is manifestly either to take, or 
to keep back, a portion of the principal or interest 
stipulated to be paid. 

To do this, on whatever pretext, is not to do what 
is expressly promised; it is not to pay that precise 
principal, or that precise interest, which has been 
engaged to be paid; it is, therefore, to violate the 
promise given to the lender. 

But is not the stipulation to the lender, a tacit 
reservation of the general right of the Legislature to 
raise contributions on the property of the state? 

This cannot be supposed — because it involves two 
contradictory things ; an obligation to do, and a right 
not to do. An obligation to pay a certain sum, and 

Public Credit 283 

a right to retain it in the shape of a tax. It is against 
the rules, both of law and reason, to admit, by im 
plication, in the construction of a contract, a princi 
pal which goes in destruction of it. 

The government, by such a construction, would be 
made to say to the lender: " I want a sum of money, 
for a national purpose, which all the citizens ought to 
contribute proportionably, but it will be more con 
venient to them, and to me, to borrow the money of 
you. If you will lend it, I promise you faithfully, to 
allow you a certain rate of interest, while I keep the 
money, and to reimburse ike principal within a deter 
minate period, except so muck of the one and the other 
as I may think fit to withhold, in the shape of a tax. ' ' 

Is such a construction either natural or rational? 
Does it not, in fact, nullify the promise by the re 
servation of a right not to perform it ? 

Is it to be presumed, without being expressed, that 
such can be the understanding of a lender, when he 
parts with his money to a government? 

The contrary is so much the more presumable that 
nothing short of an express reservation can support 
the pretension to tax the funds. 

It may be replied, that the creditor might be will 
ing to rely upon the equity of the government, not 
to abuse its right, by exacting from him excessive 
contributions. 

This, if true, does not obviate the difficulty of sup 
posing the coexistence of an obligation and a right, 
destructive the one of the other, in interpreting the 
sense of a contract, when nothing of the kind is said. 

It is possible that a creditor might be willing so to 

284 Alexander Hamilton 

contract; yet it is still necessary, in order to deter 
mine that he has done it, to find some provisions or 
expressions in the contract, indicating the intention 
to render what is stipulated compatible with what is 
reserved. But it is not probable that an individual 
would be willing to lend upon such terms. He would 
justly apprehend, that, in great emergencies, a right 
having no limit but the opinion of the party pos 
sessed of the power, would be abused, that the 
convenience of laying hold of a fund already pre 
pared and at hand, supported by a claim of right, 
would be a temptation to abuse, not easy to be re 
sisted. However well disposed to contribute, in 
common with his fellow-citizens, on all the ordinary 
objects of property or income, he would be unwilling 
to subject himself to a special burthen, in the pe 
culiar character of creditor of the state. He would 
prefer to employ his money in other ways; even to 
lend it to private persons, where it might be more 
likely to escape the hand of the fiscal power. 

Let the question be tried by another analysis. 

Public debt can scarcely, in legal phrase, be defined 
either as property in possession or in action. It is 
evidently not the first, till it is reduced to possession 
by payment. To be the second, would suppose a 
legal power to compel payment by suit. Does such a 
power exist? The true definition of public debt is 
a property subsisting in the faith of the government. 
Its essence is promise. Its definite value depends 
upon the reliance that the promise will be definitely 
fulfilled. Can the government rightfully tax its 
promise? Can it put its faith under contribution? 

Public Credit 285 

Where or what is the value of the debt, if such a 
right exists? 

Suppose the government to contract with an in 
dividual to convey to him a hundred acres of land, 
upon the condition of paying a hundred dollars. 
When he came to pay the hundred dollars and de 
mand his title, could the government require of him 
to pay fifty more as a tax upon the land, before it 
would consent to give him the title ? Who would not 
pronounce this to be a breach of contract — a fraud — 
which nothing could disguise? 

This case is parallel with that under examination, 
with circumstances that fortify the right of the 
lending creditor. 

The government agrees with him that, for one 
hundred dollars, which he delivers to the government, 
it will deliver to him, at the end of each year, six 
dollars. Here the six dollars to be delivered answer 
to the land to be conveyed, with this stronger ground 
of right, that the consideration for them has actu 
ally been given and received. Yet, when the cred 
itor comes to demand his six dollars, he is told that 
he cannot have them, except with the reservation of 
one dollar as a tax upon the six, or that he cannot 
have them, except upon the condition of returning 
one dollar as that tax. What is this but to say that 
his title to the money in this case, as to the land in 
the other, must depend upon his paying or allowing 
a further consideration for it, not contemplated in the 
contract? Can there be a doubt that this, also, 
would be a breach of contract — a fraud? 

The true rule of every case of property, founded on 

Alexander Hamilton 

contract with the government, is this : It must first 
be reduced into possession, and then it will become 
subject, in common with other similar property, to 
the right of the government to raise contributions 
upon it. It may be said that the government may 
fulfil this principle by paying the interest with one 
hand, and taking back the amount of the tax with 
the other. But to this the answer is that, to comply 
truly with the rule, the tax must be upon all the 
money of the community, not upon the particular 
portion of it which is paid to the public creditors; 
and it ought, besides, to be so regulated as not to 
include a lien of the tax upon the fund. The credi 
tor should be no otherwise acted upon, than as every 
other possessor of money; and, consequently, the 
money he receives from the public can then only be 
a fit subject of taxation when it is entirely separated 
and thrown, undistinguished, into the common mass. 
A different practice would amount to an evasion of 
the principle contended for, and to oppression. A 
rent, or annuity, liable before it passes, or in the act 
of passing, or at the moment of passing, from one 
proprietor to another, to a deduction, or drawback, 
at the pleasure of the party from whom it is to pass, 
is an imaginary thing, destitute both of shape and 
substance. 

When a government enters into contract with an 
individual, it deposes as to the matter of the con 
tract its constitutional authority, and exchanges the 
character of legislator for that of a moral agent, with 
the same rights and obligations as an individual. 
Its promises may be justly considered as excepted 

Public Credit 287 

out of its power to legislate, unless in aid of them. It 
is, in theory, impossible to reconcile the two ideas of 
a promise which obliges with a power to make a law 
which can vary the effect of it. This is the great prin 
ciple that governs the question, and abridges the 
general right of the government to lay taxes, ex 
cepting out of it a species of property which subsists 
only in its promise. 

There are persons who, admitting the general rule^ 
conceive a distinction to exist between a tax upon 
the funds, which must be paid at all events, and a 
tax upon alienations of them, which will only be paid 
when they are transferred from one to another. The 
latter they think justifiable, because it is in the 
option of the creditor to avoid the tax by avoiding 
the alienation. But the difference between the two 
cases is only a difference in the degree of violation. 

The stock, in its creation, is made transferable. 
This quality constitutes a material part of its value, 
and the existence of it is a part of the contract with 
the government, which has undertaken, itself, to 
conduct the operation of transferring by its own 
officers, and consequently at its own expense. It is 
as completely a breach of contract to derogate from 
this quality, in diminution of the value of stock, by 
encumbering the transfer with a charge or tax, as it 
is to take back, in the same shape, a portion of the 
principal or interest. It is obvious, too, that this 
may be carried so far as essentially to destroy the 
transferable capacity. But what is a tax upon trans 
fers, other than the faculty of taking away from the 
actual proprietor of stock a portion of his principal, 

288 Alexander Hamilton 

whenever his interests or his necessities demand a 
transfer, in derogation from the full enjoyment of 
the right to transfer, and from the express promise 
of the government to pay to him or his alienee? 
For it is upon the seller, not upon the buyer, that 
such a tax will fall. And where is the substantial 
difference, on the ground of contract, between this 
and a direct tax upon the fund itself? The value of 
it is as certainly impaired by the one as by the other. 

But shall the proprietor of money in the funds, 
then, be exempt from his proportion of the burthens 
which other citizens bear? 

This will not be the consequence of the principle. 
As a consumer, of which his income is the instrument, 
he will pay his proportion of the taxes on consump 
tion. As a holder of any other species of property 
procured by that income, or otherwise, which is 
liable to a tax, he must also contribute his pro 
portion. 

But, without undue refinement, the lender of 
money to the public may be affirmed to have paid 
his tax when he lends his money. 

Relying upon the engagement of the government, 
express or implied, that he will receive what is pro 
mised him, without defalcation, he is content with a 
less interest than he would take if subject to any 
such defalcation, and especially if it was to be arbi 
trary as to its extent. In this lower rate of interest 
he may be truly said to pay his tax, or to purchase 
an exemption from it. 

Here, also, we find what is decisive on the point of 
expediency. 

Public Credit 289 

If the government had a right to tax its funds, the 
exercise of that right would cost much more than it 
was worth. The money-lender would exact exor 
bitant premiums, not only as an indemnification for 
the use which the government might probably make 
of its right, and which, in practice, would be likely 
'to be qualified by some regard to equality of con 
tribution, but as an equivalent for insurance against 
the risk or possibility of a more extensive use. 
Hence the government would be likely to pay much 
more in premiums upon its loans than it would draw 
back in taxes; and the former being supposed but 
equal to the latter, there would be no advantage in 
exercising the right. 

But it will be, perhaps, more safe to affirm that 
there would be no borrowing at all upon such terms. 
The first precedent of a tax upon the funds might be 
expected to compel the government to an express 
renunciation of the right in every future loan. Solid 
capitalists would not be much inclined to adventure 
their money upon so precarious a footing as is im 
plied in a power of taxing their credits. 

These reflections lead readily to an estimate of the 
impressions which would be produced by the ex 
ample of an imposition on the funds. Regarded 
either as a breach of contract, or as a deviation 
from the sound maxims of credit, the effect upon 
it would be nearly equally fatal. Whatever might 
be excused to a time of revolution, to a defect of 
means, or to some extraordinary peculiarity of situa 
tion, no excuse would be admitted for a deliberate 
departure from principles, at a time, too, of national 

VOL. III. — 19. 

290 Alexander Hamilton 

prosperity, in a flourishing state of the finances, 
after the foundations of a regular system had been 
laid. The departure would argue an incorrectness, 
an instability, or a depravity of views, calculated to 
give a lasting shock to public credit. 

The United States must, henceforth, tread with 
the most cautious steps. 

A renunciation of the right, in future, might not 
speedily heal the wound which an example of its ex 
ercise had given. Durable suspicions might fasten 
on the wisdom or the integrity of the government, 
which might occasion to it no inconsiderable loss and 
embarrassment, before a course of contrary experi 
ence would obliterate them. 

The right of a government to sequester or confiscate 
property, in its funds, in time of war, involves con 
siderations analogous to those which regard the right 
of taxing them. Whether the foreigner be, himself, 
the original lender, or the proprietor of stock, in its 
constitution transferable without discrimination, he 
stands upon equal ground with the citizen. He has 
an equal claim upon the faith of the government. 

In the second case, as the substitute of the original 
lender, the promise made attaches immediately upon 
him. Indeed, the certificates which issue upon every 
transfer, and which may be called the public bonds, 
designate him as the creditor, and expressly invest 
him with the correspondent rights. 

To sequester or confiscate the stock, is as effectu 
ally a breach of the contract to pay, as to absorb it 
by a tax. It is to annihilate the promise, under the 
sanction of which the foreigner became a proprietor. 

Public Credit 291 

But, does not the general right of war, to seize 
and confiscate enemy property, extend to the 
property of the citizens of one nation in the funds 
of another — the two nations being at war with each 
other? 

Resorting to principle as the guide, this question 
may, on solid grounds, be answered in the negative. 

The right to seize and confiscate individual pro 
perty, in national wars, excludes all those cases 
where the individual derives his title from the enemy 
sovereign or nation : for the right to property always 
implies the right to be protected and secured in the 
enjoyment of that property; and a nation, by the 
very act of permitting the citizen of a foreign country 
to acquire property within its territory, whether to 
lands, funds, or to any other thing, tacitly engages 
to give protection and security to that property, and 
to allow him as full enjoyment of it as any other pro 
prietor — an engagement which no state of things 
between the two nations can justly or reasonably 
affect. Though politically right, that, in wars be 
tween nations, the property of private persons, 
which depend on the laws of their own country, or on 
circumstances foreign to the nation with which their 
own is at war, should be subject to seizure and con 
fiscation by the enemy nation ; yet it is both politic 
ally and morally wrong, that this should extend to 
property acquired under the faith of the government, 
and the laws of that enemy nation. 

When the government enters into a contract with 
the citizen of a foreign country, it considers him as 
an individual in a state of nature, and contracts with 

292 Alexander Hamilton 

him as such. It does not contract with him as the 
member of another society. 

The contracts, therefore, with him, cannot be 
affected by his political relations to that society. 
War, whatever right it may give over his other 
property, can give none over that which he derives 
from those contracts. The character in which they 
are made with him, the faith pledged to him person 
ally, virtually exempt it. 

This principle, which seems critically correct, 
would exempt as well the income as the capital of 
the property. It protects the use as effectually as 
the thing. What, in fact, is property, but a fiction, 
without the beneficial use of it? In many cases, in 
deed, the income or annuity is the property itself. 
And though general usage may control the principle, 
it can only be as far as the usage clearly goes. It 
must not be extended by analogy. 

Some of the most approved publicists, admitting 
the principle, qualify it with regard to the income of 
lands, which they say may be sequestered " to hinder 
the remittance of it to the enemy's country." 

But the same authority affirms that a state of war 
" does not so much as touch the sums which it owes 
to the enemy. Everywhere, in case of a war, funds 
credited to the public, are exempt from confiscation 
and seizure.'' These expressions clearly exclude se 
questration as well as confiscation. 

The former no less than the latter, would be in 
consistent with the declarations that a state of war 
does not so much as touch the sums which it owes 
to the enemy, and, that funds credited to the public 

Public Credit 293 

are exempt from seizure. And, on full inquiry, it 
is believed that the suggestion, thus understood, is 
founded in fact. 

Usage, then, however it may deviate in other par 
ticulars, in respect to public funds, concurs with 
principle in pronouncing, that they cannot rightfully 
be sequestered in time of war. 

The usages of war, still savor too much of the 
ferocious maxims of the times, when war was the 
chief occupation of man. Enlightened reason would 
never have pronounced that the persons or property 
of foreigners, found in a country at the breaking out 
of a war between that country and their own, were 
liable to any of the rigors which a state of war 
authorizes against the persons and goods of the 
enemy. It would have decreed to them, an inviola 
ble sanctuary in the faith of those permissions 
and those laws, by which themselves and their 
property had come under the jurisdiction where 
they were found. It would have rejected the 
treachery of converting the indulgences, and even 
rights of a previous state of amity, into snares for 
innocent individuals. 

Happily, however, the practice of later times has 
left several of those maxims little more than points 
of obsolete doctrine. They still retain their rank in 
theory; but usage has introduced so many qualifica 
tions, as nearly to destroy their operation. 

This appears from the acknowledgement of writers, 
from the barrenness of modern history in examples of 
the application of those doctrines, from the opinions 
known to be generally current in Europe, and from a 

294 Alexander Hamilton 

variety of articles which are constant formulas in 
treaties of the present century. 

The United States are every way interested in the 
mitigation of the rigor of the ancient maxims of war. 
They cannot better demonstrate their wisdom, than 
by their moderation in this respect. Particularly in 
terested in maintaining, in their greatest purity and 
energy, the principles of credit, they cannot too 
strictly adhere to all the relaxations of those maxims 
which favor the rights of creditors. No temporary 
advantage can compensate for the evils of a different 
course of conduct. 

Credit, public and private, is of the greatest con 
sequence to every country. Of this, it might be 
emphatically called the invigorating principle. No 
well-informed man can cast a retrospective eye over 
the progress of the United States, from their infancy 
to the present period, without being convinced that 
they owe, in a great degree, to the fostering influence 
of credit, their present mature growth. This credit 
has been of a mixed nature, mercantile and public, 
foreign and domestic. Credit abroad was the trunk 
of our mercantile credit, from which issued ramifica 
tions that nourished all the parts of domestic labor 
and industry. The bills of credit emitted, from time 
to time, by the different local governments, which 
passed current as money, co-operated with that re 
source. Their united force, quickening the energies 
and bringing into action the capacities for improve 
ment of a new country, was highly instrumental in 
accelerating its growth. 

Credit, too, animated and supported by the general 

Public Credit 295 

zeal, had a great share in accomplishing, without such 
violent expedients, as, generating universal distress, 
would have endangered the issue, that Revolution, of 
which we are so justly proud, and to which we are so 
greatly indebted. 

Credit, likewise, may, no doubt, claim a principal 
agency in that increase of national and individual 
welfare since the establishment of the present govern 
ment, which is so generally felt and acknowledged, 
though the true causes of it are not as generally 
understood. It is the constant auxiliary of almost 
every public operation; has been an indispensable 
one in those measures by which our frontiers have 
been defended; and it would not be difficult to 
demonstrate that, in a recent and delicate instance, 
it has materially contributed to the safety of the 
state. 

There can be no time, no state of things, in which 
credit is not essential to a nation, especially as long 
as nations in general continue to use it as a resource 
in war. It is impossible for a country to contend, on 
equal terms, or to be secure against the enterprises of 
other nations, without being able equally with them 
to avail itself of this important resource; and to a 
young country, with moderate pecuniary capital, and 
not a very various industry, it is still more necessary 
than to countries more advanced in both. A truth 
not less weighty for being obvious and frequently 
noticed. 

Public credit has been well denned to be " a faculty 
to borrow, at pleasure, considerable sums on moder 
ate terms; the art of distributing, over a succession 

296 Alexander Hamilton 

of years, the extraordinary efforts, found indispens 
able in one ; a means of accelerating the prompt em 
ployment of all the abilities of a nation, and even 
of disposing of a part of the overplus of others/' 

This just and ingenious definition condenses to 
a point the principal arguments in favor of public 
credit, and displays its immense importance. 

Let any man consult the actual course of our 
pecuniary operations, and let him then say whether 
credit be not eminently useful. Let him imagine the 
expense of a single campaign in a war with a great 
European Power; and let him then pronounce 
whether credit would not be indispensable. Let 
him decide whether it would be practicable, at all, 
to raise the necessary sum by taxes within the year, 
and let him judge what would be the degree of dis 
tress and oppression, which the attempt would occa 
sion to the community. He cannot but conclude 
that war, without credit, would be more than a great 
calamity — would be ruin. 

But credit is not only one of the main pillars of the 
public safety; it is among the principal engines of 
useful enterprise and internal improvement. As a 
substitute for capital, it is a little less useful than gold 
or silver, in agriculture, in commerce, in the manu 
facturing and mechanic arts. 

The proof of this needs no labored deduction. It 
is matter of daily experience in the most familiar 
pursuits. One man wishes to take up and cultivate 
a piece of land; he purchases upon credit, and, in 
time, pays the purchase money out of the produce 
of the soil improved by his labor. Another sets up 

Public Credit 297 

in trade ; in the credit founded upon a fair character, 
he seeks, and often finds, the means of becoming, at 
length, a wealthy merchant. A third commences 
business as manufacturer or mechanic, with skill, but 
without money. It is by credit that he is enabled to 
procure the tools, the materials, and even the sub 
sistence of which he stands in need, until his industry 
has supplied him with capital; and, even then, he 
derives, from an established and increased credit, 
the means of extending his undertakings. 

Among the circumstances which recommend credit, 
and indicate its importance in the whole system of 
internal exertion and amelioration, it is impossible 
to pass, unnoticed, its unquestionable tendency 
to moderate the rate of interest — a circumstance 
of infinite value in all the operations of labor and 
industry. 

If the individual capital of this country has become 
more adequate to its exigencies than formerly, it is 
because individuals have found new resources in 
the public credit — in the funds to which that has 
given value and activity. Let public credit be pro 
strated, and the deficiency will be greater than be 
fore. Public and private credit are closely allied, if 
not inseparable. There is, perhaps, no example of 
the one being in a flourishing, where the other was in 
a bad state. A shock to public credit would, there 
fore, not only take away the additional means which 
it has furnished, but by the derangements, disorders, 
distrusts, and false principles which it would en 
gender and disseminate, would diminish the anteced 
ent resources of private credit. 

298 Alexander Hamilton 

The United States possess an immense mass of 
improvable matter; the development of it, continu 
ally making, may be said to enlarge the field of 
improvement as it progresses ; and, though the active 
capital of the country has, no doubt, considerably 
increased, it is probable that it does not bear, at pre 
sent, a much greater proportion to the objects of em 
ployment than it has done at any former period. 
Credit, upon this hypothesis, of every kind, is nearly 
as necessary to us now, as it ever was. But, at least, 
it may be affirmed with absolute certainty that, to a 
country so situated, credit is peculiarly useful and 
important. 

If the United States observe, with delicate caution, 
the maxims of credit, as well toward foreigners as 
their own citizens, in connection with the general 
principles of an upright, stable, and systematic ad 
ministration, the strong attractions which they pre 
sent to foreign capital will be likely to insure them 
the command of as much as they may want, in 
addition to their own, for every species of internal 
amelioration. 

Can it be doubted that they would derive from 
this, in a course of time, advantages incomparably 
greater than any, however tempting, that could par 
tially result from a disregard of those maxims, or 
from the exercise of a questionable right, which 
should even appear to derogate from them? 

Credit is an entire thing. Every part of it has the 
nicest sympathy with every other part; wound one 
limb, and the whole tree shrinks and decays. 

The security of each creditor is inseparable from 

Public Credit 299 

the security of all creditors. The boundary between 
foreigner and citizen would not be deemed a sufficient 
barrier against extending the precedent of an inva 
sion of the rights of the former to the latter. The 
most judicious and cautions would be most apt to 
reason thus, and would only look for stronger shades 
of apparent necessity or expediency to govern the 
extension. And, in affairs of credit, the opinion of 
the judicious and cautions may be expected to pre 
vail. Hence the government, by sequestering the 
property of foreign citizens in the public funds at the 
commencement of a war, would impair, at least, if 
not destroy, that credit which is the best resource in 
war. 

It is in vain to attempt to disparage credit by 
objecting to its abuses. What is there not liable to 
abuse or misuse? The precious metals, those great 
springs of labor and industry, are also the minis 
ters of extravagance, luxury, and corruption. Com 
merce, the nurse of agriculture and manufactures, if 
overdriven, leads to bankruptcy and distress. A fer 
tile soil, the principal source of human comfort, not 
unfrequently begets indolence and effeminacy. Even 
liberty itself, degenerating into licentiousness, pro 
duces a frightful complication of ills, and works its 
own destruction. 

It is wisdom, in every case, to cherish whatever is 
useful, and guard against its abuse. It will be the 
truest policy of the United States to give all possible 
energy to public credit, by a firm adherence to its 
strictest maxims; and yet to avoid the ills of an 
excessive employment of it by true economy and 

300 Alexander Hamilton 

system in the public expenditures ; by steadily cul 
tivating peace; and by using sincere, efficient, and 
persevering endeavors to diminish present debts, 
prevent the accumulation of new, and secure the dis 
charge, within a reasonable period, of such as it may 
be at any time matter of necessity to contract. It 
will be wise to cultivate and foster private credit by 
an exemplary observance of the principles of public 
credit, and to guard against the misuse of the former 
by a speedy and vigorous administration of justice, 
and by taking away every temptation to run in debt, 
founded in the hope of evading the just claims of 
creditors. 

As an honorable evidence of this disposition, and 
with a view to quite the alarms which have been 
excited, and to silence forever a question which can 
never be agitated without serious inconvenience, the 
Secretary of the Treasury, in the last place, respect 
fully submits : 

That there be an express renunciation, by law, of all 
pretension of right to tax the public funds, or to se 
quester, at any time, or on any pretext, the property 
which foreign citizens may hold therein. 

This will be particularly essential to the success of 
the plan for converting the foreign into domestic 
debt; as the present contracts for the Amsterdam 
and Antwerp debt contain an equivalent stipulation, 
and there is no prospect that the creditors would con 
sent to a change, but upon the condition of a like 
stipulation. 

In the commencement of this report, it was the 
intention to submit some propositions for the im- 

Improvement of the Revenue 301 

provement of the several branches of the public 
revenue ; but it is deemed advisable to reserve this 
part of the subject for a future communication. 
All which is respectfully submitted. 

ALEXANDER HAMILTON, 
Secretary of the Treasury* 

IMPROVEMENT OF THE REVENUE 

Communicated to the House of Representatives, February 2, 1795. 
TREASURY DEPARTMENT, January 31, 1795. 

The Secretary of the Treasury respectfully makes 
the following report to the House of Representatives : 

According to the present laws, imposing duties on 
articles imported into the United States, not much 
short of one third of the whole amount of the duties 
is derived from articles rated ad valorem. 

In other nations, where this branch of revenue, as 
with us, is of principal or very considerable conse 
quence, and where no peculiarity of situation has 
tended to keep the rates of duty low, experience has 
led to contract more and more the number of articles 
rated ad valorem, and of course to extend the number 

1 This report was Hamilton's last message to the American people 
in closing his career as Secretary of the Treasury. It is quite as able 
as the first report, but less known because the first portion involves 
so many details. It reviews the whole financial policy in a masterly 
manner, and the last part, which deals with the taxation of pub 
lic funds and their sequestration in case of war, is an appeal and an 
argument in behalf of a high public credit, especially with reference 
to the United States, which has never been surpassed. The high 
tone of the views set forth and the eloquence and even fervor of the 
reasoning make it one of the greatest among Hamilton's many great 
State papers. 

302 Alexander Hamilton 

of those rated specifically, that is, according to weight, 
measure, or other rule of quantity. 

The reason of this is obvious. It is to guard 
against evasions which infallibly happen, in a greater 
or less degree, where duties are high. It is impossible 
for the merchants of any country to have manifested 
more probity than those of the United States, on this 
subject; and it is firmly believed, that there never 
was one in which illicit practices, to the disadvantage 
of the revenue, have obtained so little as hitherto in 
this; yet it would be a delusive expectation that, 
with duties so considerable as those which now exist, 
a disposition will not be experienced, in some indi 
viduals who carry on our import trade, to evade the 
payment of them, and this to an extent sufficient to 
make it prudent to guard with circumspection, and 
by every reasonable precaution, against the success 
of such attempts. It is needless to repeat, that this 
will contribute as much to the interest of the fair 
trader, as to that of the revenue. 

It is believed that, in our system, the method of 
rating ad valorem could, with convenience, be brought 
within a much narrower compass; and it is evident 
that, to do so, will contribute materially to the se 
curity of the revenue. 

The Secretary has not hitherto had leisure to digest 
the details of a plan for this purpose ; but, if the idea 
is approved, it can be carried with due accuracy into 
effect, at a future session, by an order upon the head 
of this Department to prepare, in the meantime, a 
tariff proportioned to the actual rates of duty. 

It may also be found expedient, with a similar 

Improvement of the Revenue 303 

view, to adjust anew the proportional rates of duty, 
of different kinds or qualities, of certain articles. 
This observation is believed to apply, with particular 
force, to teas. It would be, in the opinion of the 
Secretary, advisable to throw them into three classes : 
to raise somewhat the lowest rate, and to diminish 
considerably the higher rates. A persuasion is enter 
tained, founded partly upon observation of the course 
of importations, that a regulation of this kind would 
benefit the revenue. The same thing might be con 
veniently extended to some other articles. 

Advantages will also accrue from a re-adjustment 
of the rates, in certain cases, by combining several 
rates on the same articles, established by different 
acts, into one rate, and by dismissing inconvenient 
fractions, which serve to perplex the calculation of 
the duties. Some alteration in the terms of credit 
for duties may, it is conceived, be made with advant 
age. Where four months are allowed, three and six 
months may be substituted ; and three, six, nine, and 
twelve, or even three, six, nine, twelve, and fifteen, 
to the cases of six, nine, and twelve months. This 
will apportion the course of receipts more according 
to the course of payments, and prevent inconvenient 
pressures at particular junctures. 

The compensations to inspectors, especially in the 
ports where the expense of living is great, and to 
collectors and surveyors in the less productive ports, 
urgently demand revision, in order to an increase of 
them. 

The security of the revenue, in every branch, turns 
(it will not be too strong to say) principally upon the 

304 Alexander Hamilton 

officers of the lowest grade. Hence, it is a policy no 
less mistaken than common, to leave those officers 
without such compensations as will admit of a proper 
selection of character, and prevent the temptation, 
from indigence, to abuse the trust. It is certain 
that, in many places, the present allowance to in 
spectors, on the most liberal application of it, is in 
adequate to those important ends. 

A similar reasoning will apply to those officers of 
the principal grades who, being in districts which pro 
duce little, are ill compensated by the emoluments to 
which they are at present entitled. It cannot escape 
observation, that the safety of the revenue must de 
pend on equal fidelity and due vigilance in all the 
districts; else it may become, in many cases, worth 
the while to resort to particular districts, because 
there is a deficiency of the one or the other. Besides 
that, it is in itself just and proper that all who are in 
the public service should receive adequate rewards 
for their time, attention, and trouble. 

The aggregate expense of collecting the duties on 
impost and tonnage is at present truly moderate — a 
circumstance which facilitates the extension of allow 
ances where they are necessary. The system of the 
revenue cutters needs revision. The utility of every 
institution depends on the competency of the agents 
who are to execute it. The present compensations 
to officers and men, compared with what may be 
obtained in other similar employment, unaided by 
collateral motives, creates a degree of embarrassment 
which very much impairs the usefulness of the thing. 
It would have been, in the judgment of the Secretary, 

Improvement of the Revenue 305 

a great means of rendering it competent to its object, 
if, as was early suggested by him, the officers of the 
customs had had rank in the navy of the United 
States. 

With regard to that branch of revenue which is 
constituted by the duties upon spirits distilled within 
the United States, and upon stills, it is believed that 
it would be an improvement, and one which could 
be now made without inconvenience, to abolish the 
option to pay by the gallon of the spirits distilled, in 
the cases where the duties are charged on the stills. 
This will leave the alternative of paying by the year, 
or for less periods, upon licenses, at the choice of the 
party; an alternative which affords sufficient accom 
modation to the difference of circumstances. The 
option to pay by the gallon of the spirits distilled, 
according to an account to be rendered on the oath 
of the party, though expedient in the first experi 
ment of the law, is objectionable, as a permanent 
regulation, in a double view. 

The additional discretionary latitude given to com 
pensations to the officers concerned in the collection 
of those duties, is restricted to a term which will ex 
pire at the end of the next session of Congress. It 
will be essential to extend it, or to fix the compen 
sations which will have been allowed. It is believed 
that further experience will still be useful towards a 
definitive legislative adjustment. 

Embarrassments are experienced from the want of 
a concurrent authority in these officers, similar to 
that of the officers of the customs, to make seizures 
within each other's surveys or divisions. On the 

VOL. III. — 20. 

306 Alexander Hamilton 

borders of such as are adjacent, the officers are ex 
posed to hazard in making seizures, and better op 
portunities are afforded of escaping detection. 

The revenue to result from the act of the last ses 
sion, laying duties upon licenses to retailers of wines 
and distilled spirits, may be improved, favorable to 
proportional equality, by changing the form. 

One license, for selling one or more kinds of wines, 
puts the greatest and the smallest dealer upon the 
same footing, and is so far inequitable. To class 
wines into a few obvious and strongly marked dis 
criminations, and to render a license necessary for 
each class, with a duty upon each license, would 
favor a just distribution of the tax among great and 
small dealers, and would, at the same time, benefit 
the revenue. The classes may be as follows: ist. 
Madeira wine. 2d. Sherry wine. 3d. Port wine. 
4th. Other wines. 

To secure the effect of the discrimination in favor 
of small dealers, who may be in the practice of selling 
and sending out different kinds of wines in small 
quantities, it may be provided that not more than 
one license shall be necessary to any dealer who never 
sells or sends out at one time more than three gallons. 
And suitable penalties may be annexed to guard the 
condition of the exemption. 

Similar observations are applicable to licenses to 
retailers of spirituous liquors. These may be thrown 
into three classes: ist. Spirits distilled from the 
grape, commonly called brandy. 2d. Spirits dis 
tilled from the produce of the sugar cane, commonly 
called rum. 3d. Other distilled spirits; and there 

Improvement of the Revenue 307 

may be a like provision in favor of dealers who never 
sell or send out more than three gallons at one 
time. 

Distillers may be put, in this respect, as to the 
spirits they distil, upon the same footing with im 
porters; that is, they may be exempt from the 
license duty, but it would seem proper to annex 
these conditions to the exemption, that they shall 
not sell and send out a less quantity, in one cask, 
vessel, or package, than ten gallons; and that they 
shall not deal in the selling at retail of any other 
spirits than those they themselves distil. 

Or another rule may be adopted, for proportioning 
the tax to the extent of the dealing ; which is, to add 
to the present rate of the license certain supple 
mental rates, according to the yearly rent or yearly 
value, by appraisement, of the house or building in 
which the retailers of wines or spirituous liquors shall 
carry on the business. 

This has been found, in practice, a convenient, and, 
upon the whole, an equitable rule of proportion; 
evidently more so than one license with the same 
duty to all dealers indiscriminately. 

It is a general and a wise national policy to make 
these articles of wine and spirits as contributory to 
the revenue as can be made; which can only be 
effected by subdividing the duties upon them in the 
different stages of their passage to the consumer. 
The branch under consideration might be an im 
portant one. As it is now regulated it is feared that 
it may prove of inconsiderable consequence. The 
confining of the license for selling spirituous liquors 

3°8 Alexander Hamilton 

to foreign spirits, must give great facility to evasions. 
And it has an unequal operation upon different por 
tions of the community. 

It would promote the object of the act, which im 
poses duties on sales at auction, to allow two and a 
half per centum to each auctioneer, in lieu of the 
one per centum allowed by the ninth section of that 
act. It is believed that the present allowance is in 
sufficient to defray the expenses of clerkship incident 
to a compliance with the requisitions of the law, 
which cannot be rendered less particular or exact 
without prejudice to the revenue. 

The tax upon snuff, according to a rate per pound, 
will be liable to very great evasions, without regula 
tions for a close inspection of the course of the busi 
ness. Dispensing with these, it seems advisable to 
modify the tax upon a different plan. The pro 
position to lay it upon the mortar is as good a sub 
stitute as has occurred. It appears, upon evidence 
which is credited, that a snuff mill usually works 
about one half the year; that is, one hundred and 
fifty-six working days in a year; and yields, per 
mortar, of the whole number of mortars contained 
in a mill, an average of forty-five pounds of snuff 
per day. It follows that five hundred and sixty-one 
dollars at sixty-six cents per mortar, per annum, is 
the equivalent of the present duty of eight cents per 
pound. There are objections to this form of the tax ; 
but, as it appears to be generally desired by the 
manufacturers, it seems advisable to forego them; 
especially as the present plan demands far more 
rigorous precautions for the effectual collection of 

Improvement of the Revenue 309 

the duty than now exist, or than would be deemed 
expedient. 

A similar difficulty attends the tax upon refined 
sugar; but a proper substitute for the present plan 
is not perceived. It will fortify the revenue, and 
produce no undue inconvenience to the manufacturer, 
if he be required to annex a ticket or tickets to each 
loaf of sugar, specifying the weight in pounds; and 
to each cask, barrel, keg, box, or other package of 
refined sugar, specifying the contents and weight in 
pounds, corresponding certificates or tickets to ac 
company imported refined sugar. The kinds of 
tickets to be furnished by the respective supervisors, 
and accounted for to them. The observance of this 
regulation to be secured by proper penalties. 

The act which lays a duty on carriages for the con 
veyance of persons, exempts from the duty carriages 
usually and chiefly employed in husbandry, and in 
carrying commodities. It is a material defect in this 
act, as has been already experienced, that it provides 
no summary mode for determining what carriages 
are within the exempting description. Now, every 
disputed case must be the subject of a suit in all the 
legal forms; which is equally objectionable on the 
score of delay and expense. It is not perceived that 
any insurmountable difficulty lies in the way of pro 
viding a remedy consistently with a due reference, in 
the last resort, to the judiciary authority. 

In revenue laws, too much is as great a fault as too 
little simplicity. It leaves them unpro visional ; in 
capable of execution in a manner convenient either 
to the public or to individuals. The acts imposing 

310 Alexander Hamilton 

duties on licenses for selling wines and spirituous 
liquors at retail, and upon sales at auction, authorize 
allowances not exceeding two and a half per cent, for 
compensation to officers, and for incidental expenses. 
The acts laying duties upon carriages for the con 
veyance of persons, and upon snuff and refined sugar, 
make no provision for such compensations, or other 
expenses of collection. It is the opinion of the Secre 
tary that the rate of two and a half per cent., in the 
two first mentioned acts, is inadequate — that it ought 
to be extended to five per cent., and that an equal 
provision should be made for the expense of collec 
tion, under the two last-mentioned acts. 

The restrictions upon officers of the customs, and 
upon the supervisors and other officers of inspection, 
with regard to the public funds, appear to the Secre 
tary unnecessary and inconvenient : unnecessary, be 
cause those officers, having no concern whatever with 
any branch of public business that respects the man 
agement of the funds, can have no official influence 
upon the policy or execution of the measures which 
regard them, further than by a punctual collection 
of the revenues; inconvenient, because it deprives 
them of a means of investing any little sums they 
may save or acquire, in a mode very convenient to 
men who, from situation, are less liable to avail 
themselves of other opportunities. If the being 
stockholders can have any influence upon them as 
officers, it must be of a kind favorable to the public 
service, by increasing their personal interest in the 
exact collection of the revenue. If the idea which 
dictated the restrictions was, that they might use 

Improvement of the Revenue 311 

the public money in speculations in stock, the answer 
is, that this is not in their power, from the rapidity 
with which it is transferred to the treasury ; and if it 
were practicable for them to divert the public money, 
and a disposition to do it should, in any case, exist, 
it might operate through other channels. In lieu of 
the restrictions concerning the funds, the employ 
ment of public money for private purposes, may, if 
thought necessary, be still further guarded against 
by penalties. Those restrictions in reference to the 
immediate officers of the Treasury Department, and 
the Commissioners of Loans, are entirely proper, 
and ought to be maintained; but it is believed that 
it is not only useless, but injurious, to give them 
greater extension. The multiplication of restric 
tions on the public officers will render greater com 
pensations necessary, and be a source of expense to 
the public. 

All which is respectfully submitted. 

ALEXANDER HAMILTON, 

Secretary of the Treasury. * 

NOTE. — Since the conclusion of this report, the Secretary has learnt 
that a bill (the progress of which his peculiar situation had prevented 
his observing) has actually passed the two Houses, for changing the 
terms of six, nine, and twelve months, into eight, ten, and twelve. 
This bill, besides interfering disadvantageously with arrangements of 
the treasury, founded upon the existing provisions of the laws, will, it 
is apprehended, tend to increase an inconvenience which the above 
suggestions were meant to lessen — the too great concentration of mer 
cantile payments. Any accidental derangement of the mercantile 
body, from over-trading, or other cause, would, in this situation, en 
danger consequences to the treasury, which it might be difficult to 
meet by other expedients; whereas, a subdivision into shorter and 
more numerous periods, by diminishing the effect, would admit, in 
such cases, of an easy substitute. The merchants themselves are 
1 This brief report is full of pregnant and valuable suggestions. 

312 Alexander Hamilton 

particularly interested in this question; for the reaction upon them, of 
any embarrassment of the treasury, might render that a general and 
lasting mischief, which might otherwise have been only a partial and 
transient disorder. 

BUILDING TAX 

PLAN SENT TO OLIVER WOLCOTT, SECRETARY OP THE TREASURY, 
JUNE 7, 1797 

A million of dollars per annum on buildings and 
lands on the following plan : 

i st. Upon inhabited dwelling-houses thus: — 

Upon every such house of the denomination and 
description of a log house, at the rate of 20 cents for 
each room or apartment thereof, exclusive of garret 
and cellar. 

Upon every other inhabited dwelling-house of two 
rooms or apartments, exclusive of halls or entries, 
garrets and cellars, at the rate of 25 cents for each 
room or apartment. 

Upon every such house of three rooms or apart 
ments, exclusive as before, at the rate of 33^ cents 
for each room or apartment. 

Upon every such house of four rooms, exclusive 
as before, at the rate of 40 cents for each room or 
apartment. 

Upon every such house of five rooms, exclusive 
as before, at the rate of 60 cents for each room or 

Upon every such house of six rooms, exclusive as 
before, at the rate of 75 cents for each room or 
apartment thereof. 

Upon every such house of seven rooms and up 
wards, at the rate of 100 cents for each room, etc. 

Building Tax 3*3 

Remarks. — These rates have been adjusted by ap 
plying their operations to a number of houses, from 
which it appears that they find a sufficiently exact 
proportion to the rent, and they avoid the expense 
and uncertainty of valuation. Other circumstances 
of discrimination, if thought advised, may be added. 

Upon every room in a garret or cellar of a house of 
the foregoing descriptions, having a fireplace, and 
upon any kitchen, whether in a cellar or adjacent 
building, at the rate of 20 cents for each room or 
kitchen. 

Upon each room or apartment of every such house 
painted inside, the further sum of 25 cents. 

Upon each room or apartment of such house 
papered inside, or painted and bordered with paper, 
the further sum of 50 cents. 

Upon every chimney, faced with tiles or cut stone 
other than marble, the further sum of 50 cents. 

Upon every chimney faced with marble, the fur 
ther sum of 100 cents. 

Upon every 'staircase of cedar or ebony wood, the 
further sum of 50 cents. 

Upon every staircase of mahogany wood, the fur 

Upon every room or apartment with stucco cor 
nices, the further sum of 100 cents. 

Upon every room with a stucco ceiling, the further 
sum of 200 cents; but the same room shall not also 
be rated for cornices of such work. 

Upon every such house with pillars or pilasters out 
side in front, the further sum of 100 cents. 

3H Alexander Hamilton 

Upon every such house faced outside and in front, 
in whole or in part, with marble, the further sum of 
200 cents. 

These rates to be paid by the occupiers of the 
house, whether owners or tenants. When a house is 
let by parcels the landlord to be deemed the occupier. 

Upon all stone houses not being parts of dwelling- 
houses in use, at the rate of one fortieth part of the 
yearly value, to be determined by the actual rent, if 
rented, and if not by an estimate or valuation 
thereof. 

Upon all grist-mills, at the rate of 125 cents for 
each run of stone therein. 

Upon all saw-mills at the rate of 50 cents for each 
saw usually worked therein, not exceeding three, and 
for each saw above that number 25 cents. 

Upon all wharves in the cities and towns of Ports 
mouth, Boston, etc., (enumerating the principal 
towns,) at the rate of 12^ cents for each foot in front 

Upon all wharves in any other city or town at the 
rate of 6 cents. 

Remarks. — Or this may be thrown into classes. 

Upon all lumber yards in the cities or towns of 
Portsmouth, Boston, etc., (enumerating the principal 
towns,) at the rate of 2\ cents for each hundred 
square feet. 

Cottages inhabited by paupers to be excepted, to 
be judged of and ascertained by the assessors herein 
after described. 

Building Tax 315 

The amount of the foregoing taxes in each State, 
to be ascertained within a time to be limited by law 
for that purpose by the assessors, and a report thereof 
to be made to the Treasury, which shall then proceed 
to apportion, according to the prescribed quota, the 
sum remaining to make up the million of dollars to 
be levied. 

For example, suppose there were five States, and 
the product of the house-tax of each as follows : 

A. $100,000 

B. 150,000 

C. 200,000 

D. 50,000 

E. 100,000 

$600,000 

There would then remain toward the million to be 
levied on lands $400,000. Let there be then assigned 
to each State so much in land-tax as together with its 
house-tax will equal the [The paper is incomplete.] 

Remarks. — The mode of ascertaining to be by an 
actual calling at each house, and receiving of the 
occupiers a list of the particulars which are criterions 
of the tax ; the officer to have power to administer an 
oath. 

A proper penalty to be annexed to misrepresent 
ation, and a power to be given upon cause of sus 
picion testified on oath, to issue a warrant to inspect 
the house for ascertaining the fact. This will recon 
cile the idea of the sanctity of the castle with the 
security of the revenue. 

NATIONAL BANK 

HAMILTON TO ROBERT MORRIS, 1780 * 

SIR : — The present conjuncture is by all allowed to 
be peculiarly critical. Every man of reflection em 
ploys his thoughts about the remedies proper to be 
applied to the national disorders; and every one, 
from a partiality to his own ideas, wishes to convey 
them to those who are charged with the manage 
ment of affairs. The channel of the public papers, 
commonly made use of for the purpose, appears to 
me exceptionable on several accounts. It not only 

1 This letter was written while Hamilton was still serving in the 
Revolutionary army. The struggle for independence was in danger of 
being wrecked by financial difficulties and Robert Morris had just 
undertaken those labors which, by his skill and energy, saved the 
cause of the Colonies. Hamilton, with his mind running on questions 
of government and finance, and satisfied that civil, political, and finan 
cial measures were really more essential than even military campaigns, 
desired most earnestly to help Morris, whom he greatly liked and re 
spected. This letter was the result; a very extraordinary perform 
ance for a young man of twenty-three, whose life had been spent in 
college and camp. The natural genius of the financier and statesman 
shine out strongly. This is in fact the first of the arguments which 
led to the foundation of the national banking system of the United 
States. The others follow. Nothing has been omitted except a draft 
of a charter for the Bank of New York, 1786, and one of a charter for 
the Merchants' Bank of New York, 1803, which throw no light on 
Hamilton's opinions or on the development of the principles which 
were by his efforts, embodied in legislation. 

320 Alexander Hamilton 

restrains a freedom of discussion, from the extreme 
delicacy of the subject, but the discussion itself 
increases the evil, by exposing our weak sides to 
the popular eye, and adding false terrors to those 
well-founded apprehensions which our situation 
authorizes. 

Instead of pursuing this method, I prefer addressing 
myself to a member of that body, in whose power 
alone it is, by well-digested system, to extricate us 
from our embarrassments. I have pitched upon you, 
from a personal knowledge of your abilities and zeal. 
If I offer anything new and useful, I am persuaded 
you will endeavor to turn it to advantage. If the 
contrary is the case, I am, at least, doing no harm. 
I shall only have had the trouble of writing, and 
you of reading, a few useless pages. 

The object of principal concern is the state of our 
currency. In my opinion, all our speculations on 
this head have been founded in error. Most people 
think that the depreciation might have been avoided 
by provident arrangements in the beginning, without 
any aid from abroad; and a great many of our san 
guine politicians, till very lately, imagined the money 
might still be restored by expedients within ourselves. 
Hence the delay in attempting to procure a foreign 
loan. 

This idea proceeded from an ignorance of the real 
extent of our resources. The war, particularly in 
the first periods, required exertions beyond our 
strength, to which neither our population nor riches 
were equal. We have the fullest proof of this in the 
constant thinness of our armies, the impossibility, at 

National Bank 321 

this time, of recruiting them otherwise than by com 
pulsion, the scarcity of hands in husbandry and other 
occupations, the decrease of our staple commodities, 
and the difficulty of every species of supply. I am 
aware that the badness of the money has its influ 
ence; but it was originally an effect, not a cause, 
though it now partakes of the nature of both. A 
part of those evils would appear were our finances in 
a more flourishing condition. We experienced them 
before the money was materially depreciated; and 

I they contributed to its depreciation. The want of 
men soon obliged the public to pay extravagant 
wages for them in every department. Agriculture 
languished from a defect of hands. The mechanic 
arts did the same. The price of every kind of labor 
increased, and the articles of foreign commerce, from 
the interruption it received, more than kept pace 
with other things. 

The relative value of money being determined by 
the greater or less portion of labor and commodities 
which it will purchase; whatever these gained in 
price, that of course lost in value. 

The public expenditures, from the dearness of 
everything, necessarily became immense; greater in 
proportion than in other countries; and much be 
yond any revenues which the best concreted scheme 
of finance could have extracted from the natural 
funds of the State. No taxes, which the people 
were capable of bearing, on that quantity of money 
which is deemed a proper medium for this country 
(had it been gold instead of paper), would have been 
sufficient for the current exigencies of government. 

VOL. III. — 21. 

322 Alexander Hamilton 

The most opulent states of Europe, in a war of any 
duration, are commonly obliged to have recourse to 
foreign loans or subsidies.1 How, then, could we 
expect to do without them, and not augment the 
quantity of our artificial wealth beyond those bounds 
which were proper to preserve its credit? The idea 
was chimerical. 

The quantity of money formerly in circulation 
among us is estimated at about thirty millions of 
dollars. This was barely sufficient for our interior 
commerce. Our exterior commerce was chiefly 
carried on by barter. We sent our commodities 
abroad, and brought back others in return. The 

1 France owes a debt of near two hundred million of pounds sterling; 
of which about twenty-eight millions is due to governments and in 
dividuals in the United Provinces. 

England owes a debt not much short, of which about thirty millions 
is likewise due to the United Provinces. 

The United Provinces, themselves, owe a debt of the generality of 
fifty millions sterling, besides the particular debts of each province. 
Russia, Prussia, Denmark, Sweden, all owe money to the United 
Provinces, notwithstanding the assistance of their mines. These gov 
ernments, too, are patterns of economy. Sweden receives a constant 
supply from France. The House of Austria is also to be included in 
the catalogue. Spain is almost the only considerable European power 
to be excepted; but this is to be attributed to that inexhaustible fund 
of treasure which she possesses in the mines of South America. 

The King of Prussia is one of those potentates the least in debt not 
withstanding he has a long time made a figure in Europe, much above 
what the comparative strength and resources of his kingdom entitled 
him to expect. This his superior genius has effected. By a wise ad 
ministration, he maintains an army of one hundred and fifty thousand 
men, nearly equal to that of France, with one third of its people, and 
less than a third of its riches. This he does by judicious arrangements, 
by a rigid economy, and by a species of commerce, which is carried on, 
on account of the state. There are several public manufactories, from 
which the army is supplied, and by the help of which the money paid 
out with one hand is taken in by the other. 

National Bank 323 

balance of the principal branch was against us, and 
the little specie derived from others was transferred 
directly to the payment of that balance, without 
passing into home circulation. It would have been 
impracticable, by loans and taxes, to bring such a 
portion of the forementioned sum into the public 
coffers as would have answered the purposes of the 
war ; nor could it have spared so considerable a part, 
without obstructing the operations of domestic com 
merce. Taxes are limited, not only by the quantity 
of wealth in a state, but by the temper, habits, and 
genius of the people ; all which, in this country, con 
spired to render them moderate; and as to loans, 
men will not be prevailed upon to lend money to the 
public when there is a scarcity, and they can find a 
more profitable way of employing it otherwise, as 
was our case. 

The ordinary revenues of the United Provinces 
amount to about twenty-five millions of guilders; or 
two millions two hundred and fifty thousand pounds 
sterling per annum. This is, on proportion to its 
territory and numbers, the richest country in the 
world; and the country where the people sustain 
the heaviest load of taxes. Its population is about 
equal to ours, two millions of souls. The burthens 
on the subject are so great that it is by some held 
most impracticable, even on extraordinary emergen 
cies, to enlarge the revenues by new impositions. It 
is maintained, their dependence, in these cases, must 
be on the extraordinary contributions of wealthy 
individuals ; with the aid of which, in some of their 
wars, they have raised four millions sterling a year. 

324 Alexander Hamilton 

In a country possessed of so vast a stock of wealth, 
where taxes are carried to such a height, and where 
the means of paying them so infinitely exceed those 
in our power, if the national revenues only amount 
to the sum I have stated, how inadequate must have 
been the product of any taxes we could have levied, 
to the demands of the service ! Loans, for the reason 
before hinted, would have been out of the question ; 
at least, they would have been so trifling as to be an 
object of little importance. Suppose we should have 
been able to raise a million sterling, annually ; a sum 
that probably would have exceeded our ability ; how 
unequal would this have been to our wants ! ' No 
economy could have made it bear any proportion, 
especially if we recur to the causes already enumer 
ated, by which the currency depreciated in its first 
stages. 

From these reasonings it results, that it was not in 
the power of Congress, when their emissions had 
arrived at the thirty millions of dollars, to put a stop 
to them.2 They were obliged, in order to keep up 
the supplies, to go on creating artificial revenues by 
new emissions; and as these multiplied, their value 
declined. The progress of the depreciation might 
have been retarded, but it could not have been pre 
vented. It was, in a great degree, necessary. 

1 This will appear, by recurring to our expenses in the commence 
ment of the war, before the money was depreciated. In '75, which 
was only three fourths of a year, the emissions amounted to seven 
millions of dollars; in '76, to fourteen millions. The war did not 
begin, in earnest, till '76. 

2 This is meant, without employing the assistance of a foreign loan, 
and of other expedients beside borrowing and taxing. 

National Bank 325 

There was but one remedy; a foreign loan. All 
other expedients should rather have been considered 
as auxiliary. Could a loan have been obtained, and 
judiciously applied, assisted by a vigorous system 
of taxation, we might have avoided that excess of 
emissions which has ruined the paper. The credit 
of such a fund would have procured loans from the 
moneyed and trading men within ourselves ; because 
it might have been so directed, as to have been 
beneficial to them in their commercial transactions 
abroad.1 

The necessity for a foreign loan is now greater 
than ever. Nothing else will retrieve our affairs. 

The wheels of government, without it, cannot 
much longer be kept in motion. Including loan- 
office certificates, and State emissions, we have 
about four hundred millions of dollars in circula 
tion. The real value of these is less than seven 
millions, which is the true circulating medium of 
these States : for though the price of specie is 
and the rate of exchange for sterling bills 
the nominal value of every commodity is at least 
sixty to one, on an average. All the reasonings 
against the possibility of raising the current ex 
penses on the foundation of thirty millions, apply 
to our present situation in the ratio of thirty to 
seven; that is, it is as thirty to seven less practic 
able now than when our emissions amounted to 
only thirty millions. Could every dollar in circula 
tion be brought annually into the Treasury, which 
never was effected in any country, and is politically 

1 This will appear from the plan which will be proposed. 

3 26 Alexander Hamilton 

impossible, the revenue would not be equal to the 
yearly expense. 

The hope of appreciating the money, by taxes and 
domestic loans, is at an end. As fast as it could be 
received, it must be issued in the daily expenditures. 
The momentary interval between its being drawn 
out of circulation and returning into it, would pre 
vent its receiving the least advantage. 

These reasonings may appear useless, as the neces 
sity of a foreign loan is now acknowledged, and 
measures are taking to procure it. But they are 
intended to establish good principles; the want of 
which has brought us to the desperate crisis we 
are arrived at, and may still betray us into fatal 
mistakes. 

How this loan is to be employed is now the ques 
tion; and its difficulty equal to its importance. 
Two plans have been proposed: one, to purchase at 
once, in specie or sterling bills, all superfluous paper ; 
and to endeavor, by taxes, loans, and economy, to 
hinder its returning into circulation. The remain 
der, it is supposed, would then recover its value. 
This, it is said, will reduce our public debt to the 
sterling cost of the paper. 

Suppose two hundred millions were to be pur 
chased, and the rest called in by taxes. At 
this would require bills to the amount of of 

dollars. But I doubt whether four times this sum 
would be sufficient. The moment it was known 
such purchases were to be made, the avarice of the 
speculators would begin to operate: the demand 
would immediately occasion an artificial apprecia- 

National Bank 327 

tion; each successive million would cost more than 
the preceding. But this appreciation would be 
more relative to the purchasing medium than to 
the prices of commodities. The raising the value of 
the paper relative to the former, would depend on the 
combination of a few artful individuals, and would 
be easily accomplished. The diminution of prices 
must be slow, as it implies a change in the senti 
ments of the body of the people with respect to the 
money. A sudden revolution in the general rates 
of all the necessaries of life is not to be expected. 
The prices of these, as they have reached their 
present summit by degrees, must, by degrees, revert 
to their former station. The minds of the people 
will not readily admit impressions in favor of the 
currency. All their past experience has given a 
habit of diffidence; and the epidemical spirit of 
extortion will maintain a violent struggle with what 
ever has a tendency to produce a fall of prices. A 
permanent reduction of the quantity of circulating 
cash, will alone gradually effect it. But this will 
not happen on the present plan. 

The necessity of continuing the supplies at nearly 
the same rates now given (which would be the case 
if my reasonings are true), would have nearly the 
same effect mentioned with respect to taxes and 
domestic loans. The money would return into cir 
culation almost as fast as it was drawn out; and at 
the end of the year we should find our treasury empty, 
our foreign loan dissipated, and the state of our 
finances as deplorable as ever. At a moderate cal 
culation, we should have spent ten or twelve millions 

328 Alexander Hamilton 

of real dollars, for the sole purpose of carrying on 
the war another year. It would be much better, 
instead of purchasing up the paper currency, to pur 
chase the supplies out of our specie or bills. In the 
first instance, the public would suffer a direct loss of 
the artificial appreciation, relative to the purchasing 
medium ; in the last, it would buy at the value of the 
commodities in specie or bills. 

A great source of error in disquisitions of this 
nature, is the judging of events by abstract calcula 
tions; which, though geometrically true, are false 
as they relate to the concerns of beings governed 
more by passion and prejudice than by an enlight 
ened sense of their interests. A degree of illusion 
mixes itself in all the affairs of society. The opinion 
of objects has more influence than their real nature. 
The quantity of money in circulation is certainly a 
chief cause of its decline ; but we find it is depreciated 
more than five times as much as it ought to be by 
this rule. The excess is derived from opinion; a 
want of confidence. In like manner we deceive our 
selves, when we suppose the value will increase in 
proportion as the quantity is lessened. Opinion will 
operate here also; and a thousand circumstances 
may promote or counteract the principle. 

The other plan proposed is to convert the loan 
into merchandise, and import it on public account. 
This plan is incomparably better than the former. 
Instead of losing on the sale of its specie or bills, the 
public would gain a considerable profit on the com 
modities imported. The loan would go much further 
this way, in supplying the expenses of the war; and 

National Bank 329 

a large stock of valuable commodities, useful to the 
army and to the country, would be introduced. 
This would affect the prices of things in general, and 
assist the currency. But the arts of monopolizers 
would prevent its having so extensive and durable 
an influence as it ought to have. 

A great impediment to the success of this, as well 
as the former scheme, will be the vast sums requisite 
for the current expenses. The arguments adduced 
in the former case are applicable here also, though 
not with equal force. The necessity the public will 
be under of parting with its stock to defray the daily 
demands, will give designing men an opportunity, 
by combinations not to purchase, to oblige it to sell 
at a rate below the real value of money. This they 
may the more easily effect, as the demand for foreign 
commodities is much less than formerly, on account 
of the general spirit of parsimony which has ob 
tained from necessity, and the manufactures carried 
on in private families for their own use. The great 
est part of the country people now almost entirely 
clothe themselves. 

The public must either sell very cheap, to collect 
rapidly the superfluous paper in hopes of raising the 
value of the remainder ; or it must sell very slow, to 
preserve the due proportion between the articles it 
has for sale and those it wants to buy. By pursuing 
the first method, it will soon exhaust its stock at a 
very considerable loss, and only give temporary 
relief to the currency. According to my principle, 
though it sells cheap, it must still buy dear; and, 
consequently, the money collected cannot remain in 

33° Alexander Hamilton 

the treasury long enough to preserve the rise in its 
appreciated state. If it pursues the second method, 
the expenditures will be equal to the income; and 
though the public will make the natural profits on 
its goods, as it will lay up nothing, it will do nothing 
towards the appreciation.1 

The farmers have the game in their own hands, 
and will make it very difficult to lower the prices of 
their commodities. For want of laborers, there is 
no great superfluity of the most essential articles 
raised. These are things of absolute necessity, and 
must be purchased, as well by the other classes of 
society as by the public. The farmers, on the con 
trary, if they do not like the price, are not obliged to 
sell; because they have almost every necessary 
within themselves, — salt, and one or two more, ex- 
cepted, which bear a small proportion to what is 

1 To form an idea of the effect of this plan, let it be supposed that 
the goods imported amount to two millions of pounds sterling, and 
that these sell at one hundred and fifty pounds in paper, for each 
pound sterling. The whole proceeds will be eight hundred millions of 
dollars; to these add two hundred millions, raised in taxes. There 
will then be in the hands of the public one thousand millions of dollars ; 
which, at sixty to one, gives sixteen millions six hundred and sixty-six 
thousand six hundred and sixty- six and two thirds of real dollars. 
Take the year '76 for a standard, and suppose fourteen millions of 
dollars to be the proper annual expense of the war, which is only two 
millions six hundred and sixty-six thousand six hundred and sixty-six 
and two thirds less than the whole amount of the goods and taxes. 
At this rate, the plan would do little more than defray the expenses of 
the war for one year. But this calculation is not exactly true ; because 
the money would certainly appreciate, in some degree, by the reduc-. 
tion of its quantity; yet, as this reduction would not last, at least in 
the same extent, to preserve the appreciation, and as, in proportion 
to the appreciation, the price of goods must fall, and bring less money 
in, it is difficult to say whether it would not ultimately come to the 
same thing. 

National Bank 331 

wanted from them, and which they can obtain, by 
barter, for other articles equally indispensable. 
Heavy taxes, it may be said, will oblige them to 
sell; but they can pay, with a small part of what 
they have, any taxes our Legislatures will venture 
to impose, or would be able to enforce. 

One measure, alone, can counterbalance these 
advantages of the farmers, and oblige them to con 
tribute their proper quota to the support of govern 
ment: a tax in kind. 

This ought instantly to begin throughout the 
States. The present quantity of cash, though nom 
inally enormous, would, in reality, be found incom 
petent to domestic circulation, were it not that a 
great part of our internal commerce is carried on by 
barter. For this reason, it is impossible, by pecuniary 
taxes, to raise a sum proportioned to the wants of 
the State. The money is no longer a general re 
presentative ; and when it ceases to be so, the State 
ought to call for a portion of the thing represented; 
or, in other words, to tax in kind. This will greatly 
facilitate whatever plan of finance is adopted; be 
cause it will lessen the expenditures in cash, and 
make it the easier to retain what is drawn in. 

I said the demand for foreign goods is less than it 
formerly was. I mean there is not a demand for so 
large a quantity, which the reasons already assigned 
clearly demonstrate; nor are the exorbitant rates 
now given any objection to this doctrine. There is 
an absolute scarcity even in comparison of the 
present consumption; and, of course, a demand for 
what there is. But should an importation of two 

332 Alexander Hamilton 

millions sterling take place, the market would be 
glutted; and there would be no way of keeping up 
the price, but by making very slow sales. A less 
quantity would stand no chance of calling in the 
money, and keeping it in long enough to effect any 
thing in favor of its credit. 

I say nothing about the risk of importation. I 
do not believe we could obtain a convoy sufficient to 
justify our hazarding it without the precaution of 
insurance. But with this expedient we are safe, 
and must be satisfied with smaller profits for the 
sake of security. 

This is a plan not altogether to be rejected. With 
prudent management it might enable us to carry on 
the war two or three years (which, perhaps, is as 
long as it may last) ; but if we should expect more 
from it, the restoration of the currency, we should 
be disappointed. 

The only plan that can preserve the currency is 
one that will make it the immediate interest of the 
moneyed men to co-operate with government in its 
support. The country is in the same predicament 
in which France was previous to the famous Missis 
sippi scheme, projected by Mr. Law. Its paper 
money, like ours, had dwindled to nothing; and no 
efforts of the government could revive it, because 
the people had lost all confidence in its ability. Mr. 
Law, who had much more penetration than integrity, 
readily perceived that no plan could succeed which 
did not unite the interest and credit of rich indi 
viduals with those of the state; and upon this he 
framed the idea of his project, which, so far, agreed 

National Bank 333 

in principle with the Bank of England. The founda 
tion was good, but the superstructure too vast. 
The proprietors aimed at unlimited wealth, and the 
government itself expected too much; which was 
the cause of the ultimate miscarriage of the scheme, 
and of all the mischiefs that befell the kingdom in 
consequence. 

It will be our wisdom to select what is good in this 
plan, and in any others that have gone before us, 
avoiding their defects and excesses. Something on 
a similar principle in America will alone accom 
plish the restoration of paper credit, and establish 
a permanent fund for the future exigencies of 
government. 

Article I. The plan I would propose is that of an 
American bank, instituted by authority of Congress 
for ten years, under the denomination of The Bank 
of the United States. 

II. A foreign loan makes a necessary part of the 
plan ; but this I am persuaded we can obtain, if we 
pursue the proper measures. I shall suppose it to 
amount to two millions of pounds sterling. This 
loan is to be thrown into the bank as a part of its 
stock. 

III. A subscription to be opened for two hundred 
millions of dollars; and the subscribers erected into 
a company, to be called THE COMPANY OF THE BANK 
OF THE UNITED STATES. 

IV. The government to guarantee this subscrip 
tion money to the proprietors, at the rate of one for 
twenty; that is, to engage, at the dissolution of the 
bank, to make good to them the sum of ten millions 

334 Alexander Hamilton 

of dollars, in lieu of the two hundred millions sub 
scribed, payable in Spanish milled dollars, or a cur 
rency bona fide equivalent to them. 

V. The taxes raised in money annually, to be 
thrown into stock.1 

VI. All the remaining paper to be called in (at 
the option of the possessor), and bank-notes issued 
in lieu of them, for so much sterling, payable to the 
bearer in three months from the date, at two per 
cent, per annum interest. A pound sterling to be 
estimated at two hundred and sixty-six and two 
thirds of the present dollar.2 The interest to be 
punctually paid in specie at the end of the three 
months, when it shall be at the choice of the 
possessor to have the bank-notes renewed, or to 
receive the sum deposited in the old paper. 

VII. All the money issued from the bank to be 
of the same denomination, and on the same terms.3 

VIII. The bank to furnish Congress with an an 
nual loan of two millions sterling, if they have occa 
sion for it, at four per cent, interest. 

IX. The whole or such part of the stock as is 
judged necessary to be employed in commerce, in 
the manner and on the terms which shall be agreed 

1 The taxes are made to increase every year, for the three years, 
because the money in circulation increases, and, consequently, the 
people can afford to pay more. 

2 This is sixty paper dollars to one dollar of four shillings and six 
pence sterling, which is the real value of the money. But if it is appre 
hended that this may meet with opposition, let the valuation of the 
bank-notes be the same as the price of European bills of exchange. 
Other operations must be regulated accordingly. 

3 The reason of this is to preserve the idea of a stock, and make it 
seem that the old paper is still in existence. But there is danger, not 
withstanding the reasons to the contrary, that there may be a run 

National Bank 335 

upon from time to time between the company and 
a Board of Trade to be appointed by Congress. 

X. The bank to issue occasionally, by permission 
of Congress, such sums as may be thought safe and 
expedient, in private loans, on good securities, at 
six per cent, interest. 

XI. The government to share half the whole 
stock and profits of the bank. 

XII. The bank to be managed by the trustees of 
the company, under the inspection of the Board of 
Trade,1 who may have recourse to the company's 
books whenever they think proper to examine the 
state of its affairs. The same is done in England and 
in other countries where banks are established, and 
is a privilege which the government has a right to 

upon the bank, from particular causes, which may embarrass it. It 
is not probable the old paper will be entirely, though nearly, called 
out of circulation ; what remains will appreciate ; this may tempt those 
who have bank-notes to demand payment on the terms of the original 
deposit, without considering that, by bringing too great a quantity 
again into circulation, it will again depreciate. The bank may be 
pushed to a very disagreeable extremity by this means. I do not 
know whether it may not be advisable to confine the privilege of re 
payment to the lenders to the bank, and make the bills bear interest, 
payable every three months, without making the principal demandable. 
Much may be said for and against. It is well worth consideration. 

1 This board ought immediately to be established at all events. 
The Royal Council of Commerce, in France, and the subordinate 
Chambers in each province, form an excellent institution, and may, in 
many respects, serve as a model. Congress have too long neglected to 
organize a good scheme of administration, and throw public business 
into proper executive departments. For commerce I prefer a board, 
but for most other things, single men. We want a Minister of War, a 
Minister of Foreign Affairs, a Minister of Finance, and a Minister of 
Marine. There is always more decision, more dispatch, more secrecy, 
more responsibility, where single men, than where bodies, are con 
cerned. By a plan of this kind we should blend the advantages of a 
monarchy and of a republic in a happy and beneficial union. Men will 

Alexander Hamilton 

demand for its own security. It is the more necessary 
in this case, from the commercial nature of the bank. 
To give an idea of the advantages — 

[Here a part of the manuscript is missing.] 

which, having all the operation of money, and 
of a more advantageous kind than that which the 
lenders have parted with, will have all the efficacy of 
a payment. It is for this reason they are made to 
bear interest ; and there can be no doubt that every 
man will prefer a species of money which answers all 
the purposes of a currency, and even when lying idle, 
brings in a profit to the possessor. The same con 
sideration will prevent the lenders recalling the old 

only devote their lives and attentions to the mastering a profession, on 
which they can build reputation and consequence which they do not 
share with others. 

If this plan should be approved Congress ought immediately to ap 
point a Minister of Finance under whatsoever title they think proper, 
and charge him with its execution. He ought to be a man of ability 
to comprehend it in all its consequences; and of eloquence, to make 
others comprehend and relish it. He ought, beside, to have some 
general knowledge of the science. This man ought immediately to 
address himself to some of the most sensible moneyed men, and en 
deavor to convince them of the utility of the project. These must 
engage others, and so on, till a sufficient number is engaged. 

Then Congress must establish the bank and set it agoing. I know 
of no man that has better pretensions than yourself; and I shall be 
very happy to hear that Congress have said: "Thou art the man." 

I had like to have omitted one remark, which is, that the subscrip 
tion money may be guaranteed, if necessary, at ten to one, as a greater 
inducement. This will only be twenty millions of dollars, or five 
millions of pounds sterling; a cheap bargain to get rid of the perplexi 
ties we labor under, and convert the torrent of ideal money into a 
moderate but sufficient stream to supply the real wants of the State. 
Congress, no doubt, would be able to borrow enough abroad to pay 
this debt, if it should not find better means within itself. But I shall 
be much mistaken if the proprietors will desire to be repaid, and not 
prefer continuing the loan to government on reasonable terms. 

National Bank 337 

paper at the quarterly payments ; because they hold 
a more valuable property instead of it. The in 
terest is to be paid in specie, as a further temptation, 
for which a small sum will suffice. The denomina 
tion of the money is altered ; because it will produce 
a useful illusion. Mankind are much led by sounds 
and appearances; and the currency having changed 
its name will seem to have changed its nature. 

The bank will advance bills to the amount of two 
million of pounds sterling to Congress ; and, in addi 
tion to its stock, will now have a debt due it of this 
sum, which is to be considered as so much gained. 

[Here a part of the manuscript is missing.] 

Brought over £7,075,000 

To be deducted : 

Drawn out of circulation, by the 

sale of goods imported . . . £4,000,000 
By governmental taxes, supposed 

to be 1,000,000 — 5,000,000 

Remaining in circulation the fourth 

year . £2,075,000 

This will be less than the preceding, which is occa 
sioned by the million supposed to be drawn in by 
taxes. 

The national debt, on this plan, will stand thus, 
at the end of three years: 

Foreign loan £2,000,000 

Domestic loan, at two millions per annum . 6,000,000 
Interest at four per cent 320,000 

8,320,000 
Half the value of the bank 7,900,000 

Balance against the United States .... £420,000 

VOL. III.— 22. 

338 Alexander Hamilton 

We may, therefore, by means of this establish 
ment, carry on the war three years, and only incur 
a debt of four hundred and twenty thousand pounds 
over and above the guaranty of the subscription 
money; which, however, is not to be paid till the 
end of ten years. 

I have said, in one place, that abstract calcula 
tions, in questions of finance, are not to be relied on ; 
and as the complex operations of trade are involved 
in the present plan, I am, myself, diffident of those 
flattering results which it presents at every step. I 
am aware how apt the imagination is to be heated 
in projects of this nature, and to overlook the falla 
cies which often lurk in first principles. But when I 
consider, on the other hand, that the scheme stands 
on the firm footing of public and private faith ; that 
it links the interest of the State in an intimate con 
nection with those of the rich individuals belonging 
to it ; that it turns the wealth and influence of both 
into a commercial channel, for mutual benefit, which 
must afford advantages not to be estimated; that 
there is a defect of circulating medium, which this 
plan supplies, by a sort of creative power, con 
verting what is so produced into a real and effica 
cious instrument of trade;- — I say, when I consider 
these things, and many more that might be added, 
I cannot forbear feeling a degree of confidence in the 
plan, and, at least, hoping that it is capable of being 
improved into something that will give relief to our 
finances. 

I do not believe that the advantages will be so 
great in fact, as they seem to be in speculation. 

National Bank 339 

They will be limited by the means of commerce 
which the States produce ; and these may not be so 
extensive in the beginning as the plan supposes. 
Besides this, the profits of the commerce will not be 
so large, in proportion, after the first or second year, 
as during those years; neither will it be possible to 
increase the paper credit in the same degree. But 
the Bank of England is a striking example, how 
far this may be carried, when supported by pub 
lic authority and private influence. On the other 
hand, a variety of secondary expedients may be 
invented, to enlarge the advantages of the bank. 
The whole system of annuities, as practised in 
England, may be ingrafted upon it, with such 
differences as are proper to accommodate it to our 
circumstances. The European loan may also be 
converted into a European bank, the interest of 
which, being interwoven with the American bank, 
may engage rich individuals there in promoting and 
extending the plan. 

Very beneficial contracts may be made between 
government and the company, for supplying the 
army, by which money may be saved to the public, 
the army better furnished, and the profits of the 
bank extended. 

I have confined the bank to the space of ten years, 
because this will be long enough to judge of its ad 
vantages and disadvantages ; and the latter may be 
rectified by giving it a new form. I do not suppose 
it will ever be discontinued; because it seems to be 
founded on principles that must always operate well, 
and make it the interest, both of government and 

34° Alexander Hamilton 

the company, to uphold it. But I suppose the 
plan capable of improvement, which experience will 
suggest. 

I give one half of the whole property of the bank 
to the United States; because it is not only just but 
desirable to both parties. The United States con 
tribute a great part of the stock; their authority is 
essential to the existence of the bank; their credit is 
pledged for its support. The plan would ultimately 
fail, if the terms were too favorable to the company, 
and too hard upon government. It might be en 
cumbered with a debt which it could never pay, and 
be obliged to take refuge in bankruptcy. The share 
which the State has in the profits will induce it to 
grant more ample privileges, without which the 
trade of the company might often be under restric 
tions injurious to its success. 

It is not, perhaps, absolutely necessary that the 
sum subscribed should be so considerable as I have 
stated it, though the larger the better. It is only 
necessary it should be considerable enough to en 
gage a sufficient number of the principal moneyed 
men in the scheme. But Congress must take care 
to proportion the advantages they give and receive. 

It may be objected that this plan will be pre 
judicial to trade, by making the government a party 
with a trading company; which may be a tempta 
tion to arrogate exclusive privileges, and thereby 
fetter that spirit of enterprise and competition on 
which the prosperity of commerce depends. But 
Congress may satisfy the jealousies on this head, by 
a solemn resolution not to grant exclusive privileges, 

National Bank 341 

which alone can make the objection valid. Large 
trading companies must be beneficial to the com 
merce of a nation, when they are not invested with 
these, because they furnish a capital with which 
the most extensive enterprises may be undertaken. 
There is no doubt the establishment proposed 
would be very serviceable at this juncture, merely 
in a commercial view; for private adventurers are 
not a match for the numerous obstacles resulting 
from the present posture of affairs. 

The present plan is the product of some reading on 
the subjects of commerce and finance, and of occa 
sional reflections on our particular situation; but a 
want of leisure has prevented its being examined in 
so many lights, and digested so materially, as its 
importance requires. If the outlines are thought 
worthy of attention, and any difficulties occur which 
demand explanation; or if the plan be approved, 
and the further thoughts of the writer are desired, a 
letter directed to James Montague, Esquire, lodged 
in the post-office at Morristown, will be a safe 
channel of any communications you may think 
proper to make; and an immediate answer will be 
given. Though the writer has reasons which make 
him unwilling to be known, if a personal conference 
with him should be thought material, he will en 
deavor to comply. 

You will consider this as a hasty production, and 
excuse the incorrectnesses with which it abounds. 
I am, Sir, very respectfully, 

Your most obedient and humble servant. 

342 Alexander Hamilton 

HAMILTON TO ROBERT MORRIS 

April 30, 1781. 

SIR: 

I was among the first who were convinced that an 
administration by single men was essential to the 
proper management of the affairs of this country. I 
am persuaded now it is the only resource we have to 
extricate ourselves from the distresses which threaten 
the subversion of our cause. It is palpable that the 
people have lost all confidence in our public councils ; 
and it is a fact, of which I dare say you are as well 
apprised as myself, that our friends in Europe are in 
the same disposition. I have been in a situation 
that has enabled me to obtain a better idea of this 
than most others; and I venture to assert that the 
Court of France will never give half the succors to 
this country, while Congress holds the reins of ad 
ministration in their own hands, which they would 
grant, if these were entrusted to individuals of es 
tablished reputation, and conspicuous for probity, 
abilities, and fortune. 

With respect to ourselves, there is so universal and 
rooted a diffidence of the government, that, if we 
could be assured the future measures of Congress 
would be dictated by the most perfect wisdom and 
public spirit, there would be still a necessity for a 
change in the forms of our administration, to give 
a new spring and current to the passions and hopes 
of the people. 

To me it appears evident that an executive min 
istry, composed of men with the qualifications I 
have described, would speedily restore the credit of 

National Bank 343 

government abroad and at home — would induce our 
allies to greater exertions in our behalf — would in 
spire confidence in moneyed men in Europe, as well 
as in America, to lend us those sums of which it may 
be demonstrated we stand in need, from the dis 
proportion of our national wealth to the expenses 
of the war. 

I hope, sir, you will not consider it as a com 
pliment, when I assure you that I heard, with the 
greatest satisfaction, of your nomination to the de 
partment of finance. In a letter of mine last sum 
mer to Mr. Duane, urging, among other things, the 
plan of an executive ministry, I mentioned you as 
the person who ought to fill that department. I 
know of no other in America, who unites so many 
advantages; and of course every impediment to 
your acceptance is to me a subject of chagrin. I 
flatter myself Congress will not preclude the public 
from your services by an obstinate refusal of reason 
able conditions; and, as one deeply interested in 
the event, I am happy in believing you will not 
easily be discouraged from undertaking an office, by 
which you may render America, and the world, no 
less a service than the establishment of American 
independence! 'T is by introducing order into our 
finances — by restoring public credit — not by gain 
ing battles, that we are finally to gain our object. 
'T is by putting ourselves in a condition to con 
tinue the war — not by temporary, violent, and 
unnatural efforts to bring it to a decisive issue, that 
we shall, in reality, bring it to a speedy and success 
ful one. In the frankness of truth I believe, sir, you 

344 Alexander Hamilton 

are the man best capable of performing this great 
work. 

In expectation that all difficulties will be removed, 
and that you will ultimately act on terms you ap 
prove, I take the liberty to submit to you some 
ideas relative to the objects of your department. I 
pretend not to be an able financier; it is a part of 
administration which has been least in my way, and, 
of course, has least occupied my inquiries and re 
flections. Neither have I had leisure or materials 
to make accurate calculations. I have been obliged 
to depend on memory for important facts, for want 
of the authorities from which they are drawn. 
With all these disadvantages, my plan must neces 
sarily be crude and defective; but if it may be a 
basis for something more perfect, or if it contains 
any hints that may be of use to you, the trouble I 
have taken myself, or may give you, will not be mis 
applied. At any rate, the confidence I have in your 
judgment assures me that you will receive with 
pleasure communications of this sort: if they con 
tain anything useful, they will promote your views 
and the public benefit; if not, the only evil is the 
trouble of reading them; and the best informed will 
frequently derive lights, even from reveries of pro 
jectors and quacks. There is scarcely any plan so 
bad as not to have something good in it. I trust 
mine to your candor without further apology; you 
will at least do justice to my intention. 

The first step towards determining what ought to 
be done in the finances of this country, is to estimate, 
in the best manner we can, its capacity for revenue ; 

National Bank 345 

and the proportion between what it is able to afford, 
and what it stands in need of, for the expenses of its 
civil and military establishments. There occur to 
me two ways of doing this: ist. By examining what 
proportion the revenues of other countries have 
borne to their stock of wealth, and applying the 
rule to ourselves, with proper allowance for the 
difference of circumstances. 2d. By comparing 
the result of this rule with the product of taxes in 
those States which have been the most in earnest 
in taxation. The reason for having recourse to the 
first method is, that our own experience of our 
faculties in this respect has not been sufficiently 
clear, or uniform, to admit of a certain conclusion: 
so that it will be more satisfactory to judge of them 
by a general principle, drawn by the example of 
other nations, compared with what we have effected 
ourselves, than to rely entirely upon the latter. 

The nations with whose wealth and revenues we 
are best acquainted, are France, Great Britain, and 
the United Provinces. The real wealth of a nation, 
consisting in its labor and commodities, is to be 
estimated by the sign of that wealth — its circulating 
cash. There may be times when, from particular 
accidents, the quantity of this may exceed or fall 
short of a just representative ; but it will turn again 
to a proper level, and in the general course of things, 
maintain itself in that state. 

The circulation of France is almost wholly carried 
on in the precious metals; and its current cash is 
estimated at from fifteen to sixteen hundred mil 
lions of livres. The net revenue of the kingdom, 

346 Alexander Hamilton 

the sum which actually passes into the public coffers, 
is somewhere between three hundred and sixty and 
four hundred millions, about one fourth of the whole 
of its currency. An estimate of the wealth of this 
nation is liable to less fallacy than of that of the 
other two, as it makes little use of paper credit, 
which may be artificially increased, and even sup 
ported, a long time beyond its natural bounds. 

It is supposed that the gross sum extracted from 
the people by the collectors of the revenue may be 
one third more than that which goes into the treas 
ury; but as their exactions are excessive, and fall 
too heavy on particular orders, who are by that 
means reduced to indigence and misery, it is to be in 
ferred, that, with moderate and reasonable expenses 
of collection, the present revenue is as great as the 
kingdom can well afford, from its present quantity 
of wealth. 

The circulating cash of Great Britain, in paper and 
specie, may be stated at about forty millions of 
pounds sterling. Mr. Hume supposes it to have 
been, at the time he wrote his Essay on the Balance 
of Trade, about thirty millions. Other writers have 
carried it to fifty, and it is probably in a medium 
that we shall find the truth. I do not include in this, 
the whole amount of bank-notes, exchequer bills, 
India bonds, etc., etc. ; but only such part as is really 
employed in common circulation, and performs the 
offices of current cash. In '75, by Dr. Price's state 
ment, the net revenue of Great Britain was ten mil 
lions — that is, about one fourth of its current cash, 
as in France. 

National Bank 347 

I have never met with any calculation that might 
be depended upon, of the current cash of the Seven 
Provinces. Almost the whole of their coin, as well 
as large quantities of plate and bullion, are shut up 
in the Bank of Amsterdam. The real wealth of the 
bank is believed to be about fifteen millions sterling; 
though, upon the strength of this fund, it has a 
credit almost unlimited, that answers all the pur 
poses of cash in trade. As the Dutch, by their prud 
ent maxims, have commonly the rate of exchange 
throughout Europe in their favor, and a considerable 
balance of trade, the use of paper credit (which, in 
part, also depends upon the particular nature of 
their banks) has not the same tendency with them, 
as in England, to banish the precious metals. We 
may therefore suppose these to be here, as in France, 
the true sign of the wealth of the nation. If to the 
fifteen millions in bank, we add two millions of specie 
for the retail circulation and various transactions of 
business, we shall, I imagine, have nearly the true 
stock of wealth of the United Provinces. Their 
revenues amount to something more than four mil 
lions, and bear the same proportion to the stock 
from which they are drawn, as those of France and 
England. I confess, however, the data, in their 
case, are not sufficiently ascertained to permit us to 
rely equally on the result. From these three ex 
amples we may venture to deduce this general rule, 
—that the proportion of revenue which a nation is 
capable of affording, is about one fourth of its cir 
culating cash, so far as this is a just representative 
of its labor and commodities. 

34$ Alexander Hamilton 

This is only applicable to commercial countries, 
because, in those which are not so, the circulating 
cash is not an adequate sign. A great part of 
domestic commerce is carried on by barter; and 
the state must receive a part of its dues in the labor 
and commodities themselves. The proportion, how 
ever, of the revenues of such a state to the aggregate 
of its labor and commodities, ought to be the same 
as in the case of trading nations to their circulating 
cash; with this difference, that the difficulty of 
collection and transportation, the waste and em 
bezzlement inseparable from this mode of revenue, 
would make the real advantage and ultimate gain 
to the state infinitely less than when the public dues 
are paid in cash. 

When I say that one fourth part of its stock of 
wealth is the revenue which a nation is capable of 
affording to the government, I must be understood 
in a qualified, not in an absolute, sense. It would 
be presumptuous to fix a precise boundary to the in 
genuity of financiers, or to the patience of the people ; 
but this we may safely say, that taxation is already 
carried, in the nations we have been speaking of, 
to an extent which does not admit of a very con 
siderable increase without a proportionable increase 
of industry. This suffices for a standard to us; 
and we may proceed to the application. 

From a comparison of the several estimates I have 
seen, of the quantity of current cash in this country 
previous to the war (specie and paper), I have set 
tled my opinion of the amount at thirty millions of 
dollars, of which about eight might have been in 

National Bank 349 

specie: one fourth of this, by analogy, was at that 
time the proper revenue of these States; that is, 
seven and a half millions of dollars. 

As taxation, however, has, by slow gradations, 
been carried to an extreme in those countries 
which I have chosen as examples, that would not 
be, but in a course of time, practicable in this, where 
the people have been so little accustomed to taxes, 
it may be doubted whether it would be possible to 
raise the same proportion of revenue here. The ob 
ject of the war, I imagine, would supply the want 
of habit, and reconcile the minds of the people to 
paying to the utmost of their abilities, provided the 
taxes were judiciously imposed, and the revenues 
wisely administered. Besides this, there is a cir 
cumstance in our favor, which puts it in the power 
of government to raise an equal proportion of re 
venue without burthening the lower classes of the 
people in the same degree as in Europe. This cir 
cumstance is the much greater equality of fortunes, 
by which means men, in this country, may be made 
to contribute to the public exigencies in a much 
juster proportion to their property; and this is in 
fact the case. In France the rich have gained so 
entire an ascendant, that there is a constant sacri 
fice of the ease and happiness of the people to their 
avarice and luxury: their burthens are in no pro 
portion to those of the middle order, and still less 
to those of the poor. In England and Holland the 
case, though not altogether, is in a great measure 
the same. There are also men of very large moneyed 
capitals, which were either formerly exempt from 

35° Alexander Hamilton 

taxes by being in the public funds; or, having no 
visible representative for taxation to operate upon, 
enjoy virtually the same advantages. But if, at the 
commencement of the war, the ability of these 
States for revenue may be rated at seven and a half 
millions of dollars, when the amount of its circulating 
cash was thirty millions, now that it is reduced more 
than one half in real value, to what revenue are they 
to be supposed equal at this time? I should judge 
about one fifth less, and not more. 

The diminution of our circulating cash is prin 
cipally artificial. It is true, our foreign commerce 
has declined by the war, but our domestic commerce 
has increased. I know of no good reason to be 
lieve, that the quantity of labor and commodities 
have been materially diminished. Our exports have 
lessened, but our internal consumption has aug 
mented. The men employed in the army, and in 
the departments connected with it, consume and 
waste three times as much as the same number of 
men in civil life. A number of husbandmen have 
been taken from their ploughs into military service; 
but the progress of our natural population has, in 
part, supplied their place; and the demands of the 
war have increased individual industry. The great 
influx of money at first operated upon the avarice 
of the people, and, for a long time, served also as 
a stimulus to industry, which taxation has since 
kept up on the principle of necessity. Notwith 
standing the demands and competitions of two 
armies for supplies, we see that corn, which is the 
staple of these Middle States, is cheaper than for 

National Bank 35 l 

some years before the war; a strong argument of 
plenty. 

We may infer from all this, that we stand in need 
now of nearly the same quantity of medium for our 
circulation as before the war. The depreciation of 
the money below the standard is to be attributed to 
a want of confidence rather than to a decay of re 
sources. We find the people, in some of the States, 
distressed to pay their taxes for want of money, 
with ample means otherwise; which is a proof, that 
our current cash is not a competent representative 
of the labor and commodities of the country. An 
other proof of the same nature is, that particular 
States which have found no small difficulty in col 
lecting their pecuniary taxes, have been successful 
in raising contributions to a large amount in kind. 

This country never having been a country of man 
ufactures, the productions of the soil were, as they 
still are, the principal source of revenue. The in 
habitants have abridged their wants of foreign ar 
ticles, from the scarcity of them, and have, in part, 
supplied their place by home manufactures, which, 
being chiefly conducted by the women, take nothing 
from the labor appropriated to agriculture, while it 
enables the farmer to spare a larger portion of his in 
come to the public. 

Whatever diminution our means of revenue may 
have suffered, must be accounted for on the decay 
of foreign trade, and on the loss of territory. The 
imposts on trade in Great Britain amounted to about 
a fourth of its total revenue. The proportion must 
be less in America. But suppose it to be the same; 

35 2 Alexander Hamilton 

suppose our external commerce to be reduced one 
half, which I believe is an ample allowance, then 
one eighth should be deducted from our revenue on 
this account ; which would bring it down to six mil 
lions five hundred and sixty- two thousand five hun 
dred dollars. Allow for the loss of Georgia and 
South Carolina one eighth of this sum; this would 
reduce the income of the remaining States to five 
millions seven hundred and forty-two thousand one 
hundred and eighty-eight and four eighths dollars. 
But as the allowance in both cases is large, the 
diminution I have already supposed, of one fifth of 
the whole, appears to be nearest the truth; which 
leaves these States with a net revenue of six millions 
of dollars. 

We will now examine how far this rule agrees with 
experience, and with what has already been effected 
in these States. Massachusetts may serve as a cri 
terion. This is one of the States where taxation 
has been carried furthest. Taxes were so heavy last 
year, that I am informed there were real marks 
of distress among some classes of the people. The 
Legislature, in their late address, tell us that they 
amounted to six hundred thousand pounds lawful; 
and they appear to have thought the pressure of 
them too great, by reducing them at a time when 
they are obliged to have recourse to a large loan to 
answer the exigencies of the current year. 

The taxes they specify, which seem to belong to 
those of the present year, with the addition of the 
bounties for raising men, and the beef supply, may 
be estimated at near five hundred thousand pounds. 

National Bank 353 

This State is in a different situation from any 
other. Its position has made it impossible for the 
enemy to intercept its trade; while that of all the 
others has been greatly injured or totally obstructed. 
It has become, in consequence, the mart of the 
States northward of Pennsylvania; and its com 
merce has enlarged itself much beyond its former 
limits. A great part of the money expended for the 
support of the war has been disbursed there. Con 
gress, in their requisitions for money, have rated the 
quota of Massachusetts at z of the whole ; but I 
believe its ability, at this time, is in the proportion 
of one fifth. I found this estimation on an impartial 
comparison of the circumstances of the several 
States. 

Admitting the proportion to be just, and taking 
the taxes of the present year as a standard, the 
gross amount of our collective revenues would be 
two millions five hundred thousand pounds lawful; 
or eight millions three hundred and thirty-three 
thousand three hundred and thirty-three and one 
third dollars. The expense of collection, in England, 
is about one ninth of the gross amount ; and consider 
ing that our revenue is to be raised in eleven different 
governments, each having a complete set of collectors 
of its own, the expense of collection, with us, will in 
all probability be not much less than it is in England. 
Supposing it to be the same, and that the taxes were 
to prove as productive as their normal amount, 

1 This blank is in the original, and as the quota of Massachusetts 
seems to have varied from a seventh to a ninth it cannot be filled pre 
cisely. See Journals of Continental Congress. 

VOL. III. — 23 

354 Alexander Hamilton 

our net revenue would then be seven millions four 
hundred and seven thousand four hundred and eight 
and one half dollars; which considerably exceeds 
what it ought to be by my first calculation. 

But there are considerations which may induce 
us to make large deductions from this sum. When 
the Legislature tells us, that the taxes of last year 
amounted to six hundred thousand pounds, it also 
tells us that there was a part of them still to be 
levied; which, among other things, had occasioned 
them to postpone the next tax to a future session. 
Whatever is due on the last year may be considered, 
in effect, as an anticipation on the taxes of the 
present; for it takes off so much from the ability of 
the people to pay them. The chances are, that the 
additional impositions projected for the current 
year will not be raised in their full extent. Taxes 
are seldom or never so productive as their estimated 
value; and in a case like this, must be expected to 
be more than commonly deficient. 

It is to be observed, also, that the last year was a 
year of peculiar exertion. There was a general ex 
pectation of some attempt, in conjunction with our 
allies, decisive of the war. This made the people 
strain their efforts beyond their natural abilities; 
and yet they did not comply with the demands of 
the Legislature. 

The money for the bounties this year, which I have 
calculated at sixty thousand pounds,1 may, in like 

1 It is to be feared, too, that this sum is rated too high. Hitherto 
we have not four hundred men from that State, nor very promising 
accounts of those which may be expected. 

National Bank 355 

manner, be regarded as an extraordinary and special 
contribution, which the people may be willing to 
submit to, over and above what they could probably 
afford to pay, to get rid of the insupportable incon 
venience of temporary enlistments. 

Reasonable deductions on these accounts being 
made, will bring the two calculations to a pretty 
exact agreement, and make them confirm each other. 
But were not this the case, I should be inclined, in 
preference, to trust the first, as being founded on a 
basis better known and better ascertained by exper 
ience. I believe, however, we may safely conclude, 
from both, that between six and seven millions of 
dollars is the proper revenue of these States, after 
the dismemberment of South Carolina and Georgia. 

Having formed an estimate of our ability for 
revenue, the next thing to be ascertained is the 
annual expense of our civil and military establish 
ments. With tolerable economy, I should suppose 
two millions and a half of dollars would amply 
suffice for the first, including the particular admin 
istration of each State. For the second, judiciously 
managed, eight millions of dollars would be ade 
quate, calculating for an army of twenty thousand 
men, which are as many as we shall stand in need 
of, or be able ' to raise. Eleven millions of dollars 

1 The proportion of the European armies, in general, to the national 
population, is calculated at one to a hundred. By this rule, suppos 
ing our population to be two and a half millions, our armies ought to 
consist of twenty-five thousand men ; but the proportion will naturally 
be less in this country. Our population is more diffused: there is a 
greater facility of procuring subsistence, fewer poor and consequently 
fewer of that class of men whose habits, tempers, and circumstances 
lead them to embrace the military life, than in any other country in 

356 Alexander Hamilton 

will be then the amount of the annual expenses of 
these States. I speak on a supposition that a sys 
tem were embraced, well adapted to rescuing our 
affairs from the chaos in which they are now in 
volved; and which, while it continues, must baffle 
all calculation. 

The difference between our revenues and ex 
penses, on the preceding scale, will be from four to 
four and a half millions of dollars; which deficiency 
must of course be supplied by credit, foreign or 
domestic, or both. 

With regard to credit abroad, I think we have 
little chance of obtaining a sufficiency, nearly to 
answer our purpose. France, by all the reforms 
she can make in her interior economy, by all the 
means she can procure in loans and lotteries, in 

the world. Hence it is, I say, twenty thousand men are as many as 
we shall be able to raise. Experience justifies this opinion. In the 
first paroxysms of enthusiasm our armies were larger. I believe, at 
particular periods, we have had more than thirty thousand men in the 
field: but our force has every year diminished, and has been for two 
years past below the standard I have assigned. Immense efforts have 
been made to procure men, but they have not been able to produce 
more. This shows that our military system is still susceptible of great 
reforms in favor of economy; but we dare not make them, because we 
cannot pay the army. I also said, twenty thousand men would be as 
many as we should stand in need of. The enemy have now less than 
this number within the States; and cannot, in the future progress of 
the war, have more. 

An equal force, with the occasional aid of the militia, will confine 
them within one or two capital points; and this will be their defeat. 
But we have a further resource in the troops of our allies. We must 
not dream of decisive enterprises, unless our allies will assist us with 
twelve or fifteen thousand land troops, and an undisputed maritime 
superiority. Then, with the aid of the militia, drawn out tor a few 
months, we may undertake and succeed. Our true policy, in the 
meantime, is, to endeavor to form a solid compact force, proportioned 
to our necessities. 

National Bank 357 

addition to her revenue, can do little more than 
satisfy her own wants. The death of the Empress 
Queen, and the notorious hostility of the Emperor, 
will add to the number of these. She will, in all 
probability, be obliged to pay greater attention to 
her army, which has been neglected, for several 
years past, to apply all the resources of the kingdom 
to the improvement of the navy. Though Russia 
and Prussia, by the last advices, seemed disposed 
to control the ill-humor of the Emperor, France will 
hardly think it prudent to leave herself in a defence 
less condition, relying on the precarious friendship 
and momentary interests of other powers. The in 
crease of her army will necessarily increase her ex 
penses, as she cannot, in the present state of things, 
retrench any thing from the navy; and of course 
she will have less money to spare to allies. It has 
been observed, that France has hitherto imposed 
none of the additional taxes usual in time of war; 
by doing which, it is imagined she would have it in 
her power, not only to supply her own wants better, 
but to contribute largely to ours. To this it has 
been answered, with great appearance of reason, 
that the credit of the financier very much depends 
on his having such a resource in reserve, which, 
being considered as a means he may command, when 
necessary, to fulfil his engagements, disposes moneyed 
men to lend to him with the greater freedom and con 
fidence. The breaking in xipon that resource, there 
fore (it is said), would injure credit, and obstruct 
loans in a degree that could not be compensated by 
the direct value of the revenue it would furnish. 

Alexander Hamilton 

Upon the whole, however, from a variety of sift- 
ings and inquiries, I should be mistaken if France 
did not lend this country eight or ten millions of 
livres annually, during the war ; provided its finances 
were once put upon a reasonable footing: but this 
is not above a third of our wants. 

I find no reason to flatter ourselves that we have 
much to expect either from the ability or inclina 
tion of Spain. Her government is far from being 
so rich as is vulgarly imagined. The mines of South 
America, of late years, have been less liberal of 
their profits; and, for fear of accidents, but a small 
part of their product, since the war, has been im 
ported into Europe. The extreme indolence of the 
Spaniards, and their neglect of agriculture, manu 
factures, and trade, make them tributary to their 
more industrious neighbors, who drain them of their 
precious metals as fast as they arrive. 

But if they were heartily disposed to do it, they 
might still afford us some assistance. Their con- 
dtict hitherto has manifested no such disposition; 
it has been as cold and reserved as it could well be. 
The bills drawn upon them have not been rejected, 
but they have not been paid. Their permitting the 
residence of a British emissary among them, and 
the countenance they give him, unprecedented in a 
state of war, afford just room for a distrust of their 
intentions, though it may be nothing more than a 
stroke of policy, to play him off against our nego 
tiators, and make us bid higher for their friendship. 
Their method of prosecuting the war is passive to a 
degree that can scarcely be resolved even into Span- 

I 

National Bank 359 

ish supineness, but seems to have a more corrupt 
original. A bigoted prince, governed by a greedy 
confessor, is a character on which little dependence 
can be placed. 

'T is not on Spain, then, that we are to build our 
hopes of any considerable succors in money. 

The Dutch Government has of long standing 
mortgaged all its revenues. Taxation has been 
carried to a length that admits of little extension. 
'T is from its credit with its own citizens that it 
must derive the means of making war. It has 
every thing to do. Its fleet is to be in a manner 
created anew and its land forces to be recruited, 
having been for some time past suffered to decline 
very much. It will, therefore, stand in need of all 
its credit for its own uses. Of course, we have 
nothing to expect from the government of that 
country. 

The individuals will not have confidence enough 
in our public councils to embark any considerable 
part of their fortunes with us on the ordinary prin 
ciples of a loan. Stronger inducements, the pro 
spect of commercial advantages, securities differing 
from the mere faith of the United States, must be 
held out to tempt them to engage far with us. The 
plan I am going to propose endeavors to conciliate 
these objects. 

As to internal loans, on which, after all, we must 
chiefly depend, there are two things that operate 
against them to any large amount: the want of a 
sufficient number of men with sufficient moneyed 
capitals to lend the sums required, and the want of 

360 Alexander Hamilton 

confidence in those who are able to lend to make 
them willing to part with their money. It may be 
added that they can employ it to greater advantage 
in traffic than by merely lending it on interest. 

To surmount these obstacles, and give individuals 
ability and inclination to lend in any proportion to 
the wants of government, a plan must be devised 
which, by incorporating their means together and 
uniting them with those of the public, will, on the 
foundation of that incorporation and union, erect a 
mass of credit that will supply the defect of moneyed 
capital, and answer all the purposes of cash; a plan 
which will offer adventurers immediate advantages, 
analogous to those they receive by employing their 
money in trade, and eventually greater advantages ; 
a plan which will give them the greatest security 
the nature of the case will admit for what they lend ; 
and which will not only advance their own interest 
and secure the independence of their country, but, 
in its progress, have the most beneficial influence 
upon its future commerce, and be a source of na 
tional strength and wealth. 

I mean the institution of a NATIONAL BANK. 
This I regard, in some shape or other, as an ex 
pedient essential to our safety and success; unless, 
by a happy turn of European affairs, the war should 
speedily terminate in a manner upon which it would 
be unwise to reckon. There is no other that can 
give to government that extensive and systematic 
credit which the defect of our revenues makes in 
dispensably necessary to its operations. 

The longer it is delayed the more difficult it be- 

National Bank 361 

comes. Our affairs grow every day more relaxed 
and more involved; public credit hastens to a more 
irretrievable catastrophe; the means for executing 
the plan are exhausted in partial and temporary 
efforts. The loan now making in Massachusetts 
would have gone a great way in establishing the 
funds on which the bank must stand. 

I am aware of all the objections that have been 
made to public banks ; and that they are not with 
out enlightened and respectable opponents. But 
all that has been said against them only tends to 
prove that, like all other good things, they are sub 
ject to abuse, and, when abused, become pernicious. 
The precious metals, by similar arguments, may 
be proven to be injurious. It is certain that the 
mines of South America have had great influence in 
banishing industry from Spain, and sinking it in real 
wealth and importance. Great power, commerce, and 
riches, or, in other words, great national prosperity, 
may, in like manner, be denominated evils ; for they 
lead to insolence, an inordinate ambition, a vicious 
luxury, licentiousness of morals, and all those vices 
which corrupt government, enslave the people, and 
precipitate the ruin of a nation. But no wise states 
man will reject the good from an apprehension of 
the ill. The truth is, in human affairs there is no 
good, pure and unmixed; every advantage has two 
sides ; and wisdom consists in availing themselves of 
the good, and guarding as much as possible against 
the bad. 

The tendency of a national bank is to increase 
public and private credit. The former gives power 

362 Alexander Hamilton 

to the state, for the protection of its rights and in 
terests: and the latter facilitates and extends the 
operations of commerce among individuals. In 
dustry is increased, commodities are multiplied, 
agriculture and manufactures flourish: and herein 
consists the true wealth and prosperity of a state. 

Most commercial nations have found it necessary 
to institute banks ; and they have proved to be the 
happiest engines that ever were invented for ad 
vancing trade. Venice, Genoa, Hamburg, Holland, 
and England are examples of their utility. They 
owe their riches, commerce, and the figure they have 
made at different periods, in a great degree to this 
source. Great Britain is indebted for the immense 
efforts she has been able to make, in so many illus 
trious and successful wars, essentially to that vast 
fabric of credit raised on this foundation. 'T is by 
this alone she now menaces our independence. 

She has, indeed, abused the advantage, and now 
stands on a precipice. Her example should both 
persuade and warn us. 'T is in republics where 
banks are most easily established and supported, 
and where they are least liable to abuse. Our 
situation will not expose us to frequent wars; and 
the public will have no temptation to overstrain its 
credit. 

In my opinion, we ought not to hesitate, because 
we have no other resource. The long and expensive 
wars of King William had drained England of its 
specie; its commerce began to droop for want of a 
proper medium: its taxes were unproductive, and 
its revenues declined. The administration wisely 

National Bank 363 

had recourse to the institution of a bank; and it 
relieved the national difficulties. We are in the 
same, and still greater, want of a sufficient medium. 
We have little specie ; the paper we have is of small 
value, and rapidly descending to less: we are im 
mersed in a war for our existence as a nation, for our 
liberty and happiness as a people: we have no 
revenues and no credit. A bank, if practicable, is 
the only thing that can give us either the one or the 
other. 

Besides these great and cardinal motives to such 
an institution, and the advantages we should enjoy 
from it, in common with other nations, our situa 
tion, relatively to Europe and to the West Indies, 
would give us some peculiar advantages. 

Nothing is more common than for men to pass 
from the abuse of a good thing, to the disuse of it. 
Some persons, disgusted by the depreciation of 
the money, are chimerical enough to imagine it 
would be beneficial to abolish all paper credit, anni 
hilate the whole of what is now in circulation, and 
depend altogether upon our specie, both for com 
merce and finance. This scheme is altogether 
visionary, and in the attempt would be fatal. We 
have not a competent stock of specie in this country, 
either to answer the purposes of circulation in trade, 
or to serve as a basis for revenue. The whole 
amount of what we have, I am persuaded, does not 
exceed six millions of dollars, one fifth of the cir 
culating medium before the war. To suppose this 
would be sufficient for the operations of commerce, 
would be to suppose that our domestic and foreign 

364 Alexander Hamilton 

commerce were both reduced four fifths : a suppos 
ition that carries absurdity on the face of it. It 
follows that if our paper money were destroyed, a 
great part of the transactions of traffic must be 
carried on by barter; a mode inconvenient, partial, 
confined, destructive both of commerce and in 
dustry. With the addition of the paper we now 
have, this evil exists in too great a degree. 

With respect to revenue, could the whole of our 
specie be drawn into the public treasury annually, 
we have seen that it would be little more than one 
half of our annual expense. But this would be 
impracticable; it has never been effected in any 
country. Where the numerary of a country is a 
sufficient representative, there is only a certain pro 
portion of it that can be drawn out of daily circula 
tion; because, without the necessary quantity of 
cash, a stagnation of business would ensue. How 
small, then, would be the proportion of the six mill 
ions (in itself so unequal a representative) which 
the public would be able to extract in revenue. It 
must either have little or no revenue, or it must re 
ceive its dues in kind; on the inefficacy and incon 
veniences of which mode, I have already remarked. 
The necessity for it, in part, unhappily now has 
place, for the cause assigned, a deficiency of current 
cash: but were we to establish it as our principal 
dependence, it would be impossible to contrive a 
mode less productive to the public, more contrary 
to the habits and inclinations of the people, or more 
baneful to industry. 

But waiving the objections on this head, there 

National Bank 365 

would still remain a balance of four millions of dol 
lars more than these States can furnish in revenue, 
which must be provided for the yearly expense of 
the war. How is this to be procured without a 
paper credit, to supply the deficiency of specie, and 
enable the moneyed men to lend? This question, I 
apprehend, will be of no easy solution. 

In the present system of things, the health of a 
State, particularly a commercial one, depends on a 
due quantity and regular circulation of cash, as 
much as the health of an animal body depends upon 
the due quantity and regular circulation of the blood. 
There are indisputable indications that we have not 
a sufficient medium; and what we have is in con 
tinual fluctuation. The only cure to our public dis 
orders, is to fix the value of the currency we now 
have, and increase it to a proper standard, in a 
species that will have the requisite stability. 

The error of those who would explode paper 
money altogether, originates in not making proper 
distinctions. Our paper was, in its nature, liable 
to depreciation, because it had no funds for its sup 
port, and was not upheld by private credit. The 
emissions under the resolution of March, '80, have 
partly the former advantage, but are destitute of 
the latter, which is equally essential. No paper 
credit can be substantial, or durable, which has no 
funds, and which does not unite, immediately, the 
interest and influence of the moneyed men, in its 
establishment and preservation. A credit begun 
on this basis, will, in process of time, greatly exceed 
its funds: but this requires time and a well-settled 

366 Alexander Hamilton 

opinion in its favor. 'T is in a national bank, alone, 
that we can find the ingredients to constitute a 
wholesome, solid, and beneficial credit. 

I am aware that, in the present temper of men's 
minds, it will be no easy task to inspire a relish for 
a project of this kind: but much will depend on the 
address and personal credit of the proposer. In 
your hands I should not despair: and I should have 
the greater hopes for what I am informed appeared 
to be the disposition, at the promulgation of the 
plan for a loan in Massachusetts. The men of pro 
perty in America are enlightened about their own 
interest, and would easily be brought to see the ad 
vantages of a good plan. They ought not to be 
discouraged at what has happened heretofore, when 
they behold the administration of our finances put 
into a better channel. The violations of public en 
gagements, hitherto, have proceeded more from a 
necessity produced by ignorance and mismanage 
ment, than from levity or a disregard to the obliga 
tions of good faith. 

Should the success, in the first instance, not be as 
complete as the extent of the plan requires, this 
should not hinder its being undertaken. It is of 
the nature of a bank, wisely instituted, and wisely 
administered, to extend itself, and, from small be 
ginnings, grow to a magnitude that could not have 
been foreseen. 

The plan I propose requires a stock of three mil 
lions of pounds, lawful money; but if one half the 
sum could be obtained, I should entertain no doubt 
of its full success. It now remains to submit my 

National Bank 367 

plan, which I rather offer as an outline, than as a 
finished plan. It contains, however, the general 
principles. To each article I shall affix an explana 
tory remark. 

ART. I. A bank to be erected with a stock of three 
millions of pounds, lawful money, at the rate of six 
shillings to a dollar, divided into thirty thousand 
shares. This stock to be exempted from all public 
taxes and impositions whatsoever. 

REMARK i. By the second Article, a part of the stock 
is to be in landed security; by this, the whole is to be 
exempted from taxes. Here will be a considerable saving 
to the proprietor, which is to be estimated among the 
clear profits of the bank. This will indeed be a small 
reduction of the public revenue; but the loss will be of 
little consequence, compared with the advantages to be 
derived from the bank. 

ART. II. A subscription to be opened for the 
amount of the stock. A subscriber of from one 
share to five, to advance -the whole in specie. A 
subscriber of six shares to fifteen, to advance one 
half in specie, the other half in good landed security. 
A subscriber of sixteen shares, and upwards, to ad 
vance two sixths in specie, one sixth in bills of secur 
ities on good European funds, and three sixths in 
good landed security. In either case of specie, plate 
or bullion, at a given value, proportioned to its 
quality, may be substituted; and in either case of 
landed security, specie, good bills, or securities on 
European funds, to be admissible in their stead.1 

1 The possibility of making up so large a proportion of specie will 
depend on foreign assistance. It could hardly be hoped to effect it 

368 Alexander Hamilton 

REMARK 2. By admitting landed security as a part of 
the bank stock, while we establish solid funds for the 
money emitted, we at the same time supply the defect of 
specie, and we give a strong inducement to moneyed men 
to advance their money; because, not only the money 
actually deposited is to be employed for their benefit, 
but, on the credit of their landed security, by the seventh 
Article, may be raised an equal amount in cash, to be 
also employed for their benefit; by which artifice they 
have the use of their land (exempted, too, from taxes), 
and the use of the value of it in a representative cash. 
In this consists a capital advantage of the bank to the 
proprietors. A, for instance, advances six hundred pounds 
in specie, and as much more in landed security. By the 
establishment he may draw bank-notes for the whole of 
his stock, that is, for twelve hundred pounds, when he 
only advances half the sum in money. These bank-notes 
operating as cash, his land (continuing as we observed 
above, in his own use, with the privilege besides of an 
exemption from taxes) is converted into cash; which he 
may employ in loans, in profitable contracts, in beneficial 
purchases, in discounting bills of exchange, and in the 
other methods permitted in the subsequent Articles. 
Besides all this, when the bank-notes have once acquired 
a fixed credit, he is not obliged to keep his six hundred 
pounds, deposited in specie, idle; he may lend or other 
wise improve, a part of that also. These advantages will 
not exist in their full extent at first, but they will soon 
succeed each other. 

within ourselves, if, as I suppose, there are not more than six millions 
of dollars in these States. It is true, plate is admitted; but it is 
uncertain how far this may prove a resource. It were to be wished 
the proportion of specie might be as large as possible; but, perhaps, 
for fear of a failure, it may be advisable to alter the above propor 
tions, so as to have, upon the whole, about one third in specie, and 
two thirds in European funds and landed security. 

National Bank 369 

ART. III. The bank to be erected into a legal cor 
poration; to have all the powers and immunities 
requisite to its security, to the recovery of its debts, 
and to the disposal of its property. 

REMARK 3. This Article needs no illustration. 

ART. IV. The stock of the bank not to be liable 
to any attachment or seizure whatsoever; but, on 
refusal of payment, the holders of bank-notes, or 
bonds, may enter suit against any member, or mem 
bers, of the corporation; and, as far as their re 
spective shares in the bank extend, recover the debt, 
with cost and damages, out of their private property. 

REMARK 4. The first part of this regulation is necessary 
to engage foreigners to trust their property in the bank; 
the latter part to give an idea of security to the holders 
of bank-notes. 

ART. V. The United States, or any particular 
States, or foreigners, may become subscribers to the 
bank, and participate in its profits, for any sums not 
exceeding the whole half the stock. 

REMARK 5. This will link the interests of the public 
more intimately with the bank, and be an easy method 
of acquiring revenue. It will also facilitate the making 
up its stock by the loans which Congress may obtain 
abroad ; without which it would be more difficult to raise 
so large a sum. It is essential the stock should be large, 
because, in proportion to it, will be the credit of the bank, 
and of course its ability to lend and enlarge its paper 
emissions. The admission of foreigners will also assist 
the completing the stock; and it is probable many may 

VOL. 111. — 24. 

37° Alexander Hamilton 

be induced to enter into the plan, especially after it has 
made some progress among ourselves, and obtained a 
degree of consistency. 

The sum is limited to one half the stock, because it is 
of primary importance that the moneyed men among 
ourselves should be deeply interested in the plan. 

ART. VI. The United States, collectively and 
particularly, to become responsible for all the trans 
actions of the bank, conjointly with the private 
proprietors. 

REMARK 6. This mode of pledging the public faith 
makes it as difficult to be infringed as could possibly be 
devised. In our situation it is expedient to offer every 
appearance of security. Foreigners are more firmly per 
suaded of the establishment of our independence than of 
the continuance of our union; and will, therefore, have 
more confidence in the States bound separately than col 
lectively. Individuals among ourselves will be influ 
enced by similar considerations. 

ART. VII. The bank to issue notes payable at 
sight in pounds, shillings, and pence, lawful; all of 
twenty shillings, and under, to bear no interest ; all 
above, to bear an interest not exceeding four per 
cent. The notes to be of so many denominations as 
may be judged convenient for circulation, and of 
two kinds; one payable only in America, the other 
payable either in America or in any part of Europe 
where the bank may have funds. The aggregate of 
these notes never to exceed the bank stock. 

REMARK 7. The reason of having them payable at 
sight is to inspire the greater confidence and give them a 

National Bank 37 1 

readier currency; nor do I apprehend there would be 
any danger from it. In the beginning some may be car 
ried to the bank for payment, but finding they are punc 
tually discharged, the applications will cease. The notes 
are payable in pounds, shillings, and pence, rather than 
in dollars, to produce an illusion in the minds of the people 
favorable to the new paper; or rather to prevent their 
transferring to that their prejudices against the old. 
Paper credit depends much on opinion, and opinion is 
often guided by outside appearances. A circumstance 
trivial as this may seem, might have no small influence 
on the popular imagination. And if twenty shillings, and 
under, are without interest, because such small sums will 
be diffused in the lesser transactions of daily circulation, 
there will be less probability of their being carried to the 
bank for payment. 

The interest on the larger notes is calculated to give 
them a preference to specie, and prevent a run upon the 
bank. The notes, however, must be introduced by de 
grees, so as not to inundate the public at once. Those 
bearing no interest ought not to be multiplied too much 
at first ; but as the interest is an abridgment of the profits 
of the bank, after the notes have gained an unequivocal 
credit, it will be advantageous to issue a large proportion 
of the smaller ones. At first, the interest had best be at 
four per cent., to operate the more effectually as a motive ; 
afterward, on the new notes, it may be gradually dimin 
ished ; but it will always be expedient to let them bear 
an interest not less than two per cent. 

The making some of the notes payable in Europe as 
well as in America, is necessary to enable the bank to 
avail itself of its funds there; it will also serve to raise 
the demand for bank-notes, by rendering them useful in 
foreign commerce, the promoting which is a further 
inducement. 

372 Alexander Hamilton 

The limiting the aggregate of the notes to the amount 
of the stock, is necessary to obviate a suspicion of their 
being multiplied beyond the means of redemption. 

ART. VIII. The bank to lend money to the pub 
lic, or to individuals, at an interest not exceeding 
eight per cent. 

REMARK 8. In the beginning it will be for the advant 
age of the bank to require high interest, because the 
money is in great demand, and the bank itself will want 
the principal part of its cash for the loans stipulated in 
Article XIII., and for performing the contracts author 
ized by Article XII. ; so that the profits will not, for 
some time, turn materially on the principle of loans, 
except that to the public. But when the contracts cease, 
the bank will find its advantage in lending, at a moderate 
interest, to secure a preference from borrowers, which 
will, at the same time, promote commerce; and by a 
kind of mutual reaction, the bank will assist commerce, 
and commerce will assist the bank. 

ART. IX. The bank to have liberty of borrowing, 
on the best terms it can, to the amount of one half 
of its stock. 

REMARK 9. This is a precaution against a sudden run. 
It may borrow in proportion to what it pays. It has 
another advantage : at particular conjunctures the bank 
may borrow at a low interest, and lend, at others, at a 
higher. 

ART. X. The bank to have liberty of purchasing 
estates by principal, or by annuities; the power of 
coining to the amount of half its stock, the quantity 

National Bank 373 

of alloy, etc., being determined by Congress; also 
the power of discounting bills of exchange. 

REMARK 10. This privilege of purchasing estates will 
be a very valuable one. By watching favorable oppor 
tunities, with so large a capital, vast property may be 
acquired in this way. There will be a fine opening at the 
conclusion of the war. Many persons disaffected to our 
independence, who have rendered themselves odious with 
out becoming obnoxious to the laws, will be disposed to 
sell their estates here, either for their whole value, or for 
annuities in Europe. The power of coining J is necessary, 
as plate, or bullion, is admitted instead of specie ; and it 
may be, on particular occasions, expedient to coin them; 
this will be a small resource to the bank. The power of 
discounting bills of exchange will be a considerable one. 
Its advantages will consist in purchasing, or taking up for 
the honor of the drawer, when the security is good, bills 
of exchange at so much per cent, discount. A large profit 
might be now made in this way on the bills drawn on 
France ; and hereafter, in times of peace, when commerce 
comes to flourish, this practice will promote the transac 
tions of the several States with each other, and with 
Europe, and will be very profitable to the bank. 

ART. XI. The bank to receive from individuals 
deposits of any sums of money, to be repaid when 
called for, or passed, by order, to the credit of others ; 
or deposits of plate, paying a certain annual rate for 
safe-keeping. Whatever is deposited in the bank, 
to be exempt from taxes. 

i It may, perhaps, not be impossible to make some profitable specu 
lations on the bullion which the Spaniards are afraid to transport 
from South America to Europe. 

374 Alexander Hamilton 

REMARK n. This is in imitation of the Bank of Am 
sterdam. If individuals once get into the practice of 
depositing their money in bank, it will give credit to the 
bank, and assist trade. In time, a premium may be re 
quired at repayment as in Holland. A small profit may 
be immediately gained on plate, as the States begin to 
tax this article; and many persons will dispense at this 
time with the use of their plate, if they can deposit it in a 
place of safety, and pay less for keeping it than the tax. 
Whatever serves to increase the apparent wealth of the 
bank, will enhance its credit! It may even be useful to 
let the owners of the plate have credit in bank for the 
value of the plate, estimated on a scale that would make 
it for the advantage of the bank to purchase. 

ART. XII. The bank to have a right to contract 
with the French Government for the supply of its 
fleets and armies in America, and to contract with 
Congress for the supply of their armies. 

REMARK 12. It will be of great importance to the suc 
cess of the subscriptions, that a previous assurance of 
these contracts should take place: the profits of them 
would be no trifling inducement to adventurers ; it would 
have the air of employing the money subscribed in trade. 
As soon, therefore, as the plan should be resolved upon, 
negotiations should be begun for the purpose. It is so 
clearly the interest of the French Government to enter 
into these contracts, that they must be blind not to do it, 
especially when it is proposed under the aspect of a 
method of re-establishing our finances. The present loss 
on their bills is enormous. The bank may engage to 
receive them at a moderate discount, and to supply on 
better terms than they now make. Their business is at 
this time trusted to a variety of hands, some of which are 

National Bank 375 

neither very skilful nor very honest : competitions, frauds, 
and additional expense, are the consequences. 

Congress could not hesitate on their part, as the 
amount of the contracts would be a part of the loan re 
quired in Article XIII. 

ART. XIII. The bank to lend Congress one mil 
lion two hundred thousand pounds, lawful, at eight 
per cent, interest; for the payment of which, with 
its interest, a certain unalienable fund of one hund 
red and ten thousand four hundred pounds per 
annum, to be established for twenty years. The 
States, generally and severally, to pledge them 
selves for this sum, and for the due appropriation of 
the fund. Congress to have a right, at any inter 
mediate period, to pay off the debt, with the in 
terest to the time of payment. The same rule to 
govern in all future loans. 

REMARK 13. This loan will enable Congress to get 
through the expenses of the year. There may be a small 
deficiency, but this will be easily supplied. The credit 
of the bank once established, it may increase its stock, 
and lend an equal sum every year during the war. This 
loan may be advanced, partly in a contract for provisions, 
clothing, etc., and partly in cash, at periodical payments, 
to avoid a too quick multiplication of bank-notes. 

ART. XIV. The bank to become responsible for 
the redemption of all the paper now emitted; the 
old, at forty for one in thirty years, the new at par, 
with gold and silver, according to the terms pro 
mised by Congress in their resolution of March, '80. 
One third of the first to be redeemed at the end of 

376 Alexander Hamilton 

every ten years ; and the whole of the last to be re 
deemed at the expiration of the six years specified 
by Congress, with the interest of five per cent. The 
United States, in compensation for this responsibility, 
to establish certain funds for an annuity, payable to 
the bank, equal to the discharge of the whole amount 
of the paper currency in thirty years, with an interest 
of two per cent, per annum. 

REMARK 14. It is of the greatest importance that the 
old currency should be fixed at a certain value, or there 
will be danger of its infecting the future paper ; besides, 
we want to raise it to a point that will make it approach 
nearer to an adequate medium. I have chosen the re 
solution of March, '80, as a standard. We ought not, on 
any account, to raise the value of the old paper higher 
than forty to one, for this will give it about the degree 
of value that is most salutary; at the same time that it 
will avoid a second breach of faith, which would cause 
a violent death to all future credit. A stable currency 
is an idea fundamental to all practicable schemes of fi 
nance. It is the duty and interest of the public to give 
stability to that which now exists ; and it will be the 
interest of the bank, which alone can effect it, to co 
operate. I have not mentioned the amount of the annuity 
to be paid by Congress, because I have not materials to 
judge what quantity of paper money now exists; since 
it will be necessary to take all the State emissions into 
the calculation. I suppose (including State emissions) 
there may be about four hundred millions of dollars of 
the old standard, and about four millions of the new.1 
This will give us, in specie- value, about fourteen mil- 

1 It is impossible too soon to make some arrangement that will 
enable Congress to put a stop to the further emission. 

National Bank 377 

lions of dollars. This is what the bank is to become 
answerable for, and what the public is to pay, by an 
annuity of thirty years, with two per cent, interest. 
This annuity would amount to six hundred and eleven 
thousand three hundred and thirty-three and one third 
dollars, for which funds are to be provided. 

By a rough calculation, I find that the bank would 
gain, in the thirty years, about three millions of dollars, 
on the simple footing of interest; and that it will, at 
different periods, have more public money in its posesssion 
than it will be in advance at others; so that, upon the 
whole, the sum it will gain in interest will be for the loan 
of its credit to the public, not of any specific sum of cash. 
Besides, the interest of the bank may gain a very consid 
erable sum by the purchases it may make of the old paper 
at its current value, before the influence of this plan has 
time to bring it back to the point at which it is intended 
to be fixed.1 It is the obvious interest of the United 
States to concur in this plan, because, by paying three 
millions of dollars in interest to the bank, more than it 
would have to pay to the money-holders, agreeably to 
its present engagements, it would avoid a new breach 
of faith, fix its circulating medium increased in value 
more than one half, render the taxes more productive, 
and introduce order into its finances, without which our 
independence is lost. It will also have only about two 
thirds of the funds to establish for this plan that are 
required by the act of March, '80, to discharge the new 
bills ; it will, of course, reserve a large balance toward the 
current expenses, which is no insignificant consideration. 

Perhaps it may be imagined that the same funds 

1 There is another immense consideration. The proprietors of the 
bank will be the holders of a great part of this paper. They have it 
in their power to double the value of it by this plan, which is, in other 
words, to gain a hundred per cent. 

Alexander Hamilton 

established for the redemption of the money in the same 
time, without passing through the bank, would have an 
equal effect upon its credit, and then we should save the 
interest of two per cent. Experience proves the contrary. 
We find the new notes depreciating in the States which 
have provided good funds. The truth is, there is not 
confidence enough in any funds merely public. The re 
sponsibility of the bank would beget a much stronger 
persuasion of the paper being redeemed, and have incom 
parably more efficacy in raising and confirming its credit. 
Besides, the bank might immediately reduce the quantity 
by purchase, which the public could not do. 

It will be observed that of the six millions of dollars 
which constitute our annual revenue, I require nine hund 
red and seventy-nine thousand three hundred and thirty- 
three and one third dollars, in funds, to reimburse the 
loan for the first year, and pay off the annuity for the 
redemption of the old paper. It may be asked, where 
these funds are to be procured in the present impotence 
of our Federal Government. I answer, there are ample 
means for them, and they must be had. Congress must 
deal plainly with their constituents. They must tell 
them that power without revenue is a bubble ; that unless 
they give them substantial resources of the latter, they 
will not have enough of the former either to prosecute 
the war or to maintain the Union in peace ; that, in short, 
they must, in justice to the public and to their own 
honor, renounce the vain attempt of carrying on the war 
without either, a perseverance in which, can only deceive 
the people, and betray their safety. They must demand 
an instant, positive, and perpetual investiture of an im 
post on trade ; a land tax and a poll tax, to be collected 
by their own agents. This act to become a part of the 
Confederation. 

It has ever been my opinion that Congress ought to 

National Bank 379 

have complete sovereignty in all but the mere municipal 
law of each State; and I wish to see a convention of 
all the States, with full power to alter and amend, fin 
ally and irrevocably, the present futile and senseless 

The taxes specified may be made to amount to three 
millions of dollars ; the other three millions to be raised 
by requisition, as heretofore. 

ART. XV. The bank-notes to be received in pay 
ment of all public customs and taxes, at an equival 
ent with gold and silver. 

REMARK 15. It is essential that all taxes should be 
raised, throughout the United States, in specie, or bank 
notes at par, or the old paper at its current value at the 
time of payment. This will serve to increase the circu 
lation and credit of the bank-notes ; but no person should 
be obliged to receive them in private dealings. Their 
credit must depend on opinion; and this opinion would 
be injured by legislative interposition. 

ART. XVI. The bank to dissolve itself whenever 
it thinks proper, making effectual provision for the 
payment of its debts; and a proprietor of bank 
stock to have the privilege of selling out whenever 
he pleases. 

REMARK 16. This permission to dissolve or sell at 
pleasure will encourage men to adventure; and, when 
once engaged, the profits will make them willing to 
continue. 

ART. XVII. The bank to be established for thirty 
years by way of experiment. 

380 Alexander Hamilton 

REMARK 17. This is chiefly to prevent some speculative 
men being alarmed, who, upon the whole, may think a 
paper credit detrimental and dangerous, though they 
would be willing, from necessity, to encourage it for a 
limited time. Experience, too, may show the defects of 
this plan, and give rise to alterations for the better. 

ART. XVIII. No other bank, public or private, to 
be permitted during that period. 

REMARK 18. Other banks might excite a competition 
prejudicial to the interests of this, and multiply and 
diversify paper credit too much. 

ART. XIX. Three banks to be erected in Massa 
chusetts, Pennsylvania, and Virginia, to facilitate 
the circulation and payment of the bank-notes. 

REMARK 19. These banks ought to be in the interior 
of the country, remote from danger, with every precau 
tion for their security in every way. Their distance from 
the capital trading points will be an advantage, as it will 
make applications for the payment of bank-notes less 
convenient. 

ART. XX. The affairs of the bank to be managed 
by twelve general directors, men of reputation and 
fortune ; eight of them to be chosen by the private 
proprietors, and four by Congress. The Minister of 
Finance to have the privilege of inspecting all their 
proceedings. 

REMARK 20. It is necessary, for reciprocal security of 
the public, the proprietors, and the people, that the affairs 
of the bank should be conducted under a joint direction. 

National Bank 381 

These, as has been already observed, are only in 
tended as outlines; the form of administration for 
the bank, and all other matters, may be easily deter 
mined, if the leading principles are once approved. 
We shall find good models in the different European 
banks, which we can accommodate to our circum 
stances. Great care, in particular, should be em 
ployed to guard against counterfeits; and I think 
methods may be devised that would be effectual. 

I see nothing to prevent the practicability of a 
plan of this kind, but a distrust of the final success 
of the war, which may make men afraid to risk any 
considerable part of their fortunes in the public funds : 
but, without being an enthusiast, I will venture to 
assert, that, with such a resource as is here proposed, 
the loss of our independence is impossible. All we 
have to fear is, that the want of money may disband 
the army, or so perplex and enfeeble our operations 
as to create in the people a general disgust and 
alarm, which may make them clamor for peace on 
any terms. But if a judicious administration of our 
finances, assisted by a bank, takes place, and the 
ancient security of property is restored, no convul 
sion is to be apprehended. Our opposition will soon 
assume an aspect of system and vigor, that will re 
lieve and encourage the people, and put an end to 
the hopes of the enemy. 'T is evident that they 
have it not in their power to subdue us by force of 
arms. In all these States they have not more than 
fifteen thousand effective troops, nor is it possible 
for them much to augment this number. The East 
and West Indies demand reinforcements. In all the 

382 Alexander Hamilton 

islands, they have not, at this time, above five thou 
sand men; a force not more than equal to the 
proper garrisoning of Jamaica alone; and which, 
the moment they lose a maritime superiority in 
those seas, will leave them much cause to fear for 
their possessions. They will probably send out 
fifteen hundred to two thousand men, to recruit 
their regiments already here; but this is the utmost 
they can do. 

Our allies have five thousand men at Rhode 
Island, which, in the worst event that can happen, 
will be recruited to eight, to co-operate with us on a 
defensive plan. Should our army amount to no 
more than fifteen thousand men, the combined 
forces, though not equal to the expulsion of the 
enemy, will be equal to the purpose of compelling 
them to renounce their offensive, and to content 
themselves with maintaining one or two capital 
points. This is on the supposition that the public 
have the means of putting their troops in activity. 
By stopping the progress of their conquests, and re 
ducing them to an unmeaning and disgraceful de 
fensive, we destroy the national expectation of 
success, from which the ministry draw their re 
sources. It is not a vague conjecture, but a fact 
founded on the best information, that, had it not 
been for the capture of Charleston and the victory 
of Camden, the ministry would have been in the 
utmost embarrassment for the supplies of this year. 
On the credit of those events they procured a loan 
of five and twenty millions. They are in a situa 
tion where a want of splendid success is ruin. They 

National Bank 383 

have carried taxation nearly to its extreme bound 
ary; they have mortgaged all their funds; they 
have a large unfunded debt, besides the enormous 
mass which is funded. This must necessarily create 
apprehensions in their most sanguine partisans ; and 
if these are not counteracted by flattering events, 
from time to time, they cannot much longer con 
tinue the delusion. Indeed, in this case, I suppose 
they must themselves despair. 

The game we play is a sure game, if we play it 
with skill. I have calculated, in the preceding ob 
servations, on the most disadvantageous side. Many 
events may turn up, in the course of the summer, to 
make even the present campaign decisive. 

If we compare the real ability of France, for 
revenue, with that of Great Britain; the economy 
and sagacity in the conduct of the finances of the 
former ; the extravagance and dissipation which are 
overwhelming those of the latter; there will be 
found every reason to believe that the resources of 
France will outlast those of her adversary. Her 
fleet is not much inferior, independent of that of 
Spain and Holland. Combined with that of Spain, 
it is greatly superior. If the Dutch enter into the 
war in earnest, and add their fleet, the superiority 
will be irresistible. Notwithstanding the injury 
they may sustain in the first instance, the Dutch 
will be still formidable : they are rich in credit, and 
have extensive means for maritime power. 

Except the Emperor, who is hostile, and the Dane, 
who is neutral, all the rest of Europe are either 
friends to France or to our independence. 

3^4 Alexander Hamilton 

Never did a nation unite more circumstances in 
its favor than we do; we have nothing against us 
but our own misconduct. 

There are two classes oi men among us, equally 
mistaken: one who, in spite of daily experience, of 
accumulated distress, persist in a narrow line of 
policy, and, amidst the most threatening dangers, 
fancy every thing in perfect security. Another, 
who, judging too much from the outside, alarmed by 
partial misfortunes and the disordered state of our 
finances, without estimating the real faculties of the 
parties, give themselves up to an ignorant and ill- 
founded despondency. We want to learn to appre 
ciate our true situation and that of the enemy. 
This would preserve us from a stupid insensibility to 
danger on the one hand, and inspire us with a reason 
able and enlightened confidence on the other. 

But let us suppose the worst — that we shall, after 
all, fail in our independence; our return to Great 
Britain, whenever it should happen, would be by 
compact. The war would terminate by a media 
tion. It cannot be supposed that the mediator 
would be so devoted to Great Britain, or would have 
so little consideration for France, as to oblige us to 
revert to our former subjection by an unconditional 
surrender. While they might confirm his dominion 
over us, they would endeavor to save appearances 
for the honor of France, and stipulate terms as 
favorable to us as would be compatible with a state 
of dependence. A general amnesty, and the secur 
ity of private property (of course, the payment of 
public debts), would be among the most simple and 

National Bank 385 

most indispensable. This would comprehend the 
concerns of the bank; and if, unfortunately for our 
virtue, such a circumstance could operate as an in 
ducement, it might be added that our enemies would 
be glad to find and to encourage such an institution 
among us for their own benefit. 

A question may arise concerning the abilities of 
these States to pay their debts after the establish 
ment of their independence ; and though any doubt 
on this head must originate from gross ignorance, it 
may be necessary to oppose it with more than gen 
eral argument, as has been done heretofore. A 
very summary and obvious calculation will show 
that there is nothing to be dreaded on this head. 

The funds of nine hundred and seventy-nine 
thousand three hundred and thirty-three and one 
third dollars, proposed to be established for paying 
off the loan of the first year and for redeeming the 
present paper, will in thirty years wipe off all the 
debts of the States, except those contracted to 
foreigners, which, I imagine, do not amount to four 
millions of dollars. Suppose we should be obliged, 
for two years besides the present, to borrow an equal 
sum each year from the bank; the fund requisite to 
discharge these loans, on the same terms as the first, 
will amount to seven hundred and thirty-six thou 
sand dollars, to be dedxicted from the five million 
and twenty thousand six hundred and sixty-six and 
two thirds dollars remaining on the annual revenue, 
which will reduce it to four millions two hundred and 
eighty-four thousand six hundred and sixty-six and 
two thirds dollars ; then the debt unfunded will be : 

VOL. III. — 25. 

386 Alexander Hamilton 

To foreigners already contracted by suppos 
ition . ' 'v . . . . j. . $4,000,000 

Deficiency of revenue to the expense to be 
obtained on credit, the first year, be 
sides the loan from the bank . . i,479,333i 

Deficiency of revenue for the second year, 
deducting the fund for discharging the 
loan of this year . . . . 1,847,333$ 

Deficiency of revenue for the third year, 

making the same deduction . . 2,215,333^ 

$9,542,000 

Should, then, the war last three years longer, 
which must probably be the utmost term of its dura 
tion, we shall find ourselves with an unfunded debt 
of nine million five hundred and forty-two thousand 
dollars, and an unappropriated revenue of four 
million two hundred and eighty-four thousand six 
hundred and sixty-six and two thirds dollars. 

The surplus of four millions, which is two hundred 
and eighty-four thousand six hundred and sixty-six 
and two thirds dollars, and the funds appropriated 
to the payment of the other debts which will revert 
to the public at the end of thirty years, will be a 
sufficient fund for the redemption of this debt in 
about thirty-five years; so that, according to my 
plan, at the end of thirty-five years these States have 
paid off the whole debt contracted on account of the 
war; and, in the meantime, will have a clear revenue 
of four millions of dollars for defraying the expenses 
of their civil and military establishments. 

This calculation supposes the ability of these 
States for revenue to continue the same as they now 
are, which is a supposition both false and unfavor- 

National Bank 387 

able. Speaking within moderate bounds, our popu 
lation will be doubled in thirty years ; there will be 
a confluence of emigrants from all parts of the 
world, our commerce will have a proportionable 
progress, and of course our wealth and capacity for 
revenue. It will be a matter of choice if we are not 
out of debt in twenty years, without at all encum 
bering the people. 

A national debt, if it is not excessive, will be to us 
a national blessing. It will be a powerful cement of 
our Union. It will also create a necessity for keep 
ing up taxation to a degree which, without being 
oppressive, will be a spur to industry, remote as we 
are from Europe, and shall be from danger. It were 
otherwise to be feared our popular maxims would in 
cline us to too great parsimony and indulgence. We 
labor less now than any civilized nation of Europe; 
and a habit of labor in the people is as essential to 
the health and vigor of their minds and bodies, as 
it is conducive to the welfare of the state. We 
ought not to suffer our self-love to deceive us in a 
comparison upon these points. 

I have spun out this letter to a much greater 
length than I intended. To develop the whole con 
nection of my ideas on the subject, and place my 
plan in the clearest light, I have indulged myself in 
many observations which might have been omitted. 
I shall not longer intrude upon your patience than 
to assure you of the sincere sentiments of esteem 
with which I have the honor to be, 

Sir, your most obedient and humble servant, 

A. HAMILTON. 

388 Alexander Hamilton 

NATIONAL BANK 

Communicated to the House of Representatives, December 14, 1790. 
TREASURY DEPARTMENT, December 13, 1790. 

In obedience to the order of the House of Repre 
sentatives of the ninth day of August last, requir 
ing the Secretary of the Treasury to prepare and 
report on this day such further provision as may, in 
his opinion, be necessary for establishing the pub 
lic credit, the said Secretary further respectfully 
reports : 

That, from a conviction (as suggested in his report 
herewith presented *) that a national bank is an in 
stitution of primary importance to the prosperous 
administration of the finances, and would be of the 
greatest utility in the operations connected with the 
support of the public credit, his attention has been 
drawn to devising the plan of such an institution, 
upon a scale which will entitle it to the confidence, 
and be likely to render it equal to the exigencies, of 
the public. 

Previously to entering upon the detail of this 
plan, he entreats the indulgence of the House towards 
some preliminary reflections naturally arising out of 
the subject, which he hopes will be deemed neither 
useless nor out of place. Public opinion being the 
ultimate arbiter of every measure of government, 
it can scarcely appear improper, in deference to that, 
to accompany the origination of any new proposi 
tion with explanations, which the superior informa- 

1 See Report on "Public Credit," vol. ii., p. 337. 

National Bank 389 

tion of those to whom it is immediately addressed 
would render superfluous. 

It is a fact, well understood, that public banks 
have found admission and patronage among the 
principal and most enlightened commercial nations. 
They have successively obtained in Italy, Germany, 
Holland, England, and France, as well as in the 
United States. And it is a circumstance which can 
not but have considerable weight, in a candid esti 
mate of their tendency, that after an experience of 
centuries, there exists not a question about their 
utility in the countries in which they have been so 
long established. Theorists and men of business 
unite in the acknowledgment of it. 

Trade and industry, wherever they have been 
tried, have been indebted to them for important 
aid, and government has been repeatedly under the 
greatest obligations to them in dangerous and dis 
tressing emergencies. That of the United States, as 
well in some of the most critical conjunctures of the 
late war, as since the peace, has received assistance 
from those established among us, with which it could 
not have dispensed. 

With this twofold evidence before us, it might be 
expected that there would be a perfect union of 
opinions in their favor. Yet doubts have been en 
tertained; jealousies and prejudices have circulated; 
and, though experience is every day dissipating 
them, within the spheres in which effects are best 
known, yet there are still persons by whom they 
have not been entirely renounced. To give a full 
and accurate view of the subject, would be to make 

39° Alexander Hamilton 

a treatise of a report; but there are certain aspects in 
which it may be cursorily exhibited, which may per 
haps conduce to a just impression of its merits. These 
will involve a comparison of the advantages, with the 
disadvantages, real or supposed, of such institutions. 

The following are among the principal advantages 
of a bank: 

First. — The augmentation of the active or pro 
ductive capital of a country. Gold and silver, when 
they are employed merely as the instruments of ex 
change and alienation, have not been improperly de 
nominated dead stock ; but when deposited in banks, 
to become the basis of a paper circulation, which 
takes their character and place, as the signs or 
representatives of value, they then acquire life, or, 
in other words, an active and productive quality. 
This idea, which appears rather subtile and abstract 
in a general form, may be made obvious and pal 
pable, by entering into a few particulars. It is evid 
ent, for instance, that the money which a merchant 
keeps in his chest, waiting for a favorable opportun 
ity to employ it, produces nothing till that oppor 
tunity arrives. But if, instead of locking it up in 
this manner, he either deposits it in a bank, or in 
vests it in the stock of a bank, it yields a profit during 
the interval, in which he partakes, or not, according 
to the choice he may have made of being a depositor 
or a proprietor; and when any advantageous spec 
ulation offers, in order to be able to embrace it, he 
has only to withdraw his money, if a depositor, 
or, if a proprietor, to obtain a loan from the bank, 
or to dispose of his stock — an alternative seldom or 

National Bank 39 T 

never attended with difficulty, when the affairs of 
the institution are in a prosperous train. His money, 
thus deposited or invested, is a fund upon which 
himself and others can borrow to a much larger 
amount. It is a well-established fact, that banks in 
good credit can circulate a far greater sum than the 
actual quantum of their capital in gold and silver. 
The extent of the possible excess seems indetermin 
ate; though it has been conjecturally stated at the 
proportions of two and three to one. This faculty 
is produced in various ways. ist. A great propor 
tion of the notes which are issued, and pass current 
as cash, are indefinitely suspended in circulation, 
from the confidence which each holder has, that he 
can, at any moment, turn them into gold and silver. 
2dly. Every loan which a bank makes, is, in its first 
shape, a credit given to the borrower on its books, 
the amount of which it stands ready to pay, either in 
its own notes, or in gold or silver, at his option. But, 
in a great number of cases, no actual payment is 
made in either. The borrower, frequently, by a 
check or order, transfers his credit to some other 
person, to whom he has a payment to make; who, 
in his turn, is as often content with a similar credit, 
because he is satisfied that he can, whenever he 
pleases, either convert it into cash, or pass it to some 
other hand, as an equivalent for it. And in this 
manner the credit keeps circulating, performing in 
every stage the office of money, till it is extinguished 
by a discount with some person who has a payment 
to make to the bank, to an equal or greater amount. 
Thus large sums are lent and paid, frequently 

392 Alexander Hamilton 

through a variety of hands, without the interven 
tion of a single piece of coin. 3dly. There is always 
a large quantity of gold and silver in the repositories 
of the bank, besides its own stock, which is placed 
there, with a view partly to its safe-keeping, and 
partly to the accommodation of an institution which 
is itself a sort of general accommodation. These 
deposits are of immense consequence in the opera 
tions of a bank. Though liable to be redrawn at 
any moment, experience proves, that the money so 
much oftener changes proprietors than place, and 
that what is drawn out is generally so speedily re 
placed, as to authorize the counting upon the sums 
deposited, as an effective fund, which, concurring 
with the stock of the bank, enables it to extend its 
loans, and to answer all the demands for coin, 
whether in consequence of those loans, or arising 
from the occasional return of its notes. 

These different circumstances explain the manner 
in which the ability of a bank to circulate a greater 
sum than its actual capital in coin is acquired. 
This, however, must be gradual, and must be pre 
ceded by a firm establishment of confidence — a con 
fidence which may be bestowed on the most rational 
grounds, since the excess in question will always be 
bottomed on good security of one kind or another. 
This, every well-conducted bank carefully requires, 
before it will consent to advance either its money or 
its credit, and where there is an auxiliary capital (as 
will be the case in the plan hereafter submitted), 
which, together with the capital in coin, defines the 
boundary that shall not be exceeded by the engage- 

National Bank 393 

ments of the bank, the security may, consistently 
with all the maxims of a reasonable circumspection, 
be regarded as complete. 

The same circumstances illustrate the truth of the 
position, that it is one of the properties of banks to 
increase the active capital of a country. This, in 
other words, is the sum of them: the money of one 
individual, while he is waiting for an opportunity to 
employ it, by being either deposited in the bank for 
safe-keeping, or invested in its stock, is in a condition 
to administer to the wants of others, without being 
put out of his own reach when occasion presents. 
This yields an extra profit, arising from what is paid 
for the use of his money by others, when he could 
not himself make use of it, and keeps the money it 
self in a state of incessant activity. In the almost 
infinite vicissitudes and competitions of mercantile 
enterprise, there never can be danger of an intermis 
sion of demand, or that the money will remain for 
a moment idle in the vaults of the bank. This ad 
ditional employment given to money, and the faculty 
of a bank to lend and circulate a greater sum than the 
amount of its stock in coin, are, to all purposes of 
trade and industry, an absolute increase of capital. 
Purchases and undertakings, in general, can be car 
ried on by any given sum of bank paper or credit, 
as effectually as by an equal sum of gold and silver. 
And thus, by contributing to enlarge the mass of 
industrious and commercial enterprise, banks be 
come nurseries of national wealth — a consequence 
as satisfactorily verified by experience, as it is clearly 
deducible in theory. 

394 Alexander Hamilton 

Secondly. — Greater facility as to the government 
in obtaining pecuniary aids, especially in sudden 
emergencies. This is another and an undisputed ad 
vantage of public banks — one which, as already re 
marked, has been realized in signal instances among 
ourselves. The reason is obvious: the capitals of a 
great number of individuals are, by this operation, 
collected to a point, and placed under one direction. 
The mass formed by this union, is, in a certain sense, 
magnified by the credit attached to it; and while 
this mass is always ready, and can at once be put in 
motion, in aid of the government, the interest of the 
bank to afford that aid, independent of regard to 
the public safety and welfare, is a sure pledge for its 
disposition to go as far in its compliances as can in 
prudence be desired. There is, in the nature of 
things, as will be more particularly noticed in an 
other place, an intimate connection of interest be 
tween the government and the bank of a nation. 

Thirdly. — The facilitating of the payment of taxes. 
This advantage is produced in two ways. Those 
who are in a situation to have access to the bank, 
can have the assistance of loans, to answer, with 
punctuality, the public calls upon them. This ac 
commodation has been sensibly felt in the payment 
of the duties heretofore laid by those who reside 
where establishments of this nature exist. This, 
however, though an extensive, is not a universal, 
benefit. The other way in which the effect here 
contemplated is produced, and in which the benefit 
is general, is the increasing of the quantity of cir 
culating medium, and the quickening of circulation. 

National Bank 395 

The manner in which the first happens has already 
been traced. The last may require some illustra 
tion. When payments are to be made between 
different places having an intercourse of business 
with each other, if there happen to be no private 
bills at market, and there are no bank-notes which 
have a currency in both, the consequence is, that 
coin must be remitted. This is attended with 
trouble, delay, expense, and risk. If, on the con 
trary, there are bank-notes current in both places, 
the transmission of these by the post, or any other 
speedy or convenient conveyance, answers the pur 
pose; and these again, in the alternations of demand, 
are frequently returned, very soon after, to the 
place from which they were first sent: whence the 
transportation and re-transportation of the metals 
are obviated, and a more convenient and more ex 
peditious medium of payment is substituted. Nor 
is this all; the metals, instead of being suspended 
from their usual functions during this process of 
vibration from place to place, continue in activity, 
and administer still to the ordinary circulation, 
which, of course, is prevented from suffering either 
diminution or stagnation. These circumstances are 
additional causes of what, in a practical sense, or 
to the purposes of business, may be called greater 
plenty of money. And it is evident, that whatever 
enhances the quantity of circulating money, adds to 
the ease with which every industrious member of 
the community may acquire that portion of it of 
which he stands in need, and enables him the better 
to pay his taxes, as well as to supply his other wants. 

396 Alexander Hamilton 

Even where the circulation of the bank paper is not 
general, it must still have the same effect, though in 
a less degree. For, whatever furnishes additional 
supplies to the channels of circulation in one quarter, 
naturally contributes to keep the streams fuller else 
where. This last view of the subject serves both to 
illustrate the position that banks tend to facilitate 
the payment of taxes, and to exemplify their utility 
to business of every kind in which money is an agent. 

It would be to intrude too much on the patience 
of the House, to prolong the details of the advantages 
of banks ; especially as all those which might still be 
particularized are readily to be inferred as conse 
quences from those which have been enumerated. 
Their disadvantages, real or supposed, are now to be 
reviewed. The most serious of the charges which 
have been brought against them are: 

That they serve to increase usury; 

That they tend to prevent other kinds of lending; 

That they furnish temptations to overtrading; 

That they afford aid to ignorant adventurers, who 
disturb the natural and beneficial course of trade ; 

That they give to bankrupt and fraudulent traders 
a fictitious credit, which enables them to maintain 
false appearances and to extend their impositions; 
and, lastly, 

That they have a tendency to banish gold and 
silver from the country. 

There is great reason to believe, that, on a close 
and candid survey, it will be discovered that these 
charges are either destitute of foundation, or that, 
as far as the evils they suggest have been found to 

National Bank 397 

exist, they have proceeded from other, or partial, 
or temporary causes, are not inherent in the nature 
and permanent tendency of such institutions, or are 
more than counterbalanced by opposite advantages. 
This survey shall be had in the order in which the 
charges have been stated. The first of them is — 

That banks serve to increase usury. 

It is a truth, whicn ought not to be denied, that 
the method of conducting business, which is essen 
tial to bank operations, has, among us, in particular 
instances, given occasion to usurious transactions. 
The punctuality in payment, which they necessarily 
exact, has sometimes obliged those who have adven 
tured beyond both their capital and their credit, to 
procure money at any price, and, consequently, to 
resort to usurers for aid. 

But experience and practice gradually bring a cure 
to this evil. A general habit of punctuality among 
traders is the natural consequence of the necessity 
of observing it with the bank — a circumstance which 
itself more than compensates for any occasional ill 
which may have sprung from that necessity in the 
particular under consideration. As far, therefore, 
as traders depend on each other for pecuniary sup 
plies, they can calculate their expectations with 
greater certainty; and are in proportionably less 
danger of disappointments, which might compel 
them to have recourse to so pernicious an expedient 
as that of borrowing at usury; the mischiefs of 
which, after a few examples, naturally inspire great 
care in all but men of desperate circumstances, to 
avoid the possibility of being subjected to them. 

398 Alexander Hamilton 

One, and not the least, of these evils incident to the 
use of that expedient, if the fact be known, or even 
strongly suspected, is loss of credit with the bank 
itself. 

The directors of a bank, too, though, in order to 
extend its business and its popularity in the infancy 
of an institution, they may be tempted to go further 
in accommodation than the strict rules of prudence 
will warrant, grow more circumspect, of course, as 
its affairs become better established, and as evils of 
too great facility are experimentally demonstrated. 
They become more attentive to the situation and 
conduct of those with whom they deal; they ob 
serve more narrowly their operations and pursuits; 
they economize the credit they give to those of sus 
picious solidity ; they refuse it to those whose career 
is more manifestly hazardous. In a word, in the 
course of practice, from the very nature of things, 
the interest will make it the policy of a bank to 
succor the wary and industrious, to discredit the 
rash and unthrifty, to discountenance both usurious 
lenders and usurious borrowers. 

There is a leading view, in which the tendency of 
banks will be seen to be to abridge, rather than to 
promote, usury. This relates to their property of 
increasing the quantity and quickening the circula 
tion of money. If it be evident, that usury will 
prevail or diminish according to the proportion 
which the demand for borrowing bears to the quan 
tity of money at market to be lent, whatever has the 
property just mentioned, whether it be in the shape 
of paper or coin, by contributing to render the sup- 

National Bank 399 

ply more equal to the demand, must tend to counter 
act the progress of usury. 

But bank-lending, it is pretended, is an impedi 
ment to other kinds of lending; which, by confining 
the resource of borrowing to a particular class, leaves 
the rest of the community more destitute, and, 
therefore, more exposed to the extortions of usurers. 
As the profits of bank stock exceed the legal rate of 
interest, the possessors of money, it is urged, prefer 
investing it in that article to lending it at this rate ; 
to which there are the additional motives of a more 
prompt command of the capital, and of more fre 
quent and exact returns, without trouble or per 
plexity in the collection. This constitutes the second 
charge which has been enumerated. 

The fact on which this charge rests is not to be 
admitted without several qualifications — particularly 
in reference to the state of things in this country. 

First. The great bulk of the stock of a bank will 
consist of the funds of men in trade, among our 
selves, and moneyed foreigners ; the former of whom 
could not spare their capitals out of their reach, to 
be invested in loans for long periods, on mortgages 
or personal security; and the latter of whom would 
not be willing to be subjected to the casualties, de 
lays, and embarrassments of such a disposition of 
their money in a distant country. 

Secondly. There will always be a considerable pro 
portion of those who are properly the money-lenders 
of a country, who, from that spirit of caution which 
usually characterizes this description of men, will in 
cline rather to invest their funds in mortgages on 

400 Alexander Hamilton 

real estate, than in the stock of a bank, which they 
are apt to consider as a more precarious security. 

These considerations serve, in a material degree, 
to narrow the foundation of the objection, as to the 
point of fact. But there is a more satisfactory 
answer to it. The effect supposed, as far as it has 
existence, is temporary. The reverse of it takes 
place in the general and permanent operation of the 
thing. 

The capital of every public bank will, of course, 
be restricted within a certain defined limit. It is 
the province of legislative prudence so to adjust this 
limit, that, while it will not be too contracted for the 
demand which the course of business may create, and 
for the security which the public ought to have for 
the solidity of the paper which may be issued by 
the bank, it will still be within the compass of the 
pecuniary resources of the community ; so that there 
may be an easy practicability of completing the sub 
scriptions to it. When this is once done, the sup 
posed effect, of necessity, ceases. There is then no 
longer room for the investment of any additional 
capital. Stock may, indeed, change hands, by one 
person selling and another buying; but the money 
which the buyer takes out of the common mass to 
purchase the stock, the seller receives and restores 
to it. Hence, the future surpluses which may ac 
cumulate must take their natural course, and lend 
ing at interest must go on as if there were no such 
institution. 

It must, indeed, flow in a more copious stream. 
The bank furnishes an extraordinary supply for 

National Bank 401 

borrowers, within its immediate sphere. A larger 
supply consequently remains for borrowers elsewhere. 
In proportion as the circulation of the bank is ex 
tended, there is an augmentation of the aggregate 
mass of money for answering the aggregate mass of 
demand. Hence greater facility in obtaining it for 
every purpose. 

It ought not to escape without a remark, that, as 
far as the citizens of other countries become adven 
turers in the bank, there is a positive increase of the 
gold and silver of the country. It is true, that, 
from this, a half yearly rent is drawn back, accruing 
from the dividends upon the stock. But as this rent 
arises from the employment of the capital by our 
own citizens, it is probable that it is more than re 
placed by the profits of that employment. It is 
also likely that a part of it is, in the course of trade, 
converted into the products of our country; and it 
may even prove an incentive, in some cases, to 
emigration to a country in which the character of 
citizen is as easy to be acquired as it is estimable 
and important. This view of the subject furnishes 
an answer to an objection which has been deduced 
from the circumstance here taken notice of, namely, 
the income resulting to foreigners from the part of 
the stock owned by them, which has been repre 
sented as tending to drain the country of its specie. 
In this objection the original investment of the 
capital, and the constant use of it afterwards, seem 
both to have been overlooked. 

That banks furnish temptations to overtrading, is 
the third of the enumerated objections. This must 

VOL. III. — 26. 

402 Alexander Hamilton 

mean, that, by affording additional aids to mercantile 
enterprise, they induce the merchant sometimes to 
adventure beyond the prudent or salutary point. 
But the very statement of the thing shows that the 
subject of the charge is an occasional ill, incident to 
a general good. Credit of every kind (as a species 
of which only can bank-lending have the effect sup 
posed) must be, in different degrees, chargeable with 
the same inconvenience. It is even applicable to 
gold and silver, when they abound in circulation. 
But would it be wise, on this account, to decry the 
precious metals, to root out credit, or to proscribe 
the means of that enterprise which is the main 
spring of trade, and a principal source of national 
wealth, because it now and then runs into excesses, 
of which overtrading is one? 

If the abuses of a beneficial thing are to determine 
its condemnation, there is scarcely a source of pub 
lic prosperity which will not speedily be closed. In 
every case, the evil is to be compared with the good ; 
and in the present case such a comparison will issue 
in this, that the new and increased energies derived 
to commercial enterprise, from the aid of banks, are 
a source of general profit and advantage, which 
greatly outweigh the partial ills — the overtrading of 
a few individuals, at particular times, or of numbers 
in particular conjunctures. 

The fourth and fifth charges may be considered 
together. These relate to the aid which is some 
times afforded by banks to unskilful adventurers and 
fraudulent traders. These charges, also, have some 
degree of foundation, though far less than has been 

National Bank 4°3 

pretended ; and they add to the instances of partial 
ills, connected with more extensive and overbal 
ancing benefits. 

The practice of giving fictitious credit to im 
proper persons is one of those evils which experience, 
guided by interest, speedily corrects. The bank it 
self is in so much jeopardy of being a sufferer by it, 
that it has the strongest of all inducements to be on 
its guard. It may not only be injured immediately by 
the delinquencies of the persons to whom such credit 
is given, but eventually by the incapacities of others, 
whom their impositions or failures may have ruined. 

Nor is there much danger of a bank's being be 
trayed into this error from want of information. 
The directors themselves being, for the most part, 
selected from the class of traders, are to be expected 
to possess, individually, an accurate knowledge of 
the characters and situations of those who come 
within that description. And they have, in addi 
tion to this, the course of dealing of the persons 
themselves with the bank to assist their judgment, 
which is, in most cases, a good index of the state 
in which those persons are. The artifices and shifts 
which those in desperate or declining circumstances 
are obliged to employ, to keep up the countenance 
which the rules of the bank require, and the train 
of their connections, are so many prognostics, not 
difficult to be interpreted, of the fate which awaits 
them. Hence, it not unfrequently happens, that 
banks are the first to discover the unsoundness of 
such characters, and, by withholding credit, to an 
nounce to the public that they are not entitled to it. 

404 Alexander Hamilton 

If banks, in spite of every precaution, are some 
times betrayed into giving a false credit to the per 
sons described, they more frequently enable honest 
and industrious men, of small, or, perhaps, of no 
capital, to undertake and prosecute business with 
advantage to themselves and to the community; 
and assist merchants, of both capital and credit, 
who meet with fortuitous and unforeseen shocks, 
which might, without such helps, prove fatal to 
them and to others, to make head against their mis 
fortunes, and finally to retrieve their affairs — cir 
cumstances which form no inconsiderable encomium 
on the utility of banks. 

But the last and heaviest charge is still to be ex 
amined: this is, that banks tend to banish the gold 
and silver of the country. 

The force of this objection rests upon their being 
an engine of paper credit, which, by furnishing a 
substitute for the metals, is supposed to promote 
their exportation. It is an objection which, if it 
has any foundation, lies not against banks peculiarly, 
but against every species of paper credit. 

The most common answer given to it is, that the 
thing supposed is of little or of no consequence ; that 
it is immaterial what serves the purpose of money, 
whether paper, or gold and silver; that the effect of 
both upon industry is the same; and that the in 
trinsic wealth of a nation is to be measured, not by 
the abundance of the precious metals contained in 
it, but by the quantity of the productions of its 
labor and industry. 

This answer is not destitute of solidity, though 

National Bank 405 

not entirely satisfactory. It is certain that the 
vivification of industry, by a full circulation, with 
the aid of a proper and well-regulated paper credit, 
may more than compensate for the loss of a part of 
the gold and silver of a nation, if the consequence 
of avoiding that loss should be a scanty or defective 
circulation. 

But the positive and permanent increase or de 
crease of the precious metals in the country can 
hardly ever be a matter of indifference. As the 
commodity taken in lieu of every other, it is a species 
of the most effective wealth; and as the money of 
the world, it is of great concern to the state, that it 
possess a sufficiency of it to face any demands which 
the protection of its external interest may create. 

The objection seems to admit of another and a 
more conclusive answer, which controverts the fact 
itself. A nation that has no mines of its own must 
derive the precious metals from others; generally 
speaking, in exchange for the products of its labor 
and industry. The quantity it will possess will, 
therefore, in the ordinary course of things, be regu 
lated by the favorable or unfavorable balance of its 
trade; that is, by the proportion between its abilities 
to supply foreigners, and its wants of them — between 
the amount of its exportations and that of its im 
portations. Hence, the state of its agriculture and 
manufactures, the quantity and quality of its labor 
and industry, must, in the main, influence and deter 
mine the increase or decrease of its gold and silver. 

If this be true, the inference seems to be, that 
well-constituted banks favor the increase of the 

406 Alexander Hamilton 

precious metals. It has been shown that they aug 
ment, in different ways, the active capital of a 
country. This it is which generates employment— 
which animates and expands labor and industry. 
Every addition which is made to it, by contributing 
to put in motion a greater quantity of both, tends to 
create a greater quantity of the products of both; 
and, by furnishing more materials for exportation, 
conduces to a favorable balance of trade, and, con 
sequently, to the introduction and increase of gold 
and silver. 

This conclusion appears to be drawn from solid 
premises. There are, however, objections to be 
made to it. 

It may be said that, as bank paper affords a 
substitute for specie, it serves to counteract that 
rigorous necessity for the metals, as a medium of 
circulation, which, in the case of a wrong balance, 
might restrain, in some degree, their exportation; 
and it may be added that, from the same cause, in 
the same case, it would retard those economical and 
parsimonious reforms in the manner of living which 
the scarcity of money is calculated to produce, and 
which might be necessary to rectify such wrong 
balance. 

There is, perhaps, some truth in both these observa 
tions; but they appear to be of a nature rather to 
form exceptions to the generality of the conclusion, 
than to overthrow it. The state of things in which 
the absolute exigencies of circulation can be supposed 
to resist, with any effect, the urgent demands for 
specie which a wrong balance of trade may occasion, 

National Bank 407 

presents an extreme case. And a situation in which 
a too expensive manner of living of a community, 
compared with its means, can stand in need of a 
corrective, from distress or necessity, is one which, 
perhaps, rarely results but from extraordinary and 
adventitious causes — such, for example, as a national 
revolution ; which unsettles all the established habits 
of the people, and inflames the appetite for extrava 
gance, by the illusions of an ideal wealth, engendered 
by the continual multiplication of a depreciating 
currency, or some similar cause. There is a good 
reason to believe that, where the laws are wise and 
well executed, and the inviolability of property and 
contracts maintained, the economy of a people will, 
in the general course of things, correspond with its 
means. 

The support of industry is, probably in every case, 
of more consequence towards correcting a wrong 
balance of trade, than any practicable retrench 
ments in the expenses of families or individuals; 
and the stagnation of it would be likely to have 
more effect in prolonging, than any such savings in 
shortening, its continuance. That stagnation is a 
natural consequence of an inadequate medium, 
which, without the aid of bank circulation, would, 
in the cases supposed, be severely felt. 

It also deserves notice that, as the circulation is 
always in a compound ratio to the fund upon which 
it depends, and to the demand for it, and as that 
fund is itself affected by the exportation of the metals, 
there is no danger of its being overstocked, as in the 
case of paper issued at the pleasure of the govern- 

408 Alexander Hamilton 

ment, or of its preventing the consequences of any 
unfavorable balance from being sufficiently felt to 
produce the reforms alluded to, as far as circum 
stances may require and admit. 

Nothing can be more fallible than the comparisons 
which have been made between different countries, 
to illustrate the truth of the position under con 
sideration. The comparative quantity of gold and 
silver in different countries depends upon an infinite 
variety of facts and combinations, all of which ought 
to be known in order to judge whether the existence 
or non-existence of paper currencies has any share 
in the relative proportions they contain. The mass 
and value of the productions of the labor and in 
dustry of each, compared with its wants ; the nature 
of its establishments abroad; the kind of wars in 
which it is usually engaged, the relations it bears 
to the countries which are the original possessors of 
those metals; the privileges it enjoys in their trade; 
— these, and a number of other circumstances, are 
all to be taken into the account, and render the in 
vestigation too complex to justify any reliance on 
the vague and general surmises which have hitherto 
been hazarded on the point. 

In the foregoing discussion, the objection has been 
considered as applying to the permanent expulsion 
and diminution of the metals. Their temporary ex 
portation, for particular purposes, has not been con 
templated. This, it must be confessed, is facilitated 
by banks, from the faculty they possess of supplying 
their place. But their utility is in nothing more 
conspicuous than in these very cases. They enable 

National Bank 409 

the government to pay its foreign debts, and to 
answer any exigencies which the external concerns 
of the community may have produced. They enable 
the merchant to support his credit (on which the 
prosperity of trade depends), when special circum 
stances prevent remittances in other modes. They 
enable him also to prosecute enterprises which 
ultimately tend to an augmentation of the species 
of wealth in question. It is evident that gold and 
silver may often be employed in procuring com 
modities abroad, which, in a circuitous commerce, 
replace the original fund, with considerable addi 
tion. But it is not to be inferred, from this facility 
given to temporary exportation, that banks, which 
are so friendly to trade and industry, are, in their 
general tendency, inimical to the increase of the 
precious metals. 

These several views of the subject appear suffi 
cient to impress a full conviction of the utility of 
banks, and to demonstrate that they are of great 
importance, not only in relation to the administra 
tion of the finances but in the general system of the 
political economy. 

The judgment of many concerning them has, no 
doubt, been perplexed by the misinterpretation of 
appearances which were to be ascribed to other 
causes. The general devastation of personal prop 
erty, occasioned by the late war, naturally produced, 
on the one hand, a great demand for money, and, on 
the other, a great deficiency of it to answer the de 
mand. Some injudicious laws, which grew out of 
the public distresses, by impairing confidence, and 

4Io Alexander Hamilton 

causing a part of the inadequate sum in the country 
to be locked up, aggravated the evil. The dissipated 
habits contracted by many individuals during the 
war, which, after the peace, plunged them into ex 
penses beyond their incomes; the number of ad 
venturers without capital, and, in many instances, 
without information, who at that epoch rushed into 
trade, and were obliged to make any sacrifice to 
support a transient credit; the employment of con 
siderable sums in speculations upon the public debt, 
which, from its unsettled state, was incapable of 
becoming itself a substitute; all these circum 
stances concurring, necessarily led to usurious bor 
rowing, produced most of the inconveniences, and 
were the true causes of most of the appearances 
which, where banks were established, have been by 
some erroneously placed to their account — a mis 
take which they might easily have avoided by turn 
ing their eyes toward places where there were none, 
and where, nevertheless, the same evils would have 
been perceived to exist, even in a greater degree 
than where those institutions had obtained. 

These evils have either ceased or been greatly 
mitigated. Their more complete extinction may be 
looked for from that additional security to property 
which the Constitution of the United States happily 
gives (a circumstance of prodigious moment in the 
scale both of public and private prosperity); from 
the attraction of foreign capital, under the auspices 
of that security, to be employed upon objects and in 
enterprises for which the state of this country opens 
a wide and inviting field; from the consistency and 

National Bank 411 

stability which the public debt is fast acquiring, as 
well in the public opinion at home and abroad, as in 
fact; from the augmentation of capital which that 
circumstance and the quarter-yearly payment of 
interest will afford ; and from the more copious cir 
culation which will be likely to be created by a 
well-constituted national bank. 

The establishment of banks in this country seems 
to be recommended by reasons of a peculiar nature. 
Previously to the Revolution, circulation was in a 
great measure carried on by paper emitted by the 
several local governments. In Pennsylvania alone 
the quantity of it was near a million and a half of 
dollars. This auxiliary may be said to be now at an 
end. And it is generally supposed that there has 
been, for some time past, a deficiency of circulating 
medium. How far that deficiency is to be con 
sidered as real or imaginary, is not susceptible of 
demonstration; but there are circumstances and 
appearances which, in relation to the country at 
large, countenance the supposition of its reality. 

The circumstances are, besides the fact just men 
tioned respecting paper emissions, the vast tracts of 
waste land, and the little advanced state of manu 
factures. The progressive settlement of the former, 
while it promises ample retribution in the generation 
of future resources, diminishes or obstructs, in the 
meantime, the active wealth of the country. It not 
only draws off a part of the circulating money, and 
places it in a more passive state, but it diverts into 
its own channels a portion of that species of labor 
and industry which would otherwise be employed in 

412 Alexander Hamilton 

furnishing materials for foreign trade, and which, by 
contributing to a favorable balance, would assist 
the introduction of specie. In the early periods of 
new settlements, the settlers not only furnish no 
surplus for exportation, but they consume a part of 
that which is produced by the labor of others. The 
same thing is a cause that manufactures do not 
advance, or advance slowly. And notwithstanding 
some hypotheses to the contrary, there are many 
things to induce a suspicion that the precious metals 
will not abound in any country which has not mines, 
or variety of manufactures. They have been some 
times acquired by the sword ; but the modern system 
of war has expelled this resource, and it is one upon 
which it is to be hoped the United States will never 
be inclined to rely. 

The appearances alluded to are: Greater preval- 
ency of direct barter, in the more interior districts 
of the country, which, however, has been for some 
time past gradually lessening ; and greater difficulty 
generally in the advantageous alienation of im 
proved real estate, which also has of late diminished, 
but is still seriously felt in different parts of the 
Union. The difficulty of getting money, which has 
been a general complaint, is not added to the num 
ber, because it is the complaint of all times, and one 
in which imagination must ever have too great scope 
to permit an appeal to it. 

If the supposition of such a deficiency be in any 
degree well founded, and some aid to circulation be 
desirable, it remains to inquire what ought to be the 
nature of that aid. 

National Bank 413 

The emitting of paper money by the authority of 
the government is wisely prohibited to the individual 
States by the National Constitution; and the spirit 
of that prohibition ought not to be disregarded 
by the Government of the United States. Though 
paper emissions, under a general authority, might 
have some advantages not applicable, and be free 
from some disadvantages which are applicable, to 
the like emissions by the States, separately, yet they 
are of a nature so liable to abuse — and, it may even 
be affirmed, so certain of being abused, — that the 
wisdom of the government will be shown in never 
trusting itself with the use of so seducing and dan 
gerous an expedient. In times of tranquillity it 
might have no ill consequence, — it might even per 
haps be managed in a way to be productive of good; 
but in great and trying emergencies there is almost 
a moral certainty of its becoming mischievous. The 
stamping of paper is an operation so much easier 
than the laying of taxes, that a government in the 
practice of paper emissions would rarely fail, in any 
such emergency, to indulge itself too far in the em 
ployment of that resource, to avoid, as much as 
possible, one less auspicious to present popularity. 
If it should not even be carried so far as to be ren 
dered an absolute bubble, it would at least be likely 
to be extended to a degree which would occasion 
an inflated and artificial state of things, incompat 
ible with the regular and prosperous course of the 

Among other material differences between a paper 
currency, issued by the mere authority of govern- 

414 Alexander Hamilton 

ment, and one issued by a bank, payable in coin, is 
this : That, in the first case, there is no standard to 
which an appeal can be made, as to the quantity 
which will only satisfy, or which will surcharge, the 
circulation; in the last, that standard results from 
the demand. If more should be issued than is 
necessary, it will return upon the bank. Its emis 
sions, as elsewhere intimated, must always be in 
a compound ratio to the fund and the demand: 
whence it is evident that there is a limitation in 
the nature of the thing; while the discretion of the 
government is the only measure of the extent of the 
emissions, by its own authority. 

This consideration further illustrates the danger 
of emissions of that sort, and the preference which is 
due to bank paper. 

The payment of the interest of the public debt at 
thirteen different places is a weighty reason, peculiar 
to our immediate situation, for desiring a bank cir 
culation. Without a paper, in general currency, 
equivalent to gold and silver, a considerable propor 
tion of the specie of the country must always be 
suspended from circulation, and left to accumulate, 
preparatory to each day of payment; and as often 
as one approaches, there must in several cases be an 
actual transportation of the metals, at both expense 
and risk, from their natural and proper reservoirs, to 
distant places. This necessity will be felt very in 
juriously to the trade of some of the States, and will 
embarrass not a little the operations of the treasury 
in those States. It will also obstruct those nego 
tiations, between different parts of the Union, by 

National Bank 415 

the instrumentality of treasury bills, which have 
already afforded valuable accommodations to trade 
in general. 

Assuming it, then, as a consequence, from what 
has been said, that a national bank is a desirable in 
stitution, two inquiries emerge : Is there no such in 
stitution already in being, which has a claim to that 
character, and which supersedes the propriety or 
necessity of another? If there be none, what are the 
principles upon which one ought to be established? 

There are at present three banks in the United 
States: that of North America, established in the 
city of Philadelphia; that of New York, established 
in the city of New York; that of Massachusetts, es 
tablished in the town of Boston. Of these three, the 
first is the only one which has at any time had a 
direct relation to the Government of the United 
States. 

The Bank of North America originated in a reso 
lution of Congress of the 26th of May, 1781, founded 
upon a proposition of the Superintendent of Finance, 
which was afterwards carried into execution by an 
ordinance of the 3ist of December following, en 
titled "An ordinance to incorporate the subscribers 
to the Bank of North America." 

The aid afforded to the United States by this in 
stitution, during the remaining period of the war, was 
of essential consequence; and its conduct towards 
them since the peace has not weakened its title to 
their patronage and favor. So far its pretensions to 
the character in question are respectable, but there 
are circumstances which militate against them, and 

4i 6 Alexander Hamilton 

considerations which indicate the propriety of an 
establishment on different principles. 

The directors of this bank, on behalf of their con 
stituents, have since accepted, and acted under, a new 
charter, from the State of Pennsylvania, materially 
variant from their original one, and which so narrows 
the foundation of the institution as to render it an 
incompetent basis for the extensive purposes of a 
national bank. 

The limit assigned by the ordinance of Congress 
to the stock of the bank is ten millions of dollars. 
The last charter of Pennsylvania confines it to two 
millions. Questions naturally arise whether there 
be not a direct repugnancy between two charters 
so differently circumstanced; and whether the ac 
ceptance of the one is not to be deemed a virtual 
surrender of the other. But perhaps it is neither ad 
visable nor necessary to attempt a solution of them. 

There is nothing in the acts of Congress which 
imply an exclusive right in the institution to which 
they relate, except during the term of the war. 
There is, therefore, nothing, if the public good re 
quire it, which prevents the establishment of an 
other. It may, however, be incidentally remarked, 
that in the general opinion of the citizens of the 
United States, the Bank of North America has taken 
the station of a bank of Pennsylvania only. This 
is a strong argument for a new institution, or for a 
renovation of the old, to restore it to the situation 
in which it originally stood in the view of the United 

But, though the ordinance of Congress contains 

National Bank 4*7 

no grant of exclusive privileges, there may be room 
to allege that the Government of the United States 
ought not, in point of candor and equity, to estab 
lish any rival or interfering institution, in prejudice 
of the one already established, especially as this has, 
from services rendered, well-founded claims to pro 
tection and regard. 

The justice of such an observation ought, within 
proper bounds, to be admitted. A new establish 
ment of the sort ought not to be made without 
cogent and sincere reasons of public good. And, in 
the manner of doing it, every facility should be given 
to a consolidation of the old with the new, upon 
terms not injurious to the parties concerned. But 
there is no ground to maintain that, in a case in 
which the government has made no condition 
restricting its authority, it ought voluntarily to re 
strict it, through regard to the interests of a par 
ticular institution, when those of the State dictate a 
different course, especially, too, after such circum 
stances have intervened as characterize the actual 
situation of the Bank of North America. 

The inducements to a new disposition of the thing 
are now to be considered. The first of them which 
occurs is, the, at least, ambiguous situation in which 
the Bank of North America has placed itself by the 
acceptance of its last charter. If this has rendered 
it the mere bank of a particular State, liable to dis 
solution at the expiration of fourteen years, to which 
term the act of that State has restricted its duration, 
it would be neither fit nor expedient to accept it as 
an equivalent for a bank of the United States. 

VOL III 27. 

Alexander Hamilton 

The restriction of its capital, also, which, accord 
ing to the same supposition cannot be extended be 
yond two millions of dollars, is a conclusive reason 
for a different establishment. So small a capital 
promises neither the requisite aid to government 
nor the requisite security to the comnmnity. It 
may answer very well the purposes of local accom 
modation, but it is an inadequate foundation for a 
circulation coextensive with the United States, em 
bracing the whole of their revenues, and affecting 
every individual into whose hands the paper may 
come. 

And, inadequate as such a capital would be to the 
essential ends of a national bank, it is liable to being 
rendered still more so by that principle of the con 
stitution of the Bank of North America, contained 
equally in its old and in its new charter, which 
leaves the increase of the actual capital at any 
time (now far short of the allowed extent) to the 
discretion of the directors or stockholders. It is 
naturally to be expected that the allurements of an 
advanced price of stock, and of large dividends, may 
disincline those who are interested to an extension 
of capital, from which they will be apt to fear a 
diminution of profits. And for this circumstance 
the interest and accommodation of the public (as 
well individually as collectively) are made more 
subordinate to the interest, real or imagined, of 
the stockholders, than they ought to be. It is true 
that, unless the latter be consulted, there can be no 
bank (in the sense at least in which institutions of 
this kind, worthy of confidence, can be established 

National Bank 419 

in this country). But, it does not follow that this 
alone is to be consulted, or that it even ought to be 
paramount. Public utility is more truly the object 
of public banks than private profit. And it is the 
business of government to constitute them on such 
principles that, while the latter will result in a suf 
ficient degree to afford competent motives to engage 
in them, the former be not made subservient to it. 
To effect this, a principal object of attention ought 
to be to give free scope to the creation of an ample 
capital, and with this view, fixing the bounds which 
are deemed safe and convenient, to leave no dis 
cretion either to stop short of them, or to overpass 
them. The want of this precaution in the estab 
lishment of the Bank of North America is a further 
and an important reason for desiring one differently 
constituted. 

There may be room at first sight for a supposition 
that, as the profits of a bank will bear a proportion 
to the extent of its operations, and as for this reason 
the interest of the stockholders will not be disad- 
vantageously affected by any necessary augmenta 
tions of capital, there is no cause to apprehend that 
they will be indisposed to such augmentations. But 
most men, in matters of this nature, prefer the cer 
tainties they enjoy, to probabilities depending on 
untried experiments, especially when these promise 
rather that they will not be injured, than that they 
will be benefited. 

From the influence of this principle, and a desire 
of enhancing its profits, the directors of a bank will 
be more apt to overstrain its faculties, in an attempt 

420 Alexander Hamilton 

to face the additional demands which the course of 
business may create, than to set on foot new sub 
scriptions, which may hazard a diminution of the 
profits, and even a temporary reduction of the price 
of stock. 

Banks are among the best expedients for lowering 
the rate of interest in a country; but, to have this 
effect, their capitals must be completely equal to all 
the demands of business, and such as will tend to 
remove the idea that the accommodations they 
afford are in any degree favors — an idea very apt to 
accompany the parsimonious dispensation of con 
tracted funds. In this, as in every other case, the 
plenty of the commodity ought to beget a modera 
tion of price. 

The want of a principle of rotation in the con 
stitution of the Bank of North America is another 
argument for a variation of the establishment. 
Scarcely one of the reasons which militate against 
this principle in the constitution of a country, is 
applicable to that of a bank; while there are strong 
reasons in favor of it, in relation to the one, which 
do not apply to the other. The knowledge to be 
derived from experience is the only circumstance 
common to both, which pleads against rotation in 
the directing officers of a bank. 

But the objects of the government of a nation, 
and those of the government of a bank, are so widely 
different, as greatly to weaken the force of that con 
sideration in reference to the latter. Almost every 
important case in legislation requires, toward a 
right decision, a general and accurate acquaintance 

National Bank 421 

with the affairs of the State, and habits of thinking 
seldom acquired but from a familiarity with public 
concerns. The administration of a bank, on the 
contrary, is regulated by a few simple fixed maxims, 
the application of which is not difficult to any man 
of judgment, especially if instructed in the prin 
ciples of trade. It is, in general, a constant suc 
cession of the same details. 

But, though this be the case, the idea of the ad 
vantages of experience is not to be slighted. Room 
ought to be left for the regular transmission of 
official information; and for this purpose, the head 
of the direction ought to be excepted from the prin 
ciple of rotation. With this exception, and with the 
aid of the information of the subordinate officers, 
there can be no danger of any ill effects from 
want of experience or knowledge; especially as the 
periodical exclusion ought not to reach the whole of 
the directors at one time. 

The argument in favor of the principle of rotation 
is this : that by lessening the danger of combinations 
among the directors, to make the institution sub 
servient to party views, or to the accommodation, 
preferably, of any particular set of men, it will ren 
der the public confidence more firm, stable, and 
unqualified. 

When it is considered that the directors of a bank 
are not elected by the great body of the community, 
in which a diversity of views will naturally prevail 
at different conjunctures, but by a small and select 
class of men, among whom it is far more easy to 
cultivate a steady adherence to the same persons 

Alexander Hamilton 

and objects, and that those directors have it in their 
power so immediately to conciliate, by obliging the 
most influential of this class, it is easy to perceive 
that, without the principle of rotation, changes in 
that body can rarely happen, but as a concession 
which they may themselves think it expedient to 
make to public opinion. 

The continual administration of an institution of 
this kind, by the same persons, will never fail, with 
or without cause, from their conduct, to excite dis 
trust and discontent. The necessary secrecy of 
their transactions gives unlimited scope to imagina 
tion to infer that something is or may be wrong. 
And this inevitable mystery is a solid reason for in 
serting in the constitution of a bank the necessity 
of a change of men. As neither the mass of the 
parties interested, nor the public in general, can be 
permitted to be witnesses of the interior manage 
ment of the directors, it is reasonable that both 
should have that check upon their conduct, and 
that security against the prevalency of a partial or 
pernicious system, which will be produced by the 
certainty of periodical changes. Such, too, is the 
delicacy of the credit of a bank, that every thing 
which can fortify confidence and repel suspicion, 
without injuring its operations, ought carefully to 
be sought after in its formation. 

A further consideration in favor of a change is the 
improper rule by which the right of voting for di 
rectors is regulated in the plan upon which the Bank 
of North America was originally constituted — 
namely, a vote for each share; and the want of a 

National Bank 423 

rule in the last charter, — unless the silence of it, on 
that point, may signify that every stockholder is to 
have an equal and a single vote, which would be a 
rule in a different extreme, not less erroneous. It 
is of importance that a rule should be established on 
this head, as it is one of those things which ought 
not to be left to discretion; and it is, consequently, 
of equal importance that the rule should be a proper 
one. 

A vote for each share renders a combination be 
tween a few principal stockholders, to monopolize 
the power and benefits of the bank, too easy. An 
equal vote to each stockholder, however great or 
small his interest in the institution, allows not that 
degree of weight to large stockholders which it is 
reasonable they should have, and which, perhaps, 
their security and that of the bank require. A 
prudent mean is to be preferred. A conviction of 
this has produced a by-law of the corporation of the 
Bank of North America, which evidently aims at 
such a mean. But a reflection arises here, that a 
like majority with that which enacted this law may, 
at any moment, repeal it. 

The last inducement which shall be mentioned is 
the want of precautions to guard against a foreign 
influence insinuating itself into the direction of the 
bank. It seems scarcely reconcilable with due cau 
tion to permit that any but citizens should be 
eligible as directors of a national bank, or that 
non-resident foreigners should be able to influence 
the appointment of directors by the votes of their 
proxies. In the event, however, of an incorporation 

424 Alexander Hamilton 

of the Bank of North America in the plan, it may be 
necessary to qualify this principle, so as to leave the 
right of foreigners, who now hold shares of its stock, 
unimpaired; but without the power of transmitting 
the privilege in question to foreign alliances. 

It is to be considered that such a bank is not a 
mere matter of private property, but a political 
machine of the greatest importance to the State. 

There are other variations from the constitution 
of the Bank of North America not of inconsiderable 
moment, which appear desirable, but which are not 
of magnitude enough to claim a preliminary discus 
sion. These will be seen in the plan which will be 
submitted in the sequel. 

If the objections which have been stated to the 
constitution of the Bank of North America are ad 
mitted to be well-founded, they will, nevertheless, 
not derogate from the merit of the main design, or 
of the services which that bank has rendered, or of 
the benefits which it has produced. The creation 
of such an institution, at the time it took place, was 
a measure dictated by wisdom. Its utility has been 
amply evinced by its fruits ; American independence 
owes much to it. And it is very conceivable that 
reasons of the moment may have rendered those 
features in it inexpedient, which a revision, with a 
permanent view, suggests as desirable. 

The order of the subject leads next to an inquiry 
into the principles upon which a national bank ought 
to be organized. 

The situation of the United States naturally in 
spires a wish that the form of the institution could 

National Bank 425 

admit of a plurality of branches. But various con 
siderations discourage from pursuing this idea. The 
complexity of such a plan would be apt to inspire 
doubts, which might deter from adventuring in it. 
And the practicability of a safe and orderly admin 
istration, though not to be abandoned as desperate, 
cannot be made so manifest in perspective as to 
promise the removal of those doubts, or to justify 
the government in adopting the idea as an original 
experiment. The most that would seem advisable, 
on this point, is to insert a provision which may lead 
to it hereafter, if experience shall more clearly de 
monstrate its utility, and satisfy those who may have 
the direction, that it may be adopted with safety. 
It is certain that it would have some advantages, 
both peculiar and important. Besides more general 
accommodation, it would lessen the danger of a run 
upon the bank. 

The argument against it is, that each branch must 
be under a distinct, though subordinate direction, 
to which a considerable latitude of discretion must, 
of necessity, be intrusted. And, as the property of 
the whole institution would be liable for the engage 
ments of each part, that and its credit would be at 
stake, upon the prudence of the directors of every 
part. The mismanagement of either branch might 
hazard serious disorder in the whole. 

Another wish, dictated by the particular situation 
of the country, is, that the bank could be so con 
stituted as to be made an immediate instrument of 
loans to the proprietors of land; but this wish also 
yields to the difficulty of accomplishing it. Land is, 

Alexander Hamilton 

alone, an unfit fund for a bank circulation. If the 
notes issued upon it were not to be payable in coin, 
on demand, or at a short date, this would amount 
to nothing more than a repetition of the paper emis 
sions, which are. now exploded by the general voice. 
If the notes are to be payable in coin, the land must 
first be converted into it by sale, or mortgage. The 
difficulty of effecting the latter, is the very thing 
which begets the desire of finding another resource; 
and the former would not be practicable on a sudden 
emergency, but with sacrifices which would make 
the cure worse than the disease. Neither is the idea 
of constituting the fund partly of coin and partly of 
land, free from impediments. These two species of 
property do not, for the most part, unite in the same 
hands. Will the moneyed man consent to enter 
into a partnership with the landholder, by which the 
latter will share in the profits which will be made by 
the money of the former? The money, it is evident, 
will be the agent or efficient cause of the profits— 
the land can only be regarded as an additional 
security. It is not difficult to foresee, that a union, 
on such terms, will not readily be formed. If the 
landholders are to procure the money by sale or 
mortgage of a part of their lands, this they can as 
well do when the stock consists wholly of money, as 
if it were to be compounded of money and land. 

To procure for the landholders the assistance of 
loans, is the great desideratum. Supposing other 
difficulties surmounted, and a fund created, com 
posed partly of coin and partly of land, yet the 
benefit contemplated could only then be obtained 

National Bank 427 

by the bank's advancing them its notes for the whole, 
or part, of the value of the lands they had subscribed 
to the stock. If this advance was small, the relief 
aimed at would not be given; if it was large, the 
quantity of notes issued would be a cause of dis 
trust; and, if received at 'all, they would be likely to 
return speedily upon the bank for payment; which, 
after exhausting its coin, might be under a necessity 
of turning its lands into money, at any price that 
could be obtained for them, to the irreparable 
prejudice of the proprietors. 

Considerations of public advantage suggest a 
further wish, which is — that the bank could be es 
tablished upon principles that would cause the pro 
fits of it to redound to the immediate benefit of 
the State. This is contemplated by many who 
speak .of a national bank, but the idea seems liable 
to insuperable objections. To attach full confidence 
to an institution of this nature, it appears to be an 
essential ingredient in its structure, that it shall be 
under a private not a public direction — under the 
guidance of individual interest, not of public policy; 
which would be supposed to be, and, in certain 
emergencies, under a feeble or too sanguine adminis 
tration, would really be, liable to being too much 
influenced by public necessity. The suspicion of this 
would, most probably, be a canker that would con 
tinually corrode the vitals of the credit of the bank, 
and would be most likely to prove fatal in those 
situations in which the public good would require 
that they should be most sound and vigorous. It 
would, indeed, be little less than a miracle, should 


the credit of the bank be at the disposal of the gov 
ernment, if, in a long series of time, there was not 
experienced a calamitous abuse of it. It is true, 
that it would be the real interest of the government 
not to abuse it; its genuine policy to husband and 
cherish it with the most guarded circumspection, 
as an inestimable treasure. But what government 
ever uniformly consulted its true interests in oppo 
sition to the temptations of momentary exigencies? 
What nation was ever blessed with a constant 
succession of upright and wise administrators? 

The keen, steady, and, as it were, magnetic sense 
of their own interest as proprietors, in the directors 
of a bank, pointing invariably to its true pole — the 
prosperity of the institution, — is the only security 
that can always be relied upon for a careful and 
prudent administration. It is, therefore, the only 
basis on which an enlightened, unqualified, and per 
manent confidence can be expected to be erected 
and maintained. 

The precedents of the banks established in several 
cities of Europe, Amsterdam, Hamburgh, and others, 
may seem to militate against this position. With 
out a precise knowledge of all the peculiarities of 
their respective constitutions, it is difficult to pro 
nounce how far this may be the case. That of Am 
sterdam, however, which we best know, is rather 
under a municipal than a governmental direction. 
Particular magistrates of the city, not officers of the 
republic, have the management of it. It is also a 
bank of deposit, not of loan, or circulation; conse 
quently, less liable to abuse, as well as less useful. 

National Bank 429 

Its general business consists in receiving money for 
safe-keeping, which, if not called for within a certain 
time, becomes a part of its stock, and irreclaimable. 
But a credit is given for it on the books of the bank, 
which, being transferable, answers all the purposes 
of money. 

The directors being magistrates of the city, and 
the stockholders in general its most influential citi 
zens, it is evident that the principle of private in 
terest must be prevalent in the management of the 
bank. And it is equally evident that, from the na 
ture of its operations, that principle is less essential 
to it than to an institution constituted with a view 
to the accommodation of the public and individuals, 
by direct loans and a paper circulation. 

As far as may concern the aid of the bank, within 
the proper limits, a good government has nothing 
more to wish for than it will always possess, though 
the management be in the hands of private in 
dividuals. As the institution, if rightly constituted, 
must depend for its renovation, from time to time, 
on the pleasure of the government, it will not be 
likely to feel a disposition to render itself, by its con 
duct, unworthy of public patronage. The govern 
ment, too, in the administration of its finances, has 
it in its power to reciprocate benefits to the bank, of 
not less importance than those which the bank 
affords to the government, and which, besides, are 
never unattended with an immediate and adequate 
compensation. Independent of these more particu 
lar considerations, the natural weight and influence 
of a government will always go far towards procuring 

43° Alexander Hamilton 

a compliance with its desires; and, as the directors 
will usually be composed of some of the most dis 
creet, respectable, and well-informed citizens, it can 
hardly ever be difficult to make them sensible of the 
force of the inducements which ought to stimulate 
their exertions. 

It will not follow, from what has been said, that 
the state may not be a holder of a part of the stock 
of a bank, and consequently a sharer in the profits 
of it. It will only follow that it ought not to desire 
any participation in the direction of it, and, there 
fore, ought not to own the whole or a principal part 
of the stock; for, if the mass of the property should 
belong to the public, and if the direction of it should 
be in private hands, this would be to commit the in 
terests of the state to persons not interested, or not 
enough interested, in their proper management. 

There is one thing, however, which the govern 
ment owes to itself and the community — at least, to 
all that part of it who are not stockholders — which 
is, to reserve to itself a right of ascertaining, as often 
as may be necessary, the state of the bank; ex 
cluding, however, all pretension to control. This 
right forms an article in the primitive constitution 
of the Bank of North America ; and its propriety 
stands upon the clearest reasons. If the paper of a 
bank is to be permitted to insinuate itself into all the 
revenues and receipts of a country, if it is even to be 
tolerated as the substitute for gold and silver in all 
the transactions of business, it becomes, in either 
view, a national concern of the first magnitude. As 
such, the ordinary rules of prudence require that 

National Bank 431 

the government should possess the means of ascer 
taining, whenever it thinks fit, that so delicate a 
trust is executed with fidelity and care. A right of 
this nature is not only desirable, as it respects the 
government, but it ought to be equally so to all 
those concerned in the institution, as an additional 
title to public and private confidence, and as a thing 
which can only be formidable to practices that imply 
mismanagement. The presumption must always be, 
that the characters who would be intrusted with the 
exercise of this right, on behalf of the government, 
will not be deficient in the discretion which it may 
require; at least, the admitting this presumption 
cannot be deemed too great a return of confidence 
for that very large portion of it which the govern 
ment is required to place in the bank. 

Abandoning, therefore, ideas which, however agree 
able or desirable, are neither practicable nor safe, the 
following plan, for the constitution of a national bank, 
is respectfully submitted to the consideration of the 
House. 

1. The capital stock of the bank shall not exceed 
ten millions of dollars, divided into twenty-five 
thousand shares, each share being four hundred 
dollars; to raise which sum, subscriptions shall be 
opened on the first Monday of April next, and shall 
continue open until the whole shall be subscribed. 
Bodies politic as well as individuals may subscribe. 

2. The amount of each share shall be payable, 
one fourth in gold and silver coin, and three fourths 
in that part of the public debt which, according to 
the loan proposed by the act making provision for 

432 Alexander Hamilton 

the debt of the United States, shall bear an accruing 
interest, at the time of payment, of six per centum 
per annum. 

3. The respective sums subscribed shall be pay 
able in four equal parts, as well specie as debt, in 
succession, and at the distance of six calendar months 
from each other ; the first payment to be made at the 
time of subscription. If there shall be a failure in 
any subsequent payment, the party failing shall lose 
the benefit of any dividend which may have accrued 
prior to the time for making such payment, and 
during the delay of the same. 

4. The subscribers to the bank, and their suc 
cessors, shall be incorporated, and shall so continue 
until the final redemption of that part of its stock 
which shall consist of the public debt. 

5. The capacity of the corporation to hold real 
and personal estate shall be limited to fifteen mil 
lions of dollars, including the amount of its capital, 
or original stock. The lands and tenements which 
it shall be permitted to hold shall be only such as 
shall be requisite for the immediate accommodation 
of the institution, and such as shall have been bona 
fide mortgaged to it by way of security, or conveyed 
to it in satisfaction of debts previously contracted 
in the usual course of its dealings, or purchased at 
sales upon judgments which shall have been ob 
tained for such debts. 

6. The totality of the debts of the company, 
whether by bond, bill, or other contract (credits for 
deposits excepted), shall never exceed the amount 
of its capital stock. In case of excess, the directors, 

National Bank 433 

under whose administration it shall happen, shall 
be liable for it in their private or separate capacities. 
Those who may have dissented may excuse them 
selves from this responsibility, by immediately giv 
ing notice of the fact, and their dissent, to the 
President of the United States, and to the stock 
holders, at a general meeting, to be called by the 
president of the bank, at their request. 

7. The company may sell or devise its lands and 
tenements, or may sell the whole or any part of the 
public debt, whereof its stock shall consist ; but shall 
trade in nothing except bills of exchange, gold and 
silver bullion, or in the sale of goods pledged for 
money lent ; nor shall take more than at the rate of six 
per centum per annum, upon its loans or discounts. 

8. No loan shall be made by the bank for the use, 
or on account, of the Government of the United 
States, or of either of them, to an amount exceeding 
fifty thousand dollars, or of any foreign prince or 
state, unless previously authorized by a law of the 
United States. 

9. The stock of the bank shall be transferable, 
according to such rules as shall be instituted by the 
company in that behalf. 

10. The affairs of the bank shall be under the 
management of twenty-five directors, one of whom 
shall be the president; and there shall be, on the 
first Monday of January, in each year, a choice of 
directors, by a plurality of suffrages of the stock 
holders, to serve for a year. The directors, at their 
first meeting after each election, shall choose one of 
their number as president. 

434 Alexander Hamilton 

11. The number of votes to which each stock 
holder shall be entitled shall be according to the 
number of shares he shall hold, in the proportions 
following — that is to say: For one share, and not 
more than two shares, one vote ; for every two shares 
above two, and not exceeding ten, one vote; for 
every four shares above ten, and not exceeding 
thirty, one vote; for every six shares above thirty, 
arid not exceeding sixty, one vote; for every eight 
shares above sixty, and not exceeding one hundred, 
one vote ; and for every ten shares above one hund 
red, one vote ; but no person, copartnership, or body 
politic shall be entitled to a greater number than 
thirty votes. And, after the first election, no share 
or shares shall confer a right of suffrage, which shall 
not have been holden three calendar months previous 
to the day of election. Stockholders actually resi 
dent within the United States, and none other, may 
vote in the elections by proxy. 

12. Not more than three fourths of the directors 
in office, exclusive of the president, shall be eligible 
for the next succeeding year. But the director who 
shall be president at the time of an election, may 
always be re-elected. 

13. None but a stockholder, being a citizen of the 
United States, shall be eligible as a director. 

14. Any number of stockholders not less than 
sixty, who together shall be proprietors of two hund 
red shares, or upward, shall have power, at any 
time, to call a general meeting of the stockholders 
for purposes relative to the institution; giving at 
least six weeks' notice, in two public gazettes of the 

National Bank 435 

place where the bank is kept, and specifying in such 
notice the object of the meeting. 

15. In case of the death, resignation, absence 
from the United States, or removal of a director by 
the stockholders, his place may be filled by a new 
choice for the remainder of the year. 

1 6. No director shall be entitled to any emolu 
ment, unless the same shall have been allowed by 
the stockholders at a general meeting. The stock 
holders shall make such compensation to the presi 
dent, for his extraordinary attendance at the bank, 
as shall appear to them reasonable. 

17. Not less than seven directors shall constitute 
a board for the transaction of business. 

1 8. Every cashier or treasurer, before he enters on 
the duties of his office, shall be required to give 
bond, with two or more sureties, to the satisfaction 
of the directors, in a sum not less than twenty 
thousand dollars, with condition for his good be 
havior. 

19. Half-yearly dividends shall be made of so 
much of the profits of the bank as shall appear to 
the directors advisable. And, once in every three 
years, the directors shall lay before the stockholders, 
at a general meeting, for their information, an exact 
and particular statement of the debts which shall 
have remained unpaid, after the expiration of the 
original credit, for a period of treble the term of that 
credit, and of the surplus of profit, if any, after de 
ducting losses and dividends. 

20. The bills and notes of the bank, originally 
made payable, or which shall have become payable, 

436 Alexander Hamilton 

on demand, in gold and silver coin, shall be receivable 
in all payments to the United States. 

21. The officer at the head of the Treasury Depart 
ment of the United States shall be furnished, from 
time to time, as often as he may require, not exceed 
ing once a week, with statements of the amount of 
the capital stock of the bank, and of the debts due 
to the same, of the moneys deposited therein, of the 
notes in circulation, and of the cash in hand; and 
shall have a right to inspect such general accounts in 
the books of the bank as shall relate to the said state 
ments; provided that this shall not be construed to 
imply a right of inspecting the account of any private 
individual or individuals with the bank. 

22. No similar institution shall be established by 
any future act of the United States, during the 
continuance of the one hereby proposed to be 
established. 

23. It shall be lawful for the directors of the 
bank to establish offices wheresoever they shall think 
fit, within the United States, for the purposes of 
discount and deposit only, and upon the same terms, 
and in the same manner, as shall be practised at 
the bank, and to commit the management of the 
said offices, and the making of the said discounts, 
either to agents specially appointed by them, or to 
such persons as may be chosen by the stockholders 
residing at the place where any such office shall be, 
under such agreements, and subject to such regula 
tions, as they shall deem proper, not being contrary 
to law, or to the constitution of the bank. 

24. And lastly, the President of the United States 

National Bank 437 

shall be authorized to cause a subscription to be 
made to the stock of the said company, on behalf of 
the United States, to an amount not exceeding two 
millions of dollars, to be paid out of the moneys 
which shall be borrowed by virtue of either of the 
acts, the one entitled " An act making provision for 
the debt of the United States," and the other en 
titled "An act making provision for the reduction of 
the public debt"; borrowing of the bank an equal 
sum, to be applied to the purposes for which the 
said moneys shall have been procured, reimbursable 
in ten years, by equal annual instalments, or at any 
time sooner, or in any greater proportions, that the 
Government may think fit. 

The reasons for the several provisions contained 
in the foregoing plan have been so far anticipated, 
and will, for the most part, be so readily suggested 
by the nature of those provisions, that any comments 
which need further to be made will be both few and 
concise. 

The combination of a portion of the public debt, 
in the formation of the capital, is the principal thing 
of which an explanation is requisite. The chief 
object of this is to enable the creation of a capital 
sufficiently large to be the basis of an extensive cir 
culation, and an adequate security for it. As has 
been elsewhere remarked, the original plan of the 
Bank of North America contemplated a capital of ten 
millions of dollars, which is certainly not too broad 
a foundation for the extensive operations to which a 
national bank is destined. But to collect such a 
sum in this country, in gold and silver, into one 

Alexander Hamilton 

depository, may, without hesitation, be pronounced 
impracticable. Hence the necessity of an auxiliary, 
which the public debt at once presents. 

This part of the fund will always be ready to come 
in aid of the specie ; it will more and more command 
a ready sale; and can, therefore, expeditiously be 
turned into coin, if an exigency of the bank should 
at any time require it. This quality of prompt con 
vertibility into coin renders it an equivalent for that 
necessary agent of bank circulation, and distin 
guishes it from a fund in land, of which the sale 
would generally be far less compendious, and at 
great disadvantage. The quarter-yearly receipts of 
interest will also be an actual addition to the specie 
fund, during the intervals between them and the 
half-yearly dividends of profits. The objection to 
combining land with specie, resulting from their not 
being generally in possession of the same persons, 
does not apply to the debt, which will always be 
found in considerable quantity among the moneyed 
and trading people. 

The debt composing part of the capital, besides its 
collateral effect in enabling the bank to extend its 
operations, and consequently to enlarge its profits, 
will produce a direct annual revenue of six per 
centum for the government, which will enter into 
the half-yearly dividends received by the stock 
holders. 

When the present price of the public debt is con 
sidered, and the effect which its conversion into 
bank stock, incorporated with a specie fund, would, 
in all probability, have to accelerate its rise to the 

National Bank 439 

proper point, it will easily be discovered, that the 
operation presents, in its outset, a very considerable 
advantage to those who may become subscribers; 
and from the influence which that rise would have 
on the general mass of the debt, a proportional bene 
fit to all the public creditors, and, in a sense which 
has been more than once adverted to, to the com 
munity at large. 

There is an important fact, which exemplifies the 
fitness of the public debt for a bank fund, and which 
may serve to remove doubts in some minds on this 
point: it is this, that the Bank of England, in its 
first erection, rested wholly on that foundation. 
The subscribers to a loan to government of one mil 
lion two hundred thousand pounds sterling were in 
corporated as a bank, of which the debt, created by 
the loan and the interest upon it, were the sole fund. 
The subsequent augmentations of its capital, which 
now amounts to between eleven and twelve millions 
of pounds sterling, have been of the same nature. 

The confining of the right of the bank to contract 
debts to the amount of its capital is an important 
precaution, which is not to be found in the constitu 
tion of the Bank of North America, and which, 
while the fund consists wholly of coin, would be a 
restriction attended with inconveniences, but would 
be free from any, if the composition of it should be 
such as is now proposed. The restriction exists in 
the establishment of the Bank of England, and, as a 
source of security, is worthy of imitation. The con 
sequence of exceeding the limit, there, is, that each 
stockholder is liable for the excess, in proportion to 

440 Alexander Hamilton 

his interest in the bank. When it is considered that 
the directors owe their appointments to the choice 
of the stockholders, a responsibility of this kind, on 
the part of the latter, does not appear unreasonable ; 
but, on the other hand, it may be deemed a hardship 
upon those who may have dissented from the choice. 
And there are many among us, whom it might per 
haps discourage from becoming concerned in the in 
stitution. These reasons have induced the placing 
of the responsibility upon the directors by whom the 
limit prescribed should be transgressed. 

The interdiction of loans on account of the United 
States, or of any particular State, beyond the moder 
ate sum specified, or of any foreign Power, will serve 
as a barrier to Executive encroachments, and to 
combinations inauspicious to the safety, or contrary 
to the policy, of the Union. 

The limitation of the rate of interest is dictated by 
the consideration, that different rates prevail in dif 
ferent parts of the Union; and as the operations of 
the bank may extend through the whole, some rule 
seems to be necessary. There is room for a question, 
whether the limitation ought not rather to be to 
five than to six per cent., as proposed. It may, with 
safety, be taken for granted, that the former rate 
would yield an ample dividend, perhaps as much as 
the latter, by the extension which it would give to 
business. The natural effect of low interest is to 
increase trade and industry; because undertakings 
of every kind can be prosecuted with greater advan 
tage. This is a truth generally admitted; but it is 
requisite to have analyzed the subject in all its re- 

National Bank 44 1 

lations, to be able to form a just conception of the 
extent of that effect. Such an analysis cannot but 
satisfy an intelligent mind, that the difference of one 
per cent, in the rate at which money may be had, is 
often capable of making an essential change for the 
better in the situation of any country or place. 

Every thing, therefore, which tends to lower the 
rate of interest, is peculiarly worthy of the cares of 
legislators. And though laws, which violently sink 
the legal rate of interest greatly below the market 
level, are not to be commended, because they are 
not calculated to answer their aim, yet, whatever 
has a tendency to effect a reduction, without violence 
to the natural course of things, ought to be attended 
to and pursued. Banks are among the means most 
proper to accomplish this end; and the moderation 
of the rate at which their discounts are made is a 
material ingredient towards it; with which their 
own interest, viewed on an enlarged and permanent 
scale, does not appear to clash. 

But, as the most obvious ideas are apt to have 
greater force than those which depend on complex 
and remote combinations, there would be danger 
that the persons whose funds must constitute the 
stock of the bank would be diffident of the suffi 
ciency of the profits to be expected, if the rate of 
loans and discounts were to be placed below the 
points to which they have been accustomed, and 
might, on this account, be indisposed to embarking 
in the plan. There is, it is true, one reflection, 
which, in regard to men, actively engaged in trade, 
ought to be a security against this danger; it is this: 

442 Alexander Hamilton 

That the accommodations which they might derive 
in the way of their business, at a low rate, would 
more than indemnify them for any difference in the 
dividend, supposing even that some diminution of 
it were to be the consequence. But, upon the whole, 
the hazard of contrary reasoning among the mass of 
moneyed men is a powerful argument against the 
experiment. The institutions of the kind already 
existing add to the difficulty of making it. Mature 
reflection and a large capital may, of themselves, 
lead to the desired end. 

The last thing which requires any explanatory 
remark is, the authority proposed to be given to the 
President, to subscribe the amount of two millions 
of dollars on account of the public. The main de 
sign of this is, to enlarge the specie fund of the bank, 
and to enable it to give a more early extension to its 
operations. Though it is proposed to borrow with 
one hand what is lent with the other, yet the dis 
bursement of what is borrowed will be progressive, 
and bank-notes may be thrown into circulation, in 
stead of the gold and silver. Besides, there is to be 
an annual reimbursement of a part of the sum bor 
rowed, which will finally operate as an actual in 
vestment of so much specie. In addition to the 
inducements to this measure, which result from 
the general interest of the government to enlarge the 
sphere of the utility of the bank, there is this more 
particular consideration, to wit: That, as far as the 
dividend on the stock shall exceed the interest paid 
on the loan, there is a positive profit. 

The Secretary begs leave to conclude with this 

National Bank 443 

general observation: That, if the Bank of North 
America shall come forward with any propositions 
which have for their objects, the engrafting upon 
that institution, the characteristics which shall ap 
pear to the Legislature necessary to the due extent 
and safety of a national bank, there are, in his 
judgment, weighty inducements to giving every 
reasonable facility to the measure. Not only the pre 
tensions of that institution, from its original relation 
to the Government of the United States, and from 
the services it has rendered, are such as to claim a 
disposition favorable to it, if those who are inter 
ested in it are willing, on their part, to place it on a 
footing satisfactory to the government, and equal 
to the purposes of a bank of the United States, but 
its co-operation would materially accelerate the ac 
complishment of the great object, and the collision, 
which might otherwise arise, might, in a variety 
of ways, prove equally disagreeable and injurious. 
The incorporation or union here contemplated may 
be effected in different modes, under the auspices of 
an act of the United States, if it shall be desired by 
the Bank of North America, upon terms which shall 
appear expedient to the government. 

All which is humbly submitted. 

ALEXANDER HAMILTON, 

Secretary of the Treasury. 

WASHINGTON TO HAMILTON 
gIR. PHILADELPHIA, February 16, 1791. 

An act to incorporate the subscribers to the Bank of 
the United States is now before me for consideration. 

444 Alexander Hamilton 

The constitutionality of it is objected to. It therefore 
becomes more particularly my duty to examine the ground 
on which the objection is built. As a means of investiga 
tion, I have called upon the Attorney-General of the 
United States, in whose line it seemed more particularly 
to be, for his official examination and opinion. His re 
port is, that the Constitution does not warrant the act. I 
then applied to the Secretary of State for his sentiments 
on this subject. These coincide with the Attorney- 
General's ; and the reasons for their opinions having been 
submitted in writing, I now require, in like manner, 
yours on the validity and propriety of the above-recited 
act; and, that you may know the points on which the 
Secretary of State and the Attorney-General dispute the 
constitutionality of the act, and that I may be fully pos 
sessed of the arguments for and against the measure, 
before I express any opinion of my own, I give you an 
opportunity of examining and answering the objections 
contained in the enclosed papers. I require the return of 
them when your own sentiments are handed to me (which 
I wish may be as soon as is convenient) ; and further, that 
no copies of them be taken, as it is for my own satisfac 
tion they have been called for. 

HAMILTON TO WASHINGTON 

Monday. 

The Secretary of the Treasury presents his re 
spects to the President of the United States, to re 
quest his indulgence for not having yet furnished his 
reasons on a certain point. He has been ever since 
sedulously engaged in it, but finds it will be im 
possible to complete it before Tuesday evening or 

National Bank 445 

Wednesday morning early. He is anxious to give 
the point a thorough examination. 


The Secretary of the Treasury presents his re 
spects to the President, and sends him the opinion 
required, which occupied him the greatest part of 
last night. 

The bill for extending the time of opening sub 
scriptions passed yesterday unanimously to an order 
for engrossing. 

Opinion as to the Constitutionality of the Bank of the 
United States 

February 23, 1791. 

The Secretary of the Treasury having perused 
with attention the papers containing the opinions of 
the Secretary of State and the Attorney-General, 
concerning the constitutionality of the bill for estab 
lishing a national bank, proceeds, according to the 
order of the President, to submit the reasons which 
have induced him to entertain a different opinion. 

It will naturally have been anticipated, that in 
performing this task he would feel uncommon so 
licitude. Personal considerations alone, arising from 
the reflection that the measure originated with him, 
would be sufficient to produce it. The sense which 
he has manifested of the great importance of such an 
institution to the successful administration of the 
department under his particular care, and an ex 
pectation of serious ill consequences to result from 

Alexander Hamilton 

a failure of the measure, do not permit him to be 
without anxiety on public accounts. But the chief 
solicitude arises from a firm persuasion, that prin 
ciples of construction like those espoused by the 
Secretary of State and the Attorney-General would 
be fatal to the just and indispensable authority of 
the United States. 

In entering upon the argument, it ought to be 
premised that the objections of the Secretary of 
State and the Attorney-General are founded on a 
general denial of the authority of the United States 
to erect corporations. The latter, indeed, expressly 
admits, that if there be anything in the bill which is 
not warranted by the Constitution, it is the clause 
of incorporation. 

Now it appears to the Secretary of the Treasury 
that this general principle is inherent in the very 
definition of government, and essential to every step 
of the progress to be made by that of the United 
States, namely: That every power vested in a gov 
ernment is in its nature sovereign, and includes, by 
force of the term, a right to employ all the means 
requisite and fairly applicable to the attainment of 
the ends of such power, and which are not precluded 
by restrictions and exceptions specified in the Con 
stitution, or not immoral, or not contrary to the 
essential ends of political society.1 

This principle, in its application to government in 
general, would be admitted as an axiom; and it will 
be incumbent upon those who may incline to deny 

1 This is the beginning of the argument in favor of the implied powers 
of the Constitution which Hamilton was the first to evoke. 

National Bank 447 

it, to prove a distinction, and to show that a rule 
which, in the general system of things, is essential to 
the preservation of the social order, is inapplicable 
to the United States. 

The circumstance that the powers of sovereignty 
are in this country divided between the National and 
State governments, does not afford the distinction 
required. It does not follow from this, that each of 
the portion of powers delegated to the one or to the 
other, is not sovereign with regard to its proper ob 
jects. It will only follow from it, that each has sov 
ereign power as to certain things, and not as to other 
things. To deny that the Government of the United 
States has sovereign power, as to its declared pur 
poses and trusts, because its power does not extend 
to all cases, would be equally to deny that the State 
governments have sovereign power in any case, be 
cause their power does not extend to every case. 
The tenth section of the first article of the Constitu 
tion exhibits a long list of very important things 
which they may not do. And thus the United 
States would furnish the singular spectacle of a 
political society without sovereignty, or of a people 
governed, without government. 

If it would be necessary to bring proof to a pro 
position so clear, as that which affirms that the 
powers of the Federal Government, as to its objects, 
were sovereign, there is a clause of its Constitution 
which would be decisive. It is that which declares 
that the Constitution, and the laws of the United 
States made in pursuance of it, and all treaties made, 
or which shall be made, under their authority, shall 

44$ Alexander Hamilton 

be the supreme law of the land. The power which 
can create the supreme law of the land in any case, is 
doubtless sovereign as to such case. 

This general and indisputable principle puts at 
once an end to the abstract question, whether the 
United States have power to erect a corporation; 
that is to say, to give a legal or artificial capacity to 
one or more persons, distinct from the natural. For 
it is unquestionably incident to sovereign power to 
erect corporations, and consequently to that of the 
United States, in relation to the objects intrusted to 
the management of the government. The difference 
is this: where the authority of the government is 
general, it can create corporations in all cases; where 
it is confined to certain branches of legislation, it can 
create corporations only in those cases. 

Here, then, as far as concerns the reasonings of 
the Secretary of State and the Attorney- General, the 
affirmative of the constitutionality of the bill might 
be permitted to rest. It will occur to the President, 
that the principle here advanced has been untouched 
by either of them. 

For a more complete elucidation of the point, 
nevertheless, the arguments which they had used 
against the power of the government to erect cor 
porations, however foreign they are to the great and 
fundamental rule which has been stated, shall be 
particularly examined. And after showing that 
they do not tend to impair its force, it shall also be 
shown that the power of incorporation, incident to 
the government in certain cases, does fairly extend 
to the particular case which is the object of the bill. 

National Bank 449 

The first of these arguments is, that the founda 
tion of the Constitution is laid on this ground: 
" That all powers not delegated to the United States 
by the Constitution, nor prohibited by it to the 
States, are reserved to the States, or to the people/* 
Whence it is meant to be inferred, that Congress can 
in no case exercise any power not included in those 
enumerated in the Constitution. And it is affirmed, 
that the power of erecting a corporation is not in 
cluded in any of the enumerated powers. 

The main proposition here laid down, in its true 
signification, is not to be questioned. It is nothing 
more than a consequence of this republican maxim, 
that all government is a delegation of power. But 
how much is delegated in each case is a question of 
fact, to be made out by fair reasoning and construc 
tion, upon the particular provisions of the Con 
stitution, taking as guides the general principles and 
general ends of governments. 

It is not denied that there are implied, as well 
as express powers, and that the former are as ef 
fectually delegated as the latter. And for the sake 
of accuracy it shall be mentioned that there is an 
other class of powers, which may be properly de 
nominated resulting powers. It will not be doubted 
that if the United States should make a conquest of 
any of the territories of its neighbors, they would 
possess sovereign jurisdiction over the conquered 
territory. This would be rather a result from the 
whole mass of the powers of the government, and 
from the nature of political society, than a conse 
quence of either of the powers specially enumerated. 

VOL. HI.— 2Q. 

45° Alexander Hamilton 

But be this as it may, it furnishes a striking il 
lustration of the general doctrine contended for; it 
shows an extensive case, in which a power of erecting 
corporations is either implied in, or would result 
from, some or all of the powers vested in the Na 
tional Government. The jurisdiction acquired over 
such conquered country would certainly be com 
petent to any species of legislation. 

To return : — It is conceded that implied powers are 
to be considered as delegated equally with express 
ones. Then it follows, that as a power of erecting a 
corporation may as well be implied as any other 
thing, it may as well be employed as an instrument 
or means of carrying into execution any of the speci 
fied powers, as any other instrument or means what 
ever. The only question must be in this, as in every 
other case, whether the means to be employed, or, 
in this instance, the corporation to be erected, has 
a natural relation to any of the acknowledged ob 
jects or lawful ends of the government. Thus a 
corporation may not be erected by Congress for 
superintending the police of the city of Philadelphia, 
because they are not authorized to regulate the 
police of that city. But one may be erected in rela 
tion to the collection of taxes, or to the trade with 
foreign countries, or to the trade between the States, 
or with the Indian tribes ; because it is the province 
of the Federal Government to regulate those objects, 
and because it is incident to a general sovereign or 
legislative power to regulate a thing, to employ all the 
means which relate to its regulation to the best and 
greatest advantage. 

National Bank 451 

A strange fallacy seems to have crept into the 
manner of thinking and reasoning upon this subject. 
Imagination appears to have been unusually busy 
concerning it. An incorporation seems to have been 
regarded as some great independent substantive thing; 
as a political end of peculiar magnitude and moment; 
whereas it is truly to be considered as a quality, 
capacity, or means to an end. Thus a mercantile 
company is formed, with a certain capital, for the 
purpose of carrying on a particular branch of busi 
ness. Here the business to be prosecuted is the end. 
The association in order to form the requisite capital, 
is the primary mean. Suppose that an incorpora 
tion were added to this, it would only be to add a 
new quality to that association, to give it an artificial 
capacity, by which it would be enabled to prosecute 
the business with more safety and convenience. 

That the importance of the power of incorpora 
tion has been exaggerated, leading to erroneous con 
clusions, will further appear from tracing it to its 
origin. The Roman law is the source of it, according 
to which a voluntary association of individuals, at 
any time, or for any purpose, was capable of pro 
ducing it. In England, whence our notions of it are 
immediately borrowed, it forms part of the execut 
ive authority, and the exercise of it has been often 
delegated by that authority. Whence, therefore, the 
ground of the supposition that it lies beyond the 
reach of all those very important portions of sover 
eign power, legislative as well as executive, which 
belong to the Government of the United States? 
^Through this mode of reasoning respecting the 

45 2 Alexander Hamilton 

right of employing all the means requisite to the 
execution of the specified powers of the government, 
it is to be objected, that none but necessary and 
proper means are to be employed; and the Secretary 
of State maintains, that no means are to be con 
sidered necessary but those without which the grant 
of the power would be nugatory. Nay, so far does 
he go in his restrictive interpretation of the word, 
as even to make the case of necessity which shall 
warrant the constitutional exercise of the power to 
depend on casual and temporary circumstances; an 
idea which alone refutes the construction. The 
expediency of exercising a particular power, at a 
particular time, must, indeed, depend on circum 
stances ; but the constitutional right of exercising it 
must be uniform and invariable, the same to-day as 
to-morrow. 

All the arguments, therefore, against the con 
stitutionality of the bill derived from the accidental 
existence of certain State banks — institutions which 
happen to exist to-day, and, for aught that concerns 
the government of the United States, may disappear 
to-morrow — must not only be rejected as fallacious, 
but must be viewed as demonstrative that there is 
a radical source of error in the reasoning. 

It is essential to the being of the national govern 
ment, that so erroneous a conception of the meaning 
of the word necessary should be exploded. 

It is certain, that neither the grammatical nor 
popular sense of the term requires that construction. 
According to both, necessary often means no more 
than needful, requisite, incidental, useful, or conducive 

National Bank 453 

to. It is a common mode of expression to say, that 
it is necessary for a government or a person to do 
this or that thing, when nothing more is intended 
or understood, than that the interests of the govern 
ment or person require, or will be promoted by, the 
doing of this or that thing. The imagination can be 
at no loss for exemplifications of the use of the word 
in this sense. And it is the true one in which it is 
to be understood as used in the Constitution. The 
whole turn of the clause containing it indicates, that 
it was the intent of the Convention, by that clause, 
to give a liberal latitude to the exercise of the 
specified powers. The expressions have peculiar 
comprehensiveness. They are, "to make all laws 
necessary and proper for carrying into execution the 
foregoing powers, and all other powers vested by the 
Constitution in the Government of the United States, 
or in any department or officer thereof." 

To understand the word as the Secretary of State 
does, would be to depart from its obvious and popu 
lar sense, and to give it a restrictive operation, an 
idea never before entertained. It would be to give 
it the same force as if the word absolutely or indis 
pensably had been prefixed to it. 

Such a construction would beget endless uncer 
tainty and embarrassment. The cases must be pal 
pable and extreme, in which it could be pronounced, 
with certainty, that a measure was absolutely neces 
sary, or one, without which the exercise of a given 
power would be nugatory. There are few measures 
of any government which would stand so severe 
a test. To insist upon it, would be to make the 

454 Alexander Hamilton 

criterion of the exercise of any implied power, a case 
of extreme necessity; which is rather a rule to justify 
the overleaping of the bounds of constitutional au 
thority, than to govern the ordinary exercise of it. 

It may be truly said of every government, as well 
as of that of the United States, that it has only a 
right to pass such laws as are necessary and proper to 
accomplish the objects intrusted to it. For no gov 
ernment has a right to do merely what it pleases. 
Hence, by a process of reasoning similar to that of 
the Secretary of State, it might be proved that 
neither of the State governments has the right to 
incorporate a bank. It might be shown that all the 
public business of the State could be performed 
without a bank, and inferring thence that it was un 
necessary, it might be argued that it could not be 
done, because it is against the rule which has been 
just mentioned. A like mode of reasoning would 
prove that there was no power to incorporate the 
inhabitants of a town, with a view to a more perfect 
police. For it is certain that an incorporation may 
be dispensed with, though it is better to have one. 
It is to be remembered that there is no express power 
in any State constitution to erect corporations. 

The degree in which a measure is necessary can 
never be a test of the legal right to adopt it; that 
must be a matter of opinion, and can only be a test 
of expediency. The relation between the measure and 
the end; between the nature of the means employed 
towards the execution of a power, and the object of 
that power, must be the criterion of constitutionality, 
not the more or less of necessity or utility. 

National Bank 455 

The practice of the government is against the rule 
of construction advocated by the Secretary of State. 
Of this, the act concerning light-houses, beacons, 
buoys, and public piers is a decisive example. This, 
doubtless, must be referred to the powers of regulat 
ing trade, and is fairly relative to it. But it cannot 
be affirmed that the exercise of that power in this 
instance was strictly necessary, or that the power it 
self would be nugatory, without that of regulating 
establishments of this nature. 

This restrictive interpretation of the word neces 
sary is also contrary to this sound maxim of con 
struction; namely, that the powers contained in a 
constitution of government, especially those which 
concern the general administration of the affairs of 
a country, its finances, trade, defence, etc., ought to 
be construed liberally in advancement of the public 
good. This rule does not depend on the particular 
form of a government, or on the particular demarca 
tion of the boundaries of its powers, but on the na 
ture and objects of government itself. The means 
by which national exigencies are to be provided for, 
national inconveniences obviated, national prosperity 
promoted, are of such infinite variety, extent, and 
complexity, that there must of necessity be great 
latitude of discretion in the selection and application 
of those means. Hence, consequently, the necessity 
and propriety of exercising the authorities intrusted 
to a government on principles of liberal construction. 

The Attorney-General admits the rule, but makes 
a distinction between a State and the Federal 
Constitution. The latter, he thinks, ought to be 

456 Alexander Hamilton 

construed with greater strictness, because there is 
more danger of error in defining partial than general 
powers. But the reason of the rule forbids such a 
distinction. This reason is, the variety and extent of 
public exigencies, a far greater proportion of which, 
and of a far more critical kind, are objects of Na 
tional than of State administration. The greater 
danger of error, as far as it is supposable, may be a 
prudential reason for caution in practice, but it can 
not be a rule of restrictive interpretation. 

In regard to the clause of the Constitution im 
mediately under consideration, it is admitted by the 
Attorney-General, that no restrictive effect can be 
ascribed to it. He defines the word necessary thus : 
"To be necessary is to be incidental, and may be 
denominated the natural means of executing a 
power/' 

But while on the one hand the construction of the 
Secretary of State is deemed inadmissible, it will not 
be contended, on the other, that the clause in ques 
tion gives any new or independent power. But it 
gives an explicit sanction to the doctrine of implied 
powers, and is equivalent to an admission of the 
proposition that the government, as to its specified 
powers and objects, has plenary and sovereign au 
thority, in some cases paramount to the States; in 
others, co-ordinate with it. For such is the plain 
import of the declaration, that it may pass all laws 
necessary and proper to carry into execution those 
powers. 

It is no valid objection to the doctrine to say, 
that it is calculated to extend the power of the 

National Bank 457 

General Government throughout the entire sphere 
of State legislation. The same thing has been said, 
and may be said, with regard to every exercise of 
power by implication or construction. 

The moment the literal meaning is departed from, 
there is a chance of error and abuse. And yet an 
adherence to the letter of its powers would at once 
arrest the motions of government. It is not only 
agreed, on all hands, that the exercise of constructive 
powers is indispensable, but every act which has 
been passed is more or less an exemplification of it. 
One has been already mentioned — that relating to 
light-houses, etc. ; that which declares the power of 
the President to remove officers at pleasure, ac 
knowledges the same truth in another and a signal 
instance. 

The truth is, that difficulties on this point are in 
herent in the nature of the Federal Constitution; 
they result inevitably from a division of the legis 
lative power. The consequence of this division is, 
that there will be cases clearly within the power of 
the National Government; others, clearly without 
its powers; and a third class, which will leave room 
for controversy and difference of opinion, and con 
cerning which a reasonable latitude of judgment 
must be allowed. 

But the doctrine which is contended for is not 
chargeable with the consequences imputed to it. It 
does not affirm that the National Government is 
sovereign in all respects, but that it is sovereign to 
a certain extent — that is, to the extent of the ob 
jects of its specified powers. 

458 Alexander Hamilton 

It leaves, therefore, a criterion of what is con 
stitutional, and of what is not so. This criterion is 
the end, to which the measure relates as a means. 
If the end be clearly comprehended within any of 
the specified powers, and if the measure have an 
obvious relation to that end, and is not forbidden by 
any particular provision of the Constitution, it may 
safely be deemed to come within the compass of the 
national authority. There is also this further cri 
terion, which may materially assist the decision: 
Does the proposed measure abridge a pre-existing 
right of any State or of any individual? If it does 
not, there is a strong presumption in favor of its con 
stitutionality, and slighter relations to any declared 
object of the Constitution may be permitted to turn 
the scale. 

The general objections, which are to be inferred 
from the reasonings of the Secretary of State and 
the Attorney- General, to the doctrines which have 
been advanced, have been stated, and it is hoped 
satisfactorily answered. Those of a more particular 
nature shall now be examined. 

The Secretary of State introduces his opinion with 
an observation, that the proposed incorporation 
undertakes to create certain capacities, properties, 
or attributes, which are against the laws of alienage, 
descents, escheat, and forfeiture, distribution and 
monopoly, and to confer a power to make laws para 
mount to those of the States. And nothing, says he, 
in another place, but necessity, invincible by other 
means, can justify such a prostration of laws, which 
constitute the pillars of our whole system of juris- 

National Bank 459 

prudence, and are the foundation laws of the State 
governments. If these are truly the foundation 
laws of the several States, then have most of them 
subverted their own foundations. For there is 
scarcely one of them which has not, since the estab 
lishment of its particular constitution, made ma 
terial alterations in some of those branches of its 
jurisprudence, especially the law of descents. But 
it is not conceived how any thing can be called the 
fundamental law of a State government, which is not 
established in its constitution, unalterable by the 
ordinary Legislature. And with regard to the ques 
tion of necessity, it has been shown that this can 
only constitute a question of expediency, not of 
right. 

To erect a corporation, is to substitute a legal or 
artificial to a natural person, and where a number 
are concerned, to give them individuality. To that 
legal or artificial person, once created, the common law 
of every State, of itself , annexes all those incidents 
and attributes which are represented as a prostration 
of the main pillars of their jurisprudence. 

It is certainly not accurate to say that the erection 
of a corporation is against those different heads of 
the State laws; because it is rather to create a kind 
of person or entity, to which they are inapplicable, 
and to which the general rule of those laws assign 
a different regimen. The laws of alienage cannot 
apply to an artificial person, because it can have 
no country; those of descent cannot apply to it, 
because it can have no heirs; those of escheat 
are foreign from it, for the same reason; those of 

460 Alexander Hamilton 

forfeiture, because it cannot commit a crime; those 
of distribution, because, though it may be dissolved, 
it cannot die. 

As truly might it be said, that the exercise of the 
power of prescribing the rule by which foreigners 
shall be naturalized is against the law of alienage, 
while it is, in fact, only to put them in a situation to 
cease to be the subject of that law. To do a thing 
which is against a law, is to do something which it 
forbids, or which is a violation of it. 

But if it were even to be admitted that the erection 
of a corporation is a direct alteration of the stated 
laws, in the enumerated particulars, it would do 
nothing toward proving that the measure was un 
constitutional. If the Government of the United 
States can do no act which amounts to an alteration 
of a State law, all its powers are nugatory; for al 
most every new law is an alteration, in some way or 
another, of an old law, either common or statute. 

There are laws concerning bankruptcy in some 
States. Some States have laws regulating the values 
of foreign coins. Congress are empowered to estab 
lish uniform laws concerning bankruptcy throughout 
the United States, and to regulate the values of 
foreign coins. The exercise of either of these powers 
by Congress necessarily involves an alteration of the 
laws of those States. 

Again. Every person, by the common law of each 
State, may export his property to foreign countries, 
at pleasure. But Congress in pursuance of the 
power of regulating trade, may prohibit the exporta 
tion of commodities; in doing which, they would 

National Bank 461 

alter the common law of each State, in abridgment 
of individual right. 

It can therefore never be good reasoning to say 
this or that act is unconstitutional, because it alters 
this or that law of a State. It must be shown that 
the act which makes the alteration is unconstitu 
tional on other accounts; not because it makes the 
alteration. 

There are two points in the suggestions of the 
Secretary of State, which have been noted, that are 
peculiarly incorrect. One is, that the proposed in 
corporation is against the laws of monopoly, because 
it stipulates an exclusive right of banking under the 
national authority; the other, that it gives power to 
the institution to make laws paramount to those of 
the States. 

But, with regard to the first point: The bill 
neither prohibits any State from erecting as many 
banks as they please, nor any number of individuals 
from associating to carry on the business, and con 
sequently is free from the charge of establishing a 
monopoly; for monopoly implies a legal impediment 
to the carrying on of the trade by others than those 
to whom it is granted. 

And with regard to the second point, there is still 
less foundation. The by-laws of such an institution 
as a bank can operate only on its own members, can 
only concern the disposition of its own property, and 
must essentially resemble the rules of a private mer 
cantile partnership. They are expressly not to be 
contrary to law; and law must here mean the law 
of a State, as well as of the United States. There 

462 Alexander Hamilton 

never can be a doubt, that a law of a corporation, if 
contrary to a law of a State, must be overruled as 
void, unless the law of the State is contrary to that 
of the United States, and then the question will not 
be between the law of the State and that of the 
corporation, but between the law of the State and 
that of the United States. 

Another argument made use of by the Secretary 
of State is, the rejection of a proposition by the Con 
vention to empower Congress to make corporations, 
either generally, or for some special purpose. 

What was the precise nature or extent of this 
proposition, or what the reasons for refusing it, is 
not ascertained by any authentic document, or even 
by accurate recollection. As far as any such docu 
ment exists, it specifies only canals. If this was the 
amount of it, it would, at most, only prove that it 
was thought inexpedient to give a power to incor 
porate for the purpose of opening canals, for which 
purpose a special power would have been necessary, 
except with regard to the western territory, there 
being nothing in any part of the Constitution re 
specting the regulation of canals. It must be con 
fessed, however, that very different accounts are 
given of the import of the proposition, and of the 
motives for rejecting it. Some affirm that it was 
confined to the opening of canals and obstructions 
in rivers; others, that it embraced banks; and 
others, that it extended to the power of incorporating 
generally. Some, again, allege that it was dis 
agreed to because it was thought improper to vest 
in Congress a power of erecting corporations. Others, 

National Bank 463 

because it was thought unnecessary to specify the 
power, and inexpedient to furnish an additional topic 
of objection to the Constitution. In this state of the 
matter, no inference whatever can be drawn from it. 

But whatever may have been the nature of the 
proposition, or the reasons for rejecting it, it in 
cludes nothing in respect to the real merits of the 
question. The Secretary of State will not deny 
that, whatever may have been the intention of the 
framers of a constitution or of a law, that intention 
is to be sought for in the instrument itself, according 
to the usual and established rules of construction. 
Nothing is more common than for laws to express 
and effect more or less than was intended. If, then, 
a power to erect a corporation in any case be deduci- 
ble, by fair inference, from the whole or any part of 
the numerous provisions of the Constitution of the 
United States, arguments drawn from extrinsic cir 
cumstances, regarding the intention of the Conven 
tion, must be rejected. 

Most of the arguments of the Secretary of State, 
which have not been considered in the foregoing 
remarks, are of a nature rather to apply to the ex 
pediency than to the constitutionality of the bill. 
They will, however, be noticed in the discussions 
which will be necessary in reference to the particular 
heads of the powers of the government which are in 
volved in the question. 

Those of the Attorney-General will now properly 
come under view. 

His first objection is, that the power of incorpora 
tion is not expressly given to Congress. This shall 

464 Alexander Hamilton 

be conceded, but in this sense only, that it is not de 
clared in express terms that Congress may erect a 
corporation. But this cannot mean, that there are 
not certain express powers which necessarily include 
it. For instance, Congress have express power to 
exercise exclusive legislation, in all cases whatso 
ever, over such district (not exceeding ten miles 
square) as may, by cession of particular States and 
the acceptance of Congress, become the seat of the 
Government of the United States; and to exercise 
like authority over all places purchased, by consent 
of the Legislature of the State in which the same 
shall be, for the erection of forts, arsenals, dock 
yards, and other needful buildings. Here, then, is 
express power to exercise exclusive legislation, in all 
cases whatsoever, over certain places — that is, to do, 
in respect to those places, all that any government 
whatsoever may do. For language does not afford 
a more complete designation of sovereign power than 
in those comprehensive terms. It is, in other words, 
a power to pass all laws whatsoever, and, conse 
quently, to pass laws for erecting corporations, as 
well as for any other purpose which is the proper 
object of law in a free government. 

Surely it can never be believed that Congress, with 
exclusive powers of legislation in all cases whatsoever, 
cannot erect a corporation within the district which 
shall become the seat of government, for the better 
regulation of its police. And yet there is an un 
qualified denial of the power to erect corporations 
in every case, on the part both of the Secretary of 
State and of the Attorney-General; the former, in- 

National Bank 465 

deed, speaks of that power in these emphatical terms: 
That it is a right remaining exclusively with the 
States. 

As far, then, as there is an express power to do any 
particular act of legislation, there is an express one 
to erect a corporation in the case above described. 
But, accurately speaking, no particular power is 
more than that implied in a general one. Thus the 
power to lay a duty on a gallon of rum is only a par 
ticular implied in the general power to lay and 
collect taxes, duties, imposts, and excises. This 
serves to explain in what sense it may be said 
that Congress have not an express power to make 
corporations. 

This may not be an improper place to take notice 
of an argument which was used in debate in the 
House of Representatives. It was there argued, 
that if the Constitution intended to confer so im 
portant a power as that of erecting corporations, it 
would have been expressly mentioned. But the 
case which has been noticed is clearly one in which 
such a power exists, and yet without any specifica 
tion or express grant of it, further than as every 
particular implied in a general power can be said to 
be so granted. 

But the argument itself is founded upon an ex 
aggerated and erroneous conception of the nature of 
the power. It has been shown that it is not of so 
transcendent a kind as the reasoning supposes, and 
that, viewed in a just light, it is a means, which 
ought to have been left to implication, rather than 
an end, which ought to have been expressly granted. 

VOL. III.— 30. 

466 Alexander Hamilton 

Having observed that the power of erecting cor 
porations is not expressly granted to Congress, the 
Attorney-General proceeds thus : 

If it can be exercised by them, it must be — 

1. Because the nature of the Federal Government 
implies it. 

2. Because it is involved in some of the specified 
powers of legislation. 

3. Because it is necessary and proper to carry into 
execution some of the specified powers. 

To be implied in the nature of the Federal Govern 
ment, says he, would beget a doctrine so indefinite 
as to grasp at every power. 

This proposition, it ought to be remarked, is not 
precisely, or even substantially, that which has been 
relied upon. The proposition relied upon is, that 
the specified powers of Congress are in their nature 
sovereign; that it is incident to sovereign power to 
erect corporations, and that therefore Congress have 
a right, within the sphere and in relation to the ob 
jects of their power, to erect corporations. It shall, 
however, be supposed that the Attorney-General 
would consider the two propositions in the same 
light, and that the objection made to the one would 
be made to the other. 

To this objection an answer has been already 
given. It is this: that the doctrine is stated with 
this express qualification, that the right to erect cor 
porations does only extend to cases and objects 
within the sphere of the specified powers of the gov 
ernment. A general legislative authority implies a 

National Bank 467 

power to erect corporations in all cases. A par 
ticular legislative power implies authority to erect 
corporations in relation to cases arising under that 
power only. Hence the affirming that, as incident 
to sovereign power, Congress may erect a corporation 
in relation to the collection of their taxes, is no more 
than to affirm that they may do whatever else they 
please; than the saying that they have a power to 
regulate trade, would be to affirm that they have a 
power to regulate religion ; or than the maintaining 
that they have sovereign power as to taxation, would 
be to maintain that they have sovereign power as to 
every thing else. 

The Attorney-General undertakes in the next 
place to show, that the power of erecting corpora 
tions is not involved in any of the specified powers 
of legislation confided to the National Government. 
In order to do this, he has attempted an enumeration 
of the particulars, which he supposes to be compre 
hended under the several heads of the powers to lay 
and collect taxes, etc.; to borrow money on the 
credit of the United States; to regulate commerce 
with sovereign nations, between the States, and with 
the Indian tribes; to dispose of and make all need 
ful rules and regulations respecting the territory or 
other property belonging to the United States. The 
design of which enumeration is to show what is in 
cluded under those different heads of power, and 
negatively, that the power of erecting corporations 
is not included. 

The truth of this inference or conclusion must de 
pend on the accuracy of the enumeration. If it can 

468 Alexander Hamilton 

be shown that the enumeration is defective, the in 
fluence is destroyed. To do this will be attended 
with no difficulty. 

The heads of the power to lay and collect taxes 
are stated to be: 

1 . To stipulate the sum to be lent. 

2. An interest or no interest to be paid. 

3. The time and manner of repaying, unless the 
loan be placed on an irredeemable fund. 

This enumeration is liable to a variety of objec 
tions. It omits, in the first place, the pledging or 
mortgaging of a fund for the security of the money lent, 
a usual and in most cases an essential ingredient. 

The idea of a stipulation of an interest or no in 
terest is too confined. It should rather have been 
said, to stipulate the consideration of the loan. In 
dividuals often borrow on considerations other than 
the payment of interest; so may governments, and 
so they often find it necessary to do. Every one 
recollects the lottery tickets and other douceurs 
often given in Great Britain as collateral induce 
ments to the lending of money to the government. 
There are also frequently collateral conditions, 
which the enumeration does not contemplate. Every 
contract which has been made for moneys borrowed 
in Holland, induces stipulations that the sum due 
shall be free from taxes, and from sequestration in 
time of war, and mortgages all the land and property 
of the United States for the reimbursements. 

It is also known that a lottery is a common ex 
pedient for borrowing money, which certainly does 
not fall under either of the enumerated heads. 

National Bank 469 

The heads of the power to regulate commerce with 
foreign nations are stated to be: 

1. To prohibit them or their commodities from 
our ports. 

2. To impose duties on them, where none existed 
before, or to increase existing duties on them. 

3. To subject them to any species of custom 
house regulation. 

4. To grant them any exemptions or privileges 
which policy may suggest. 

This enumeration is far more exceptionable than 
either of the former. It omits every iking that re 
lates to the citizens' vessels, or commodities of the 
United States. 

The following palpable omissions occur at once: 

1 . Of the power to prohibit the exportation of com 
modities, which not only exists at all times, but which 
in time of war it would be necessary to exercise, par 
ticularly with relation to naval and warlike stores. 

2. Of the power to prescribe rules concerning the 
characteristics and privileges of an American bottom; 
how she shall be navigated, or whether by citizens or 
foreigners, or by a proportion of each. 

3. Of the power of regulating the manner of con 
tracting with seamen, the police of ships on their 
voyages, etc., of which the act for the government 
and regulation of seamen, in the merchants' service, 
is a specimen. 

That the three preceding articles are omissions will 
not be doubted ; there is a long list of items in addi 
tion, which admit of little if any question, of which a 
few samples shall be given. 

470 Alexander Hamilton 

1. The granting of bounties to certain kinds of 
vessels, and certain species of merchandise; of this 
nature is the allowance on dried and pickled fish and 
salted provisions. 

2. The prescribing of rules concerning the in 
spection of commodities to be exported. Though 
the States individually are competent to this regula 
tion, yet there is no reason, in point of authority at 
least, why a general system might not be adopted 
by the United States. 

3. The regulation of policies of insurance, of sal 
vage upon goods found at sea, and the disposition of 
such goods. 

4. The regulation of pilots. 

5. The regulation of bills of exchange drawn by a 
merchant of one State upon a merchant of another 
State. This last rather belongs to the regulation of 
trade between the States, but is equally omitted in 
the specification under that head. 

The last enumeration relates to the power to dis 
pose of and make all needful rules and regulations re 
specting the territory or other property belonging to 
the United States. 

The heads of this power are said to be: 

1 . To exert an ownership over the territory of the 
United States, which may be properly called the 
property of the United States, as in the western terri 
tory, and to institute a government therein, or 

2. To exert an ownership over the other property 
of the United States. 

The idea of exerting an ownership over the terri 
tory or other property of the United States is par- 

National Bank 47 1 

ticularly indefinite and vague. It does not at all 
satisfy the conception of what must have been in 
tended by a power to make all needful rules and 
regulations, nor would there have been any use for a 
special clause, which authorized nothing more. For 
the right of exerting an ownership is implied in the 
very definition of property. It is admitted, that in 
regard to the western territory something more is 
intended; even the institution of a government — 
that is, the creation of a body politic, or corporation 
of the highest nature; one which, in its maturity, 
will be able itself to create other corporations. Why, 
then, does not the same clause authorize the erection 
of a corporation in respect to the regulation or disposal 
of any other of the property of the United States? 

This idea will be enlarged upon in another place. 

Hence it appears, that the enumerations which 
have been attempted by the Attorney-General, are 
so imperfect as to authorize no conclusion whatever; 
they therefore have no tendency to disprove that 
each and every of the powers to which they relate 
includes that of erecting corporations, which they 
certainly do, as the subsequent illustrations will 
more and more evince. 

It is presumed to have been satisfactorily shown 
in the course of the preceding observations : 

1. That the power of the government, as to the 
objects intrusted to its management, is, in its nature, 
sovereign. 

2. That the right of erecting corporations is one 
inherent in, and inseparable from, the idea of sover 
eign power. 

472 Alexander Hamilton 

3. That the position, that the government of the 
United States can exercise no power but such as is 
delegated to it by its Constitution, does not militate 
against this principle. 

4. That the word necessary, in the general clause, 
can have no restrictive operation derogating from the 
force of this principle; indeed, that the degree in 
which a measure is or is not necessary, cannot be a 
test of constitutional right, but of expediency only. 

5. That the power to erect corporations is not to 
be considered as an independent or substantive power, 
but as an incidental and auxiliary one, and was 
therefore more properly left to implication, than ex 
pressly granted. 

6. That the principle in question does not extend 
the power of the government beyond the prescribed 
limits, because it only affirms a power to incorporate 
for purposes within the sphere of the specified powers. 

And lastly, that the right to exercise such a power 
in certain cases is unequivocally granted in the most 
positive and comprehensive terms. To all which it 
only remains to be added, that such a power has 
actually been exercised in two very eminent in 
stances : namely, in the erection of two governments ; 
one northwest of the river Ohio, and the other 
southwest — the last independent of any antecedent 
compact. And these result in a full and complete 
demonstration, that the Secretary of State and the 
Attorney-General are mistaken when they deny 
generally the power of the National Government to 
erect corporations. 

It shall now be endeavored to be shown that there 

National Bank 473 

is a power to erect one of the kind proposed by the 
bill. This will be done by tracing a natural and 
obvious relation between the institution of a bank 
and the objects of several of the enumerated powers 
of the government ; and by showing that, politically 
speaking, it is necessary to the effectual execution 
of one or more of those powers. 

In the course of this investigation, various in 
stances will be stated, by way of illustration of a 
right to erect corporations under those powers. 

Some preliminary observations may be proper. 

The proposed bank is to consist of an association 
of persons, for the purpose of creating a joint capital, 
to be employed chiefly and essentially in loans. So 
far the object is not only lawful, but it is the mere 
exercise of a right which the law allows to every in 
dividual. The Bank of New York, which is not in 
corporated, is an example of such an association. 
The bill proposes, in addition, that the government 
shall become a joint proprietor in this undertaking, 
and that it shall permit the bills of the company, 
payable on demand, to be receivable in its revenues ; 
and stipulates that it shall not grant privileges, 
similar to those which are to be allowed to this com 
pany, to any others. All this is incontrovertibly 
within the compass of the discretion of the govern 
ment. The only question is, whether it has a right 
to incorporate this company, in order to enable it 
the more effectually to accomplish ends which are in 
themselves lawful. 

To establish such a right, it remains to show the 
relation of such an institution to one or more of the 

474 Alexander Hamilton 

specified powers of the government. Accordingly it 
is affirmed that it has a relation, more or less direct, 
to the power of collecting taxes, to that of borrowing 
money, to that of regulating trade between the 
States, and to those of raising and maintaining fleets 
and armies. To the two former the relation may be 
said to be immediate ; and in the last place it will be 
argued, that it is clearly within the provision which 
authorizes the making of all needful rules and regula 
tions concerning the property of the United States, 
as the same has been practised upon by the govern 
ment. 

A bank relates to the collection of taxes in two 
ways — indirectly, by increasing the quantity of cir 
culating medium and quickening circulation, which 
facilitates the means of paying directly, by creating 
a convenient species of medium in which they are to 
be paid. 

To designate or appoint the money or thing in 
which taxes are to be paid, is not only a proper 
but a necessary exercise of the power of collecting 
them. Accordingly Congress, in the law concerning 
the collection of the duties on imposts and tonnage, 
have provided that they shall be paid in gold and 
silver. But while it was an indispensable part of 
the work to say in what they should be paid, the 
choice of the specific thing was mere matter of dis 
cretion. The payment might have been required in 
the commodities themselves. Taxes in kind, how 
ever ill-judged, are not without precedents, even in 
the United States; or it might have been in the 
paper money of the several States, or in the bills of 

National Bank 475 

the banks of North America, New York, and Massa 
chusetts, all or either of them; or it might have been 
in bills issued under the authority of the United 
States. 

No part of this can, it is presumed, be disputed. 
The appointment, then, of the money or thing in 
which the taxes are to be paid, is an incident to 
the power of collection. And among the expedients 
which may be adopted, is that of bills issued under 
the authority of the United States. 

Now the manner of issuing these bills is again 
matter of discretion. The government might doubt 
less proceed in the following manner : 

It might provide that they should be issued under 
the direction of certain officers, payable on demand; 
and, in order to support their credit, and give them 
a ready circulation, it might, besides giving them a 
currency in its taxes, set apart, out of any moneys 
in its treasury, a given sum, and appropriate it, under 
the direction of those officers, as a fund for answer 
ing the bills, as presented for payment. 

The constitutionality of all this would not admit 
of a question, and yet it would amount to the in 
stitution of a bank, with a view to the more con 
venient collection of taxes. For the simplest and 
most precise idea of a bank is, a deposit of coin, or 
other property, as a fund for circulating a credit upon 
it, which is to answer the purpose of money. That 
such an arrangement would be equivalent to the 
establishment of a bank, would become obvious, if 
the place where the fund to be set apart was kept 
should be made a receptacle of the moneys of all 

476 Alexander Hamilton 

other persons who should incline to deposit them 
there for safe-keeping; and would become still more 
so, if the officers charged with the direction of the 
fund were authorized to make discounts at the 
usual rate of interest, upon good security. To deny 
the power of the government to add these ingredients 
to the plan, would be to refine away all government. 
A further process will still more clearly illustrate 
the point. Suppose, when the species of bank 
which has been described was about to be instituted, 
it was to be urged that, in order to secure to it a due 
degree of confidence, the fund ought not only to be 
set apart and appropriated generally, but ought to 
be specifically vested in the officers who were to have 
the direction of it, and in their successors in office, to 
the end that it might acquire the character of private 
property incapable of being resumed without a viola 
tion of the sanctions by which the rights of property 
are protected, and occasioning more serious and 
general alarm — the apprehension of which might 
operate as a check upon the government. Such a 
proposition might be opposed by arguments against 
the expediency of it, or the solidity of the reason 
assigned for it, but it is not conceivable what could 
be urged against its constitutionality; and yet such 
a disposition of the thing would amount to the erec 
tion of a corporation; for the true definition of a 
corporation seems to be this: It is a legal person, or 
a person created by act of law, consisting of one or 
more natural persons authorized to hold property, 
or a franchise in succession, in a legal, as contra 
distinguished from natural, capacity. 

National Bank 477 

Let the illustration proceed a step further. Sup 
pose a bank of the nature which has been described, 
with or without incorporation, had been instituted, 
and that experience had evinced, as it probably 
would, that, being wholly under a public direction, 
it possessed not the confidence requisite to the credit 
of the bills. Suppose, also, that, by some of those 
adverse conjunctures which occasionally attend na 
tions, there had been a very great drain of the specie 
of the country, so as not only to cause general dis 
tress for want of an adequate medium of circulation, 
but to produce, in consequence of that circumstance, 
considerable defalcations in the public revenues. 
Suppose, also, that there was no bank instituted in 
any State ; in such a posture of things, would it not 
be most manifest, that the incorporation of a bank 
like that proposed by the bill would be a measure 
immediately relative to the effectual collection of the 
taxes, and completely within the province of the 
sovereign power of providing, by all laws necessary 
and proper, for that collection? If it be said, that 
such a state of things would render that necessary, 
and therefore constitutional, which is not so now, 
the answer to this, and a solid one it doubtless 
is, must still be that which has been already stated 
—circumstances may affect the expediency of the 
measure, but they can neither add to nor diminish 
its constitutionality. 

A bank has a direct relation to the power of bor 
rowing money, because it is a usual, and in sudden 
emergencies an essential, instrument in the obtain 
ing of loans to government. 

478 Alexander Hamilton 

A nation is threatened with war; large sums are 
wanted on a sudden to make the necessary pre 
parations. Taxes are laid for the purpose, but it 
requires time to obtain the benefit of them. Anticipa 
tion is indispensable. If there be a bank the supply 
can at once be had. If there be none, loans from 
individuals must be sought. The progress of these 
is often too slow for the exigency; in some situations 
they are not practicable at all. Frequently, when 
they are, it is of great consequence to be able to 
anticipate the product of them by advance from a 
bank. 

The essentiality of such an institution as an in 
strument of loans, is exemplified at this very mo 
ment. An Indian expedition is to be prosecuted. 
The only fund out of which the money can arise, 
consistently with the public engagements, is a tax, 
which only begins to be collected in July next. The 
preparations, however, are instantly to be made. 
The money must, therefore, be borrowed — and of 
whom could it be borrowed if there were no public 
banks? 

It happens that there are institutions of this kind, 
but if there were none, it would be indispensable to 
create one. 

Let it then be supposed that the necessity existed 
(as but for a casualty would be the case), that pro 
posals were made for obtaining a loan ; that a num 
ber of individuals came forward and said, we are 
willing to accommodate the government with the 
money; with what we have in hand, and the credit 
we can raise upon it, we doubt not of being able 

National Bank 479 

to furnish the sum required, but in order to do this 
it is indispensable that we should be incorporated as 
a bank. This is essential towards putting it in our 
power to do what is desired, and we are obliged on 
that account to make it the consideration or condi 
tion of the loan. 

Can it be believed that a compliance with this 
proposition would be unconstitutional? Does not 
this alone evince the contrary? It is a necessary 
part of a power to borrow, to be able to stipulate 
the consideration or conditions of a loan. It is evid 
ent, as has been remarked elsewhere, that this is 
not confined to the mere stipulation of a franchise. 
If it may, and it is not perceived why it may not, 
then the grant of a corporate capacity may be stipu 
lated as a consideration of the loan. There seems 
to be nothing unfit or foreign from the nature of the 
thing in giving individuality, or a corporate capacity, 
to a number of persons, who are willing to lend a 
sum of money to the government, the better to en 
able them to do it, and make them an ordinary in 
strument of loans in future emergencies of the state. 
But the more general view of the subject is still more 
satisfactory. The legislative power of borrowing 
money, and of making all laws necessary and proper 
for carrying into execution that power, seems ob 
viously competent to the appointment of the organ, 
through which the abilities and wills of individuals 
may be most efficaciously exerted for the accommo 
dation of the government by loans. 

The Attorney-General opposes to this reasoning 
the following observation: "Borrowing money 

48° Alexander Hamilton 

presupposes the accumulation of a fund to be lent, and 
is second to the creation of an ability to lend." This 
is plausible in theory, but is not true in fact. In a 
great number of cases, a previous accumulation of a 
fund equal to the whole sum required does not exist. 
And nothing more can be actually presupposed, than 
that there exist resources, which, put into activity 
to the greatest advantage by the nature of the opera 
tion with the government, will be equal to the effect 
desired to be produced. All the provisions and op 
erations of government must be presumed to con 
template as they really are. 

The institution of a bank has also a natural rela 
tion to the regulation of trade between the States, in 
so far as it is conducive to the creation of a convenient 
medium of exchange between them, and to the keep 
ing up a full circulation, by preventing the frequent 
displacement of the metals in reciprocal remittances. 
Money is the very hinge on which commerce turns. 
And this does not merely mean gold and silver; 
many other things have served the purpose, with 
different degrees of utility. Paper has been exten 
sively employed. 

It cannot, therefore, be admitted, with the At 
torney-General, that the regulation of trade between 
the States, as it concerns the medium of circulation 
and exchange, ought to be considered as confined to 
coin. It is even supposable that the whole, or the 
greatest part, of the coin of the country might be 
carried out of it. 

The Secretary of State objects to the relation here 
insisted upon, by the following mode of reasoning: 

National Bank 481 

To erect a bank, says he, and to regulate commerce, 
are very different acts. He who creates a bank, 
creates a subject of commerce ; so does he who makes 
a bushel of wheat, or digs a dollar out of the mines; 
yet neither of these persons regulates commerce 
thereby. To make a thing which may be bought 
and sold, is not to prescribe regulations for buying 
and selling. 

This making the regulation of commerce to consist 
in prescribing rules for buying and selling — this, in 
deed, is a species of regulation of trade, but is one 
which falls more aptly within the province of the 
local jurisdictions than within that of the general 
government, whose care must be presumed to have 
been intended to be directed to those general po 
litical arrangements concerning trade on which its 
aggregate interests depend, rather than to the de 
tails of buying and selling. Accordingly, such only 
are the regulations to be found in the laws of the 
United States, whose objects are to give encourage 
ment to the enterprise of our own merchants, and to 
advance our navigation and manufactures. And it 
is in reference to these general relations of commerce 
that an establishment which furnishes facilities to 
circulation, and a convenient medium of exchange 
and alienation, is to be regarded as a regulation of 
trade. 

The Secretary of State further argues that if this 
was a regulation of commerce, it would be void, as 
extending as much to the internal commerce of every 
State as to its external. But what regulation of com 
merce does not extend to the internal commerce of 

VOL. HI.— 31. 

482 Alexander Hamilton 

every State? What are all the duties upon im 
ported articles, amounting to prohibitions, but so 
many bounties upon domestic manufactures, affect 
ing the interests of different classes of citizens, in 
different ways? What are all the provisions in the 
Coasting Act which relate to the trade between dis 
trict and district of the same State ? In short, what 
regulation of trade between the States but must 
affect the internal trade of each State? What can 
operate upon the whole but must extend to every 
part? 

The relation of a bank to the execution of the 
powers that concern the common defence has been 
anticipated. It has been noted that, at this very 
moment, the aid of such an institution is essential 
to the measures to be pursued for the protection of 
our frontiers. 

It now remains to show that the incorporation of 
a bank is within the operation of the provision which 
authorizes Congress to make all needful rules and 
regulations concerning the property of the United 
States. But it is previously necessary to advert to 
a distinction which has been taken by the Attorney- 
General. 

He admits that the word property may signify per 
sonal property, however acquired, and yet asserts 
that it cannot signify money arising from the sources 
of revenue pointed out in the Constitution, "be 
cause," says he, "the disposal and regulation of 
money is the final cause for raising it by taxes." 

But it would be more accurate to say that the 
object to which money is intended to be applied is 

National Bank 483 

the final cause for raising it, than that the disposal 
and regulation of it is such. 

The support of government — the support of troops 
for the common defence — the payment of the public 
debt, are the true final causes for raising money. The 
disposition and regulation of it, when raised, are the 
steps by which it is applied to the ends for which it 
was raised, not the ends themselves. Hence, there 
fore, the money to be raised by taxes, as well as any 
other personal property, must be supposed to come 
within the meaning, as they certainly do within the 
letter, of authority to make all needful rules and 
regulations concerning the property of the United 
States. 

A case will make this plainer. Suppose the public 
debt discharged, and the funds now pledged for it 
liberated. In some instances it would be found ex 
pedient to repeal the taxes; in others, the repeal 
might injure our own industry, our agriculture and 
manufactures. In these cases they would, of course, 
be retained. Here, then, would be moneys arising 
from the authorized sources of revenue, which would 
not fall within the rule by which the Attorney- 
General endeavors to except them from other per 
sonal property, and from the operation of the clause 
in question. The moneys being in the coffers of 
government, what is to hinder such a disposition to 
be made of them as is contemplated in the bill; or 
what, an incorporation of the parties concerned, 
under the clause which has been cited? 

It is admitted, that with regard to the western 
territory they give a power to erect a corporation — 

484 Alexander Hamilton 

that is, to institute a government ; and by what rule 
of construction can it be maintained, that the same 
words in a constitution of government will not have 
the same effect when applied to one species of prop 
erty as to another, as far as the subject is capable of 
it? — or that a legislative power to make all needful 
rules and regulations, or to pass all laws necessary 
and proper, concerning the public property, which is 
admitted to authorize an incorporation in one case, 
will not authorize it in another? — will justify the in 
stitution of a government over the western territory, 
and will not justify the incorporation of a bank for 
the more useful management of the moneys of the 
United States? If it will do the last, as well as the 
first, then, under this provision alone, the bill is 
constitutional, because it contemplates that the 
United States shall be joint proprietors of the stock 
of the bank. 

There is an observation of the Secretary of State 
to this effect, which may require notice in this place : 
—Congress, says he, are not to lay taxes ad libitum, 
for any purpose they please, but only to pay the debts 
or provide for the welfare of the Union. Certainly 
no inference can be drawn from this against the 
power of applying their money for the institution of 
a bank. It is true that they cannot without breach 
of trust lay taxes for any other purpose than the 
general welfare; but so neither can any other gov 
ernment. The welfare of the community is the only 
legitimate end for which money can be raised on the 
community. Congress can be considered as under 
only one restriction which does not apply to other 

National Bank 485 

governments — they cannot rightfully apply the 
money they raise to any purpose merely or purely 
local. But, with this exception, they have as large 
a discretion in relation to the application of money 
as any Legislature whatever. The constitutional 
test of a right application must always be, whether it 
be for a purpose of general or local nature. If the 
former, there can be no want of constitutional power. 
The quality of the object, as how far it will really pro 
mote or not the welfare of the Union, must be matter 
of conscientious discretion, and the arguments for 
or against a measure in this light must be arguments 
concerning expediency or inexpediency, not con 
stitutional right. Whatever relates to the general 
order of the finances, to the general interests of 
trade, etc., being general objects, are constitutional 
ones for the application of money. 

A bank, then, whose bills are to circulate in all the 
revenues of the country, is evidently a general object, 
and, for that very reason, a constitutional one, as 
far as regards the appropriation of money to it. 
Whether it will really be a beneficial one or not, is 
worthy of careful examination, but is no more a 
constitutional point, in the particular referred to, 
than the question, whether the western lands shall 
be sold for twenty or thirty cents per acre. 

A hope is entertained that it has, by this time, 
been made to appear, to the satisfaction of the Presi 
dent, that a bank has a natural relation to the power 
of collecting taxes — to that of regulating trade — to 
that of providing for the common defence — and 
that, as the bill under consideration contemplates 

486 Alexander Hamilton 

the government in the light of a joint proprietor of 
the stock of the bank, it brings the case within the 
provision of the clause of the Constitution which 
immediately respects the property of the United 

Under a conviction that such a relation subsists, 
the Secretary of the Treasury, with all deference, 
conceives that it will result as a necessary conse 
quence from the position, that all the specified powers 
of government are sovereign, as to the proper ob 
jects; that the incorporation of a bank is a con 
stitutional measure; and that the objections taken 
to the bill, in this respect, are ill-founded. 

But, from an earnest desire to give the utmost 
possible satisfaction to the mind of the President, on 
so delicate and important a subject, the Secretary 
of the Treasury will ask his indulgence, while he gives 
some additional illustrations of cases in which a 
power of erecting corporations may be exercised, 
under some of those heads of the specified powers of 
the government, which are alleged to include the 
right of incorporating a bank. 

i. It does not appear susceptible of a doubt, that 
if Congress had thought proper to provide, in the 
collection laws, that the bonds to be given for the 
duties should be given to the collector of the dis 
trict, A or B, as the case might require, to enure to 
him and his successors in office, in trust for the 
United States, that it would have been consistent 
with the Constitution to make such an arrangement ; 
and yet this, it is conceived, would amount to an 
incorporation. 

National Bank 487 

2. It is not an unusual expedient of taxation to farm 
particular branches of revenue — that is, to mortgage 
or sell the product of them for certain definite sums, 
leaving the collection to the parties to whom they 
are mortgaged or sold. There are even examples of 
this in the United States. Suppose that there was 
any particular branch of revenue which it was mani 
festly expedient to place on this footing, and there 
were a number of persons willing to engage with the 
government, upon condition that they should be 
incorporated, and the sums vested in them, as well 
for their greater safety, as for the more convenient 
recovery and management of the taxes. Is it sup- 
posable that there could be any constitutional ob 
stacle to the measure? It is presumed that there 
could be none. It is certainly a mode of collection 
which it would be in the discretion of the govern 
ment to adopt, though the circumstances must be 
very extraordinary that would induce, the Secretary 
to think it expedient. 

3. Suppose a new and unexplored branch of trade 
should present itself, with some foreign country. 
Suppose it was manifest, that to undertake it with 
advantage required a union of the capitals of a number 
of individuals, and that those individuals would not 
be disposed to embark without an incorporation, as 
well to obviate that consequence of a private part 
nership which makes every individual liable in his 
whole estate for the debts of the company, to their 
utmost extent, as for the more convenient manage 
ment of the business — what reason can there be to 
doubt that the National Government would have 

488 Alexander Hamilton 

a constitutional right to institute and incorporate 
such a company? None. They possess a general 
authority to regulate trade with foreign countries. 
This is a means, which has been practised to that 
end, by all the principal commercial nations, who 
have trading companies to this day, which have 
subsisted for centuries. Why may not the United 
States, constitutionally, employ the means, usual in 
other countries, for attaining the ends intrusted to 
them? 

A power to make all needful rules and regulations 
concerning territory, has been construed to mean a 
power to erect a government. A power to regulate 
trade, is a power to make all needful rules and regu 
lations concerning trade. Why may it not, then, 
include that of erecting a trading company, as well 
as, in other cases, to erect a government ? 

It is remarkable that the State conventions, who 
had proposed amendments in relation to this point, 
have most, if not all, of them expressed themselves 
nearly thus: Congress shall not grant monopolies, 
nor erect any company with exclusive advantages 
of commerce! Thus, at the same time, expressing 
their sense, that the power to erect trading com 
panies or corporations was inherent in Congress, and 
objecting to it no further than as to the grant of 
exclusive privileges. 

The Secretary entertains all the doubts which pre 
vail concerning the utility of such companies, but 
he cannot fashion to his own mind a reason, to in 
duce a doubt, that there is a constitutional au 
thority in the United States to establish them. If 

National Bank 489 

such a reason were demanded, none could be given, 
unless it were this: That Congress cannot erect a 
corporation. Which would be no better than to say, 
they cannot do it, because they cannot do it — first 
presuming an inability, without reason, and then 
assigning that inability as the cause of itself. Illus 
trations of this kind might be multiplied without 
end. They shall, however, be pursued no further. 

There is a sort of evidence on this point, arising 
from an aggregate view of the Constitution, which is 
of no inconsiderable weight : the very general power 
of laying and collecting taxes, and appropriating 
their proceeds — that of borrowing money indefinite 
ly — that of coining money, and regulating foreign 
coins — that of making all needful rules and regula 
tions respecting the property of the United States. 
These powers combined, as well as the reason and 
nature of the thing, speak strongly this language: 
that it is the manifest design and scope of the Con 
stitution to vest in Congress all the powers requisite 
to the effectual administration of the finances of the 
United States. As far as concerns this object, there 
appears to be no parsimony of power. 

To suppose, then, that the government is pre 
cluded from the employment of so usual and so im 
portant an instrument for the administration of its 
finances as that of a bank, is to suppose what does 
not coincide with the general tenor and complexion 
of the Constitution, and what is not agreeable to im 
pressions that any new spectator would entertain 
concerning it. 

Little less than a prohibitory clause can destroy 

49° Alexander Hamilton 

the strong presumptions which result from the gen 
eral aspect of the government. Nothing but demon 
stration should exclude the idea that the power 
exists. 

In all questions of this nature, the practice of man 
kind ought to have great weight against the theories 
of individuals. 

The fact, for instance, that all the principal com 
mercial nations have made use of trading cor 
porations or companies, for the purpose of external 
commerce, is a satisfactory proof that the establish 
ment of them is an incident to the regulation of the 
commerce. 

This other fact, that banks are a usual engine in 
the administration of national finances, and an ordi 
nary and most effectual instrument of loan, and one 
which, in this country, has been found essential, 
pleads strongly against the supposition that a gov 
ernment, clothed with most of the most important 
prerogatives of sovereignty in relation to its reven 
ues, its debts, its credits, its defence, its trade, its 
intercourse with foreign nations, is forbidden to make 
use of that instrument as an appendage to its own 
authority. 

It has been stated as an auxiliary test of constitu 
tional authority, to try whether it abridges any pre 
existing right of any State, or any individual. The 
proposed investigation will stand the most severe 
examination on this point. Each State may still 
erect as many banks as it pleases. Every individual 
may still carry on the banking business to any ex 
tent he pleases. 

National Bank 491 

Another criterion may be this: whether the in 
stitution or thing has a more direct relation, as to its 
uses, to the objects of the reserved powers of the 
State governments than to those of the powers dele 
gated by the United States. This rule, indeed, is 
less precise than the former; but it may still serve 
as some guide. Surely a bank has more reference 
to the objects intrusted to the National Government 
than to those left to the care of the State govern 
ments. The common defence is decisive in this 
comparison. 

It is presumed that nothing of consequence in 
the observations of the Secretary of State and the 
Attorney-General has been left unnoticed. 

There are, indeed, a variety of observations of the 
Secretary of State designed to show that the utilities 
ascribed to a bank, in relation to the collection of 
taxes, and to trade, could be obtained without it; 
to analyze which, would prolong the discussion be 
yond all bounds. It shall be forborne for two reasons. 
First, because the report concerning the bank may 
speak for itself in this respect; and secondly, be 
cause all those observations are grounded on the 
erroneous idea that the quantum of necessity or 
utility is the test of a constitutional exercise of power. 

One or two remarks only shall be made. One is, 
that he has taken no notice of a very essential advant 
age to trade in general, which is mentioned in the 
report, as peculiar to the existence of a bank circula 
tion, equal in the public estimation to gold and sil 
ver. It is this that renders it unnecessary to lock 
up the money of the country, to accumulate for 

492 Alexander Hamilton 

months successively, in order to the periodical pay 
ment of interest. The other is this: that his argu 
ments to show that treasury orders and bills of 
exchange, from the course of trade, will prevent any 
considerable displacement of the metals, are founded 
on a particular view of the subject. A case will 
prove this. The sums collected in a State may be 
small in comparison with the debt due to it; the 
balance of its trade, direct and circuitous with the 
seat of government, may be even, or nearly so; here, 
then, without bank-bills, which in that State answer 
the purpose of coin, there must be a displacement of 
the coin, in proportion to the difference between the 
sum collected in the State, and that to be paid in it. 
With bank-bills no such displacement would take 
place, or as far as it did, it would be gradual and in 
sensible. In many other ways, also, would there be 
at least a temporary and inconvenient displacement 
of the coin, even where the course of trade would 
eventually return it to its proper channels. 

The difference of the two situations in point of 
convenience to the treasury, can only be appreciated 
by one who experiences the embarrassments of mak 
ing provision for the payment of the interest on a 
stock continually changing place in thirteen different 
places. 

One thing which has been omitted just occurs, 
although it is not very material to the main argu 
ment. The Secretary of State affirms that the bill 
only contemplates a repayment, not a loan, to the 
government. But here he is certainly mistaken. It 
is true the government invests in the stock of the 

National Bank 493 

bank a sum equal to that which it receives on loan. 
But let it be remembered, that it does not, therefore, 
cease to be a proprietor of the stock, which would be 
the case if the money received back were in the na 
ture of a payment. It remains a proprietor still, and 
will share in the profit or loss of the institution, ac 
cording as the dividend is more or less than the 
interest it is to pay on the sum borrowed. Hence 
that sum is manifestly, and in the strictest sense, a 
loan.1 

1 Washington after careful consideration adopted the opinion of 
Hamilton and signed the bill. The national bank thus established 
conformed, except in a few points, with the plan proposed by Hamil 
ton while the principles, the guiding lines, and the great central idea 
were all his. The policy thus begun has prevailed, with one or two 
intervals, throughout our subsequent history, and seems now to have 
become a permanent part of our financial system. 

The charter of Hamilton's bank expired in 1811. Two years before 
that date the bank petitioned for a recharter, and Gallatin sent in a 
report strongly favoring the policy, although suggesting some modi 
fications of the charter. It was too late for action and the matter 
went over to the next Congress (1810), when a biH was introduced in 
the House founded on Gallatin's report. At the same time a bill for 
a new bank was introduced in the Senate. It was charged that the 
old bank was a Federalist concern. The Democrats, although they 
had recognized its constitutionality by several acts, began to declaim 
against it ; the two schemes clashed, and the whole matter went over 
to the next session. The old bank then applied again for a renewal, 
and was again strongly supported by Gallatin. It was resisted by 
the enemies of the Secretary and by those speculating in State banks. 
The House indefinitely postponed it — sixty-five to sixty-four. In the 
Senate the enacting clause was stricken out by the casting vote of 
Vice- President Clinton, who rested his objection simply on the ground 
that the new charter left the bank a private and exclusive corpora 
tion beyond the control of the government (1811). 

The loss of the bank was severely felt during the stress of the war, 
which began in the next year, and the financial confusion which fol 
lowed. To revive our broken credit and re-establish our currency, 
Dallas (1814) proposed a bank before the close of the war, with power 
to issue irredeemable paper money. After a sharp conflict bills were 

494 Alexander Hamilton 

brought in, in conformity to Dallas' report. Calhoun met this scheme 
with one of his own for a private bank not allowed to suspend specie 
payment nor compelled to lend to the government. After a close and 
exciting struggle a compromise plan, agreeing in the main with Cal- 
houn's, was passed and sent to the President, who vetoed it as inade 
quate for the needs of the time. 

The confusion and distress, however, continued, and the govern 
ment was unable to pay in specie. Dallas, therefore, determined to 
try for a bank once more. He reported a plan substantially the same 
as Hamilton's, and this scheme, ardently supported by Calhoun as 
well as by Clay, who had changed his views since 1811, passed both 
Houses with slight modifications, was signed by Madison, and became 
law (1816). 

Three years later the question of the constitutionality of the bank 
came before the Supreme Court in the case of McCullough vs. Mary 
land. Marshall delivered the opinion of the court, which was unani 
mous. That opinion, one of the ablest of Marshall's decisions, strongly 
affirmed the constitutionality of the bank, and should be read in con 
junction and compared with Hamilton's Cabinet opinion. Nothing 
shows Hamilton's power of argument and statement, and his ability 
as a constitutional lawyer better than this most severe test. 

When the bank next came before the public it was in the fierce 
struggle with Andrew Jackson, which began in 1830 and ended with 
the overthrow of the bank in 1836. The bank had been held to be 
constitutional by the Congress of 1791, by Washington when he signed 
the bill, by Jefferson when he signed bills to establish its branches in 
the Territories, by the Congress of 1816, by Madison when he put his 
name to the charter of the second bank, and finally by the whole 
Supreme Court with Marshall at its head. But Jackson knew more 
than all these, and considered them of no authority; in fact, with his 
profound legal knowledge, he was able to point out the obvious errors 
of Marshall. He vetoed the bank bill, resting his veto on all sorts of 
grounds, and chief among them its unconstitutionality. Then came 
the "pet banks," receiving the deposits of government, then a brief 
fever of speculation, and finally the crash of 1837, which, on the whole* 
was the most remarkable feat and the most memorable achievement 
of the hero of New Orleans. 

After the effects of the panic of 1837 had passed away, there were 
some futile efforts to revive the bank, and then the country was forced 
back upon local institutions. The danger, inconvenience, and utter 
inefficiency of the State banks are still freshly remembered. The 
country groaned and chafed under them for more than twenty years, 
until the Republican party came into power and established the pres 
ent system of national banks. The new plan did away with the 
State banks by absorbing them and thus destroying the active and 

National Bank 495 

interested opposition which confronted the old Bank of the United 
States and its predecessor. The present system seems to be firmly 
and permanently established. It embodies Hamilton's two great 
principles — national banking, supervized by the Central Government, 
and a national-bank currency. Hamilton's policy of national banking 
has become an integral part of our financial system, and has prevailed 
over all the attacks which have been made upon it. There is another 
side however to the question more important than its financial results. 
This is the constitutional argument employed by Hamilton in his 
cabinet opinion to which allusion has been made in a previous note. 
In this famous cabinet opinion Hamilton summoned to his aid the 
doctrine of the unimplied powers of the Constitution, and the estab 
lishment of the bank was the first triumph of that principle which has 
done more than anything else to build up and strengthen the power 
of the National Government. 

END OF VOL. III. 

THIS BOOK IS DUE ON THE LAST DATE 
STAMPED BELOW 

AN INITIAL FINE OF 25 CENTS 

WILL BE ASSESSED FOR FAILURE TO RETURN THIS BOOK 
ON THE DATE DUE. THE PENALTY WILL INCREASE TO 
50 CENTS ON THE FOURTH DAY AND TO $1.00 ON THE 
SEVENTH DAY OVERDUE. 

JAN 2 3 1963 

' 

u LIBRARY 

• ' 

JUN 8 

JUN301986 

2^2004 
Book Slip-20/n-9,'60(B3010s4) 458 
Hamilton, A. 
Works/ 

Call Number: 

E302 

H3