hi v* I 

SSSSBSffiSl^Ei^ 

BOOK 973.4.H18 V.10 C.I 
HAMILTON # WORKS 

y^lrs^^g&gS-gBST' 5 

Conatitutlonal £&ition 

3>02. 

The Works of 

Alexander Hamilton 

Edited by 

Henry Cabot Lodge 

'■^ The sacred rights of mankind are not to be rummaged for among old parchments or 
musty records. They are written, as with a sunbeam, in the whole volume of human nature, 
by the hand of the Divinity itself, and can never be erased or obscured by mortal power." 

[Hamilton— 7";^^ Farmer Refuted., 'i-11^-, -^t. i8.] 

" We are laboring hard to establish in this country principles more and more national^ 
and free from all foreign ingredients, so that we may be neither ' Greeks nor Trojans,' but 
truly Americans." — [Hamilton to King, 1796, Rx.. 39.] 

Volume X 

G. P. Putnam's Sons 

New York and London 
Cbe Iknicherbocftcr ipress 

His 

Ube Iknicfterbocfter ipress, flew jgorft 

CONTENTS 

Private Correspondence — Continued: 
:']^i To RuFus King 

To Colonel Edward Carrington 

To RuFus King 

To Washington 

To Elias Boudinot . 

To John Adams 

To William Seton . 

To John Jay 

To 



To Gen. C. C. Pinckney 

To John Steele 


!"7 To Richard Harrison 

To William Short . 

To RuFus King 

To Washington 



To Jefferson . 



To Gen. Otho H. Williams 


To One of the Creditors of Col. Duer 

PAGB 
5 
7 
15 
i6 

i8 
20 
22 
28 
30 
S3 
38 
40 
46 
48 
IV 

Contents 

;*l^ 

Private Correspondence — Continued: 
To RuFus King 
To Mrs. General Greene 
To Jeremiah Wadsworth 
To Miss Angelica Hamilton 

To 

To Colonel Olney . 
'i-^-: 'Pq ^he United States Senate 
To Washington 
To Jay . 

To George Matthews, Governor of Georgia 
To Oliver Wolcott 
To RuFus King 
To A Friend in Europe . 
To Thomas Fitzsimmons . 

To WiLLiNK, Van Staphorst, & Hu 
Washington to Hamilton 
To Theodore Sedgwick . 
To William Bradford 
To Robert Troup . 
To Washington 
To Pickering . 

PAGE 
54 
57 
59 
63 
67 
F Georgia 
76 
78 
79 

beard 
84 

. 8s 
. 89 
92 

. 98 


lOI 
103 
107 
122 

. 125 
133 

Contents 

V 

PAGE 

Private Correspondence — Continued: 

To RuFus King i3S 

To Washington 
To Timothy Pickering . 
)7<5r4» To Rufus King 
To Oliver Wolcott 
To William Smith . 
To Rufus King 
To Timothy Pickering 

. 165 


. 170 

To James McHenry 

. 171 

To Washington 



. 173 

To Elias Boudinot . 
To Oliver Wolcott 

. 183 


. 185 

To Greenleaf 

. 187 



To Phineas Bond . 
To Timothy Pickering 
vi Contents 

PAGE 

Private Correspondence — Continued: 

To 195 

To Oliver Wolcott 
To Washington 
To RuFus King 
To Theo. Foster, Esq. . 
To William Smith . 
To 
To Theodore Sedgwick . 
To Timothy Pickering 

. 237 


. 238 

To Theodore Sedgwick 

. 239 

To James McHenry 
To Oliver Wolcott 

. 251 

To William Smith . 

• 253 

To RuFus King 

. 254 


. 256 

To Hamilton 

. 257 

To Timothy Pickering 
To Washington 
To Oliver Wolcott 
Contents 

Private Correspondence — Contimi^d: 
/'^^^g To RuFus King 


To Theodore Sedgwick 


To John Jay 

To James McHenry 

To RuFus King 








To General Duportail 



To General Dayton 

To Benjamin Stoddert 


To Washington 

To Oliver Wolcott 


To Francisco Miranda 




To Timothy Pickering 




To THE Count Latour Dupin Gouvernet 

To William Heth . 

To Harrison Gray Otis 

To Theodore Sedgwick 
\"|*|^ To Jonathan Dayton 

VII 

PAGE 
279 
281 
284 
291 
297 
299 
307 
312 
315 
317 
319 
32c 
322 
325 
329 

Vlll 

Contents 

Private Correspondence — Continued 
To Lafayette . 
To Harrison Gray Otis 
To Theodore Sedgwick 
To Timothy Pickering 
To Washington 
To Oliver Wolcott 
To General Knox . 
To James McHenry 
To Colonel Taylor 
To Josiah O. Hoffman 
) ^ To Tobias Lear 
To RuFus King 
To Mrs. Martha Washington 
To Captain George Izard 
To Theodore Sedgwick . 
To Henry Lee 
To William Smith . 
To Oliver Wolcott 
To Timothy Pickering . 
To General Charles Cotesworth 
To Timothy Pickering 
To Theodore Sedgwick 
To John Jay 
To Charles Carroll 

Pinckney, 

PAGE 
340 
343 
345 
348 
349 
351 
353 
354 
356 
360 
362 
364 
366 

3^8 
369 
371 
376 
378 

Contents 

Private Correspondence — Continued: 

To Samuel Dexter . 

To John Adams 

To Oliver Wolcott 

To James Ashton Bayard 

To James McHenry 



To Timothy Pickering . 


To Theodore Sedgwick . 

To Gouverneur Morris . 

To James A. Bayard 

To John Rutledge . 
•<?.•: To James Ross 



To Gouverneur Morris 


To Mrs. Hamilton . 

To .... 

Ht'i To Dr. Benjamin Rush . 


To General Charles Cotesworth 



To RuFus King 

To THE Editor of the "Evening 

To Oliver Wolcott 

To Gouverneur Morris . 

i^e ^ To Timothy Pickering .. 
7 0 ■-■ To RuFus King 

To Governor George Clinton 

To Talleyrand 

To .... 

To Philip J. Schuyler . 

IX 

PAGE 

• • « 
• • 

. 382 


. 383 


. 384 


. 388 


. 389 


• 390 

. 

. 391 

• 

. 392 

• • 

' 397 


. 398 


. 421 

Pinckney 

• 437 

Post" 

. 442 

. 
« • 
• • « 
• • 4 
• • 

• 457 

X 

Contents 

Private Correspondence — Continued: 

To James A. Hamilton .... 
To Theodore Sedgwick .... 
To General John Sullivan ^7P^ . 
To Washington »• . 
A. Burr to General Hamilton 
Hamilton to Burr ..... 
Burr to Hamilton ..... 

Hamilton to Burr 

W. P. Van Ness to Hamilton 

Van Ness to Major Nathaniel Pendleton 

Pendleton to Van Ness 

Van Ness to Pendleton 

Remarks by Hamilton on the Letter of 

June 27, 1804 

Statement by Hamilton as to His Motives 

IN Meeting Burr .... 
To Mrs. Hamilton ..... 
Statement by Hamilton as to His Pecuniary 

Affairs 4/--/-./ ^f?^. 
Rules for Mr. Philip Hamilton . 
Last Will and Testament of Alexander 

Hamilton 

Epitaph 

Index to Private Correspondence . 
General Index to Vols. I. to X., Inclusive . 
List of Letters and Other Papers Written by 
Hamilton and Printed in the John C. Hamil- 
ton Edition of 1850, which are Omitted in 
THIS Edition 

PAGE 
457 
459 
461 
464 
465 
468 
471 
476 
481 
485 
509 

PRIVATE CORRESPONDENCE— Co^^^mw^d 

VOL X.— Z, 

PRIVATE CORRESPONDENCE 

[Continued) 

TO RUFUS KING 

Philadelphia, July 25, 1792. 

My Dear Sir: 

I received, lately, a letter from you, in which you 
expressed sentiments according with my own on the 
present complexion of your party politics, as, if a 
letter of mine to you did not miscarry, you will have 
seen. I wished that Clinton and his party should be 
placed in a just light before the people, and that a 
spirit of dissatisfaction, within proper bounds, should 
be kept alive ; and this for national purposes, as well 
as from a detestation of their principles and conduct. 

But a resort to first principles, in any shape, is 
decidedly against my judgment. I don't think the 
occasion will, in any sense, warrant it. It is not for 
the friends of good government to employ extraor- 
dinary expedients, which ought only to be resorted 
to in cases of great magnitude and urgent necessity. 
I reject as well the idea of a convention as of force. 

To re judge the decision of the canvassers by a 
convention, has to me too much the appearance of 
reversing the sentence of a court by a legislative 
decree. The canvassers had a final authority in all 
the forms of the Constitution and laws. A question 

4 Alexander Hamilton 

arose in the execution of their office, not absolutely 
free from difficulty which they have decided (I am 
persuaded wrongly), but within the power vested in 
them. I do not feel it right or expedient to attempt 
to reverse the decision by any means not known to 
the Constitution or laws. 

The precedent may suit us to-day ; but to-morrow 
we may see its abuse. 

I am not even sure that it will suit us at all. I 
see already publications aiming at a revision of the 
Constitution, with a view to alterations which would 
spoil it. It would not be astonishing, if a conven- 
tion should be called, if it should produce more than 
is intended. Such weapons are not to be played 
with. Even the friends of good government, in 
their present mood, may fancy alterations desirable 
which would be the reverse. 

Men's minds are too much unsettled ever3rwhere 
at the present juncture. Let us endeavor to settle 
them, and not to set them more afloat. I find that 
strong-minded men here view the matter in the same 
light with me, and that even Mr. Jay's character is 
likely in a degree, to suffer by the idea that he fans 
the flame a little more than is quite prudent. I 
wish this idea to be conveyed to him with proper 
management. I have thoughts of writing to him. 

You see, out of the reach of the contagion, I am 
very cool and reasonable. If I were with you I 
should probably not escape the infection. 

Francis Childs ' is a very cunning fellow. In 

' Editor of the New York Daily Advertiser, and proprietor, with 
Freneau, of the National Gazette. 

Private Correspondence 5 

Philadelphia, in the person of his proxy, Freneau, 
he is a good Anti-federalist and Clintonian ; in New 
York, he is a good Federalist and Jayite. Beckley 
and Jefferson pay him for the first, and the Federal 
citizens of New York for the last. Observe a para- 
graph in his Daily Advertiser of the i8th instant. 
These things ought, in a proper way, to be brought 
into view. 

TO COLONEL EDWARD CARRINGTON 



I have received and thank you for your two letters 
of the nth instant. 

When I asked your opinion concerning the most 
fit position for a branch of the bank, I had no idea 
that the question would have been decided with 
so much precipitation as has happened. After 
some loose conversation with individual directors, 
in which the comparative merits of different places 
were slightly discussed, and left, as I understood, 
for further information, I was surprised with an 
intimation that the place had been decided upon, 
that Richmond was that place, and that some day 
in August had been assigned for choosing directors. 
A predominating motive, though an insufficient one, 
appears to have been that most of the bank-stock 
held in Virginia is held by persons in and about 
Richmond. 

The reasons assigned in your letter in favor of 
another place are prodigiously weighty. Without 

6 Alexander Hamilton 

committing you, they shall be made known before 
the thing is finally finished. But I suspect it has 
gone too far. 

Your observations concerning the temper of the 
people of your State are, as far as they go, consoling. 
Reflections according with them had arisen in my 
mind, though I could not be sure that I might not 
overrate circumstances. I shall wait with expecta- 
tion for the further communication which you are 
so obliging as to promise. 

What you remark concerning the non-execution 
of the excise law in North Carolina is very interest- 
ing. The probable effect of a continuance of the 
affair in the same posture is obvious. It has been 
the wish to win the object from time and reflection. 
But this can no longer be relied upon. The thing 
must be brought to an issue, and will be, as soon as 
the new arrangement respecting compensations is 
completed. If process should be violently resisted 
in the parts of North Carolina bordering on your 
State, how much could be hoped from the aid of the 
militia of your State ? ' 

TO RUFUS KING 

July 27, 1792. 

Desirous of examining accurately the question 
decided by the canvassers, I will thank you for a 

^ This letter is now first printed from the original in the possession 
of the same gentleman to whom I owe another letter already given on 
page 230 of Vol. IX., and whose name I am unfortunately prevented 
from giving, as I have explained in a note on page 231. 

Private Correspondence 7 

minute of all the authorities which were consulted 
by you when you gave your opinion.' 

I shall be glad to have them as soon as convenient. 

TO WASHINGTON 

Philadelphia, July 30, 1792. 

Sir: 

I received the most sincere pleasure at finding in 
our late conversation, that there was some relaxa- 
tion in the disposition you had before discovered to 
decline a re-election. Since your departure, I have 
left no opportunity of sounding the opinions of per- 
sons, whose opinions were worth knowing on these 
two points. I St. The effect of your declining, upon 
the public affairs, and upon your own reputation. 
2dly. The effect of your continuing, in reference to 
the declarations you have made of your disinclina- 
tion to public life ; and I can truly say that I have 
not found the least difference of sentiment on either 
point. The impression is uniform, that your de- 
clining would be to be deplored as the greatest evil 
that could befall the country at the present juncture, 

^ This letter, and those which precede, refer to one of the earliest and 
worst of our election frauds. Burr wished to run against Clinton, but 
was baffled by Hamilton, the result being that Jay was nominated, 
and, after a most heated canvass, elected. His election depended, 
however, on the votes of three counties, and the Clintonian board of 
canvassers threw out, on the most technical and flimsy grounds, the 
votes of these counties and burned them. There was great wrath and 
excitement over this "count out," as it would now be called, and a 
convention and other violent measures were proposed, which Hamilton 
resisted. The Legislature, by a party vote, sustained the canvassers, 
and declared Clinton elected by a majority of 108 votes. 

8 Alexander Hamilton 

and as critically hazardous to your own reputation; 
that your continuance will be justified in the mind 
of every friend to his country, by the evident neces- 
sity for it. 'T is clear, says every one with whom I 
have conversed, that the affairs of the national gov- 
ernment are not yet firmly established — that its 
enemies, generally speaking, are as inveterate as 
ever — that their enmity has been sharpened by its 
success, and by all the resentments which flow from 
disappointed predictions and mortified vanity — that 
a general and strenuous effort is making in every 
State to place the administration of it in the hands 
of its enemies, as if they were its safest guardians 
— that the period of the next House of Represen- 
tatives is likely to prove the crisis of its permanent 
character — that if you continue in office nothing 
materially mischievous is to be apprehended, if you 
quit, much is to be dreaded — that the same motives 
which induced you to accept originally ought to de- 
cide you to continue till matters have assumed a 
more determined aspect — that indeed it would have 
been better, as it regards your own character, that 
you had never consented to come forward, than now 
to leave the business unfinished and in danger of 
being undone — that in the event of storms arising, 
there would be an imputation either of want of fore- 
sight or want of firmness — and, in fine, that on public 
and personal accounts, on patriotic and prudential 
considerations, the clear path to be pursued by you 
will be, again to obey the voice of your country, 
which, it is not doubted, will be as earnest and as 
unanimous as ever. 

Private Correspondence 9 

On this last point, I have some suspicion that it 
will be insinuated to you, and perhaps (God forgive 
me if I judge hardly) with design to place before you 
a motive for declining — that there is danger of a 
division among the electors, and of less unanimity in 
their suffrages than heretofore. My view of this 
matter is as follows: 

While your first election was depending, I had no 
doubt that there would be characters among the 
electors, who, if they durst follow their inclinations, 
would have voted against you ; but that in all prob- 
ability they would be restrained by an apprehension 
of public resentment — that nevertheless it was possi- 
ble a few straggling votes might be found in opposi- 
tion, from some headstrong and fanatical individuals 
— that a circumstance of this kind would be in fact, 
and ought to be estimated by you, as of no im- 
portance, since there would be sufficient unanimity 
to witness the general confidence and attachment 
towards you. 

My view of the future accords exactly with what 
was my view of the past. I believe the same mo- 
tives will operate to produce the same result. The 
dread of public indignation will be likely to restrain 
the indisposed few. If they can calculate at all, 
they will naturally reflect that they could not give a 
severer blow to their cause than by giving a proof of 
their hostility to you. But if a solitary vote or two 
should appear wanting to perfect unanimity, of what 
moment can it be ? Will not the fewness of the ex- 
ceptions be a confirmation of the devotion of the 
community to a character which has so generally 

lo Alexander Hamilton 

united its suffrages after an administration of four 
years at the head of a new government, opposed in 
its first establishment by a large proportion of its 
citizens, and obliged to run counter to many preju- 
dices in devising the arduous arrangements requisite 
to public credit and public order? Will not those 
who may be the authors of any such exceptions, 
manifest more their own perverseness and malevo- 
lence than any diminution of the affection and con- 
fidence of the nation? I am persuaded that both 
these questions ought to be answered in the affirma- 
tive, and that there is nothing to be looked for, on 
the score of diversity of sentiment, which ought to 
weigh for a moment. 

I trust, sir, and I pray God, that you will deter- 
mine to make a further sacrifice of your tranquillity 
and happiness to the public good. I trust that it 
need not continue above a year or two more ; and I 
think that it will be more eligible to retire from office 
before the expiration of a term of election, than to 
decline a re-election. 

The sentiments I have delivered upon this occa- 
sion, I can truly say, proceed exclusively from an 
anxious concern for the public welfare, and an af- 
fectionate personal attachment. These dispositions 
must continue to govern in every vicissitude one who 
has the honor to be, very truly and respectfully, 

etc. 

August 3d. Since writing the foregoing, I am 
favored with your interesting letter of the 29th of 
July. An answer to the points raised is not difficult, 
and shall as soon as possible be forwarded. 

Private Correspondence ii 

TO WASHINGTON 
-- Treasury Department, Aug. lo, 1792. 

Sir: 

I have been duly honored with your letters of the 
ist and 5th instant. A copy of the letter is inclosed 
according to your desire. 

You may depend upon it, sir, that nothing shall be 
wanting in this department to furnish all requisite 
supplies for the army with efficiency and economy, 
and to bring to exact account all persons concerned 
in them as far as shall consist with the powers of 
the department. Hitherto moneys have been fur- 
nished to the War Department as they have been 
called for, for procuring all those articles which have 
not been objects of direct contract with the Treasury. 
And I leam from the Secretary of War that every 
thing is in great maturity. 

Under the former system, provisions and clothing 
were the only articles which the Treasury had the 
charge of procuring; the receiving, issuing, and in- 
specting their quality belonged to the Department 
of War by usage. 

The act of the last session, entitled '' An act mak- 
ing alterations in the Treasury and War Depart- 
ments," prescribes that all purchases and contracts 
for all supplies for the use of the Department of War, 
be made by or under the direction of the Treasury 
Department. 

As much progress has been made in the prepara- 
tion for the campaign, prior to the passing of this 
act, by the Secretary of War, I thought it best to 
continue the business under his immediate care for 

12 Alexander Hamilton 

some time — till in fact all the arrangements begun 
should be completed. It is now, however, deter- 
mined that on the first of September the business of 
procuring all supplies will be begun under the imme- 
diate direction of the Treasury, upon estimates and 
requisitions from time to time furnished and made 
by the Department of War. 

The arrangement which is contemplated for this 
purpose is the following: — Provisions and clothing 
will be provided as heretofore, by contracts made by 
the Secretary of the Treasury pursuant to previous 
advertisements. Articles in the quartermaster's de- 
partment will be to be procured by him, or his agents 
or deputies; for which purpose, advances of money 
will be made to him directly, to be accounted for 
to the Treasury by him. Ordnance stores, Indian 
goods, and all contingent supplies, will be procured 
by an agent who will be constituted for the purpose, 
with an allowance of eight hundred dollars a year 
in lieu of commission. Accounts for his purchases, 
in every case in which it can conveniently be done 
(which will comprehend the greatest number of 
cases) , will be settled immediately with the Treasury, 
and the money paid directly to the individuals. In 
other cases, advances on account will be made to 
the agent, to be accounted for directly to the 
Treasury. 

A leading object of this arrangement is to exempt 
the officers, both of the War and Treasury Depart- 
ments, from the ill-natured suspicions which are 
incident to the actual handling and disbursements 
of public money. None of the inferior officers of 

Private Correspondence 13 

either department, except the Treasurer, will have 
any concern with it. 

The supplies of every kind will be delivered to the 
order of the Department of War. The issuing of 
them and the accounting for the issues (except as to 
provisions, which are directly issued by the con- 
tractors to the troops, and which are proved to the 
Treasury upon vouchers prescribed for the purpose) 
appertain to the Department of War. The regula- 
tions which have been adopted for the purpose, will 
no doubt be eagerly reported to you by the Secretary 
of War, as well as those which have been concerted 
with the Treasury respecting the paying and ac- 
counting for the pay of the troops. 

I beg leave to assure you, that, in the application 
of the general arrangement which you have adopted 
respecting the execution of the act concerning dis- 
tilled spirits, the greatest attention will be paid to 
economy, as far as the precautions of the Treasury 
can insure it. 

I presume it to have been your intention that the 
opinion of the Attorney-General should be taken as 
to the power of the President to appoint the sup- 
plementary officers contemplated during the recess 
of the Senate ; which shall accordingly be done. 

It affords me much satisfaction to observe that 
your mind has anticipated the decision to enforce the 
law, in case a refractory spirit should continue to 
render the ordinary and more desirable means in- 
effectual. My most deliberate reflections have led 
me to conclude, that the time for acting with decision 
is at hand; and it is with pleasure I can add, that an 

14 Alexander Hamilton 

increasing acquiescence is likely to render this course 
the less difficult in the cases in which an uncomply- 
ing temper may finally prevail. 

I shall without delay execute your directions re- 
specting the officers of the cutters. 

TO ELIAS BOUDINOT 
My Dear Sir: Philadelphia, Aug. 13. i79- 

Some skirmishing having begun in the Gazette of 
the United States respecting Mr. Freneau's receiving 
a salary from government, I mentioned in conversa- 
tion with a friend all that I knew of the matter, and 
among other things, but without naming you, the 
information you had given me concerning Mr. Madi- 
son's negotiation with Freneau. Upon this he 
founded a very pointed attack upon Mr. Freneau 
and Mr. Jefferson, which I dare say you have seen, 
as also Mr. Freneau 's affidavit denying all negotia- 
tion with "Thomas Jefferson, Esq., Secretary of 
State," etc., etc. The gentleman has since applied 
to me to obtain, if possible, an authentication of the 
fact of the negotiation. 

If I recollect right, you told me that this, if neces- 
sary, could be done ; and, if practicable, it is of real 
importance that it should be done. It will con- 
found and put down a man who is continually machi- 
nating against the public happiness. 

You will oblige me in the most particular manner 
by obtaining and forwarding to me without delay 
the particulars of all the steps taken by Mr. Madison 

Private Correspondence 15 

— the when and where — and with Uberty to use the 
name of the informant. His affidavit to the facts, 
if obtainable, would be of infinite value. Care ought 
to be taken that nothing is asserted which is not 
unquestionable. 

TO JOHN ADAMS 

Philadelphia, Aug. 16, 1792. 

Dear Sir: 

I have been duly favored with your letter of the 
4th inst. A warrant for one thousand dollars in 
your favor has issued. If any authorization from 
you had been sent to your son or any one else, your 
signature on the warrant would have been un- 
necessary. But as it is, it will be indispensable. 
Perhaps, however, the Treasurer may pay in ex- 
pectation of it. 

The question when the Vice-President entered on 
the duties of his office is open at the Treasury, though 
an opinion has obtained that the taking of the oath 
was the criterion. This has been founded on two 
considerations — analogy to the case of the President. 
The Constitution requires that he shall take an oath 
before he enters upon the execution of his office. He 
cannot enter upon the duties of it without entering 
upon the execution of it, and he cannot legally do 
the latter till he has taken the oath prescribed. The 
same injunction, however, is not laid upon the Vice- 
President, and therefore, except by analogy, resort 
must be had to the second consideration, namely, 
that the taking of the oath of office is the legal act 

1 6 Alexander Hamilton 

of acceptance and may be supposed to date the com- 
mencement of service. 

But this reasoning, it must be confessed, is not 
conclusive, and therefore the opinion of the Attor- 
ney-General will be taken, both as to the President 
and Vice-President, and I presume will guide in the 
adjustment. 

Twenty thousand dollars have been appropriated, 
and the advances by anticipation may reach that 
limit. 

You forgot that Mr. Clinton could feast upon what 
would starve another. He will not, however, have 
an opportunity of making the experiment, and I 
hope the starvation policy will not long continue 
fashionable. 

Your confirmation of the good disposition of New 
England is a source of satisfaction. I have a letter 
from a well-informed friend in Virginia who says: 
" All the persons I converse with are prosperous and 
happy, and yet most of them, including the friends 
of the government, appear to be much alarmed at a 
supposed system of policy tending to subvert the 
republican government of the country." Were ever 
men more ingenious to torment themselves with 
phantoms ? 

TO WILLIAM SETON 

August 17, 1792. 

My Dear Sir: 

Your letter mentioning certain particulars re- 
specting the two banks has been received and will 
be duly attended to. I trust, however, that certain 

Private Correspondence 17 

appearances have in no degree proceeded from any 
unkind disposition. The solution, I beHeve, is to 
be found in the necessity of sending here a consider- 
able sum in specie. Large payments into the Bank 
of North America on account of the State of Penn- 
sylvania, subscriptions to canals, etc., and large calls 
upon the Bank of the United States for the services 
of government, joined to liberal discounts, had pro- 
duced a considerable balance in favor of the Bank of 
North America, which rendered it expedient to draw 
a sum of specie from New York, not to leave the 
National Bank in any degree in the power of the 
Bank of North America, which once manifested a 
very mischievous disposition, that was afterwards 
repaid by acts of kindness and generosity. The tide 
is now changing and must speedily reverse the bal- 
ance, and I mention it in confidence, because I wish 
by explaining to cherish the confidence between the 
two institutions at New" York so necessary to their 
mutual interest. 

Inclosed, my dear sir, is a letter to Mr. Donald, of 
St. Vincents, which I beg your most particular care 
in forwarding. I presiime he is a merchant there, 
but a gentleman lately mentioned to me that he 
thought the name of the Governor of St. Vincents 
was Donald. If so, he is probably the person in- 
tended. I received a letter from him giving me 
some information of my father. The letter to Mr. 
Donald covers one to my father, who, from a series 
of misfortunes, was reduced to great distress. You 
will perceive from this that I must be anxious for the 
safe conveyance of my letter. If there is any person 

1 8 Alexander Hamilton 

of whom you can make previous inquiry concerning 
Mr. Donald, you will oblige me by doing it as a guide 
in forwarding the letter. I mean to send a duplicate 
from this place. 

TO JOHN JAY 
(Private.) 
,, T^ ry Philadelphia, Sept. -?, 1702. 

My Dear Sir: p ^' /y 

The proceedings at Pittsburgh which you will find 
stated in the inclosed papers and other incidents in 
the western parts of this State announce so deter- 
mined and persevering a spirit of opposition to the 
laws, as in my opinion to render a vigorous exertion 
of the powers of government indispensable. I have 
communicated this opinion to the President, and I 
doubt not his impressions will accord with it. In 
this case, one point for consideration will be the ex- 
pediency of the next Circuit Court's noticing the 
state of things in that quarter, particularly the 
meeting at Pittsburgh and its proceedings. You will 
observe an avowed object is to ''obstruct the oper- 
ation of the law." This is attempted to be qualified 
by a pretence of doing it by "every legal measure." 
But "legal measures" to "obstruct the operation 
of a law" is a contradiction in terms. I therefore 
entertain no doubt that a high misdemeanor has 
been committed. The point, however, is under sub- 
mission to the Attorney- General for his opinion. 

There is really, my dear sir, a crisis in the affairs of 
the country which demands the most mature con- 
sideration of its best and wisest friends. 

Private Correspondence 19 

I beg you to apply your own most serious thoughts 
to it, and favor me as soon as possible with the re- 
sult of your reflections. Perhaps it will not be amiss 
for you to converse with Mr. King. His judgment 
is sound — he has caution and energy. 

Would a proclamation from the President be ad- 
visable, stating the crimiinality of such proceedings, 
and warning all persons to abstain from them as the 
laws will be strictly enforced against all offenders? 

If the plot should thicken and the application of 
force should appear to be unavoidable, will it be ex- 
pedient for the President to repair in person to the 
scene of commotion? 

These are some of the questions which present 
themselves. The subject will doubtless open itself 
in all its aspects to you. 

TO 

Dear Sir* Philadelphia, Sept. 21, 1792. 

I take the liberty to inclose you the copy of a 
letter from a very respectable friend in New York. 
The contents surprised me — nor am I quite per- 
suaded that the appearance of Mr. Burr on the stage 
is not a diversion in favor of Mr. Clinton. ' 

Mr. Clinton's success I should think very unfortu- 
nate; I am not for trusting the government too 
much in the hands of its enemies. But still Mr. C. 
is a man of property, and in private life, as far as I 
know, of probity. I fear the other gentleman is 

^ This refers to the contest for the Vice-Presidency at the second 
national election. The struggle finally settled down to Clinton and 
Adams, and the latter was elected. 

20 Alexander Hamilton 

unprincipled, both as a public and a private man. 
When the Constitution was in deliberation, his con- 
duct was equivocal, but its enemies, who, I believe, 
best understood him, considered him as with them. 
In fact, I take it, he is for or against nothing, but as 
it suits his interest or ambition. He is determined, 
as I conceive, to make his way to be the head of the 
popular party, and to climb per fas aut nefas to the 
highest honors of the State, and as much higher as 
circumstances may permit. Embarrassed, as I un- 
derstand, in his circumstances, with an extravagant 
family, bold, enterprising, and intriguing, I am mis- 
taken if it be not his object to play the game of con- 
fusion, and I feel it to be a religious duty to oppose 
his career. 

I have hitherto scrupulously refrained from in- 
terference in elections; but the occasion is, in my 
opinion, of sufficient importance to warrant in this 
instance a departure from that rule. I therefore 
commit my opinion to you without scruple; but in 
perfect confidence. I pledge my character for dis- 
cernment, that it is incumbent upon every good 
man to resist the present design. 

TO RUFUS KING 

September 23, 1793. 

My Dear Sir: 

Though I had had a previous intimation of the 
possibility of such an event, yet the intelligence con- 
tained in your letter of the 17th surprised me. Even 
now I am to be convinced that the movement is any 
thing more than a diversion in favor of Mr. Clinton; 

Private Correspondence 21 

yet, on my part, it will not be neglected. My atten- 
tion, as far as shall be in any degree safe, will be 
directed to every State south of New York. I do 
not go beyond it, because other influences would be 
quite as efficacious there as mine. 

A good use will be made of it in this State. I wish 
a letter could be written here, stating the plan, and 
Mr. Dallas' assertion respecting Pennsylvania, which 
could be made use of without reserve. You well 
know who could write such a letter, and of course to 
whom it miight be addressed. Mr. Lewis would be 
the most proper person to be written to. This is a 
matter of importance, and if practicable no time 
should be lost. 

I wrote Mr. Jay a long letter, which I fear reached 
New York after he had set out on the circuit, in- 
forming him that I had concluded to advise a pro- 
clamation; and my reasons for it, which included 
some material facts not before communicated, I have 
not leisure to repeat. The proclamation has been 
signed by the President, and sent to Mr. Jefferson 
for his counter-signature; I expect it here on Tues- 
day, and have taken correspondent measures. I be- 
lieve all is prudent and safe. 

TO 

Philadelphia, Sept. 26, 1792. 


Some days since I was surprised with the following 
intelligence in a letter from Mr. King, whose name I 
disclose to you in confidence. 

'' Burr is industrious in his canvass, and his object 
is well understood by our Antis. Mr. Edwards is to 

22 Alexander Hamilton 

make interest for him in Connecticut, and Mr. Dallas, 
who is here, and quite in the circle of the Governor 
and the party, informs us that Mr. Burr will be sup- 
ported as Vice-President in Pennsylvania. Nothing 
which has heretofore happened so decisively proves 
the inveteracy of the opposition. Should they suc- 
ceed, much would be to be apprehended." 

Though in my situation I deem it most proper to 
avoid interference in any matter relating to the elec- 
tions for members of the government, yet I feel 
reasons of sufficient force to induce a departure from 
that rule in the present instance. 

Mr. Burr's integrity as an individual is not un- 
impeached. As a public man, he is one of the worst 
sort — a friend to nothing but as it suits his interest 
and ambition. Determined to climb to the highest 
honors of the State, and as much higher as circum- 
stances may permit, he cares nothing about the 
means of effecting his purpose. 'T is evident that 
he aims at putting himself at the head of what he 
calls the ''popular party" as affording the best tools 
for an ambitious man to work with, secretly turning 
liberty into ridicule. He knows as well as most men 
how to make use of the name. In a word, if we have 
an embryo-Caesar in the United States, 't is Burr. 

TO GEN. C. C. PINCKNEY ' 

Philadelphia, Oct. lo, 1792. 

My Dear Sir: 

I duly received your letter of the 6th September, 
and have sent an extract to Mr. Church for the ex- 

* General Charles Cotesworth Pinckney, of South Carolina. 

Private Correspondence 23 

plan at ion which is necessary. I feel myself truly 
obliged by your friendly allusion to my unpleasant 
situation, and for the consolation which you are so 
kind as to offer me. The esteem of discerning and 
virtuous men must always support a mind properly 
formed under the pressure of malevolence and envy. 
I will not pretend that I am insensible to the perse- 
cution which I experience ; but it may be relied upon 
that I shall desert no post which I ought to endeavor 
to maintain, so long as my own reputation or the 
public good may render perseverance necessary 
or proper. When it is not requisite, either to the 
one or the other, my friends will excuse me if I re- 
collect that I have a growing and hitherto too much 
neglected family. It is to be lamented that so 
strong a spirit of faction and innovation prevails at 
the present moment in a great part of the country. 
The thing is alarming enough to call for the atten- 
tion of every friend to government. Let me not be 
thought to travel out of my sphere, if I observe that 
a particular attention to the election for the next 
Congress is dictated by the vigorous and general 
effort which is making by factious men to introduce 
everywhere, and in every department, persons un- 
friendly to the measures, if not the constitution, of 
the national government. Either Governor Clinton, 
or Mr. Burr, of New York, both decidedly of the de- 
scription of persons I have mentioned, is to be run 
in this quarter as Vice-President, in opposition to 
Mr. Adams. The former has been invariably the 
enemy of national principles. The latter has no 
other principles than to mount, at all events, to the 

:} Vl 

24 Alexander Hamilton 

fiill honors of the State, and to as much more as cir- 
cumstances will permit — a man in private life not 
unblemished. It will be a real misfortune to the 
government if either of them should prevail. 'T is 
suspected by some that the plan is only to divide the 
votes of the Northern and the Middle States, to let 
in Mr. Jefferson by the votes of the South. I will not 
scruple to say to you, in confidence, that this also 
would be a serious misfortune to the government. 
That gentleman whom I once very much esteemed ^ 
but who does not permit me to retain that sentiment 
for him, is certainly a man of sublimated and para- 
doxical imagination, entertaining and propagating 
opinions inconsistent with dignified and orderly gov- 
ernment. Mr. Adams, whatever objections may lie 
against some of his theoretic opinions, is a firm, 
honest, and independent politician. Some valuable 
characters are about to be lost to the House of Re- 
presentatives of their own choice. I feared once 
that this would be the case with Mr. Smith, ^ of your 
State ; but I believe his present intention is rather 
to continue to serve. I trust there can be no doubt 
of his success, and I wish means to be used to deter- 
mine his acquiescence. He is truly an excellent 
member — a ready, clear speaker, of a sound analytic 
head, and the justest views. I know no man whose 
loss from the House would be more severely felt by 
the good cause. The delicacy of these observations 
from me will, of course, occur to you; I make them 
without reserve, confiding equally in your friendship 
and prudence. Accept the assurances of the cordial 

I Hon. Wm. Smith, South Carolina. 

Private Correspondence 25 

esteem and regard with which I have the honor to 
remain. 

TO JOHN STEELE ' 
My Dear Sir: Philadelphia, Oct. 15, 179- 

The letter which you did me the favor to write me, 
of the 19th of September, came to hand two days ago. 
The late symptoms of acquiescence in the duty on 
distilled spirits, which you announce in your quarter, 
are particularly satisfactory. If the people will but 
make trial of the thing, their good- will towards it will 
increase. This has hitherto happened every^where, 
where the law has gone into operation. There 
certainly can be no tax more eligible or less burthen- 
some. Though I impose on myself great circum- 
spection on the subject of elections for the federal 
government, yet, in relation to the characters you 
mention, I feel myself more at liberty, and my entire 
confidence in you will not permit me to affect re- 
serve. I take it for granted that in all the Northern 
and Middle States, the present President will have a 
unanimous vote. I trust it will be so in the South 
also. A want of unanimity would be a blot on 
our political hemisphere, and would wound the mind 
of that excellent character to whom the country is 
so much indebted. For Vice-President, Mr. Adams 
will have a nearly unanimous vote in the Eastern 
States. The same thing would happen in New York 
if the electors were to be chosen by the people ; but 
as they will be chosen by the Legislature, and as a 

^ Member of Congress from North Carolina, 1790 to 1793. 

26 Alexander Hamilton 

majority of the existing Assembly are Clintonians, 
the electors will, I fear, be of the same complexion. 
In Jersey, Mr. Adams will have a unanimous vote, 
and, according to present appearances, in Pennsyl- 
vania likewise. The parties have had a trial of their 
strength here for representatives, and though the 
issue is not finally ascertained, there is a moral cer- 
tainty, from the returns received, that the ticket 
supported by the federal interest will prevail by 
a large majority. The electors nominated by the 
same interest will all, or nearly all, favor Mr. Adams. 
I believe the weight of Delaware will be thrown into 
the same scale. And I think it probable there will 
be votes for Mr. Adams in Maryland. I presume 
none in Virginia or Georgia. Of North Carolina, 
you can best judge. In South Carolina he will have 
votes, but I am at a loss to judge of the proportion. 
This statement will inform you that Mr. Adams 
is the man who will be supported in the Northern and 
' Middle States, by the friends of the Government. 
They reason thus: "Mr. Adams, like other men, 
has his faults and foibles ; some of the opinions he is 
supposed to entertain, we do not approve, but we 
believe him to be honest, firm, faithful, and inde- 
pendent— a sincere lover of his country — a real 
friend to genuine liberty, but combining his attach- 
ment to that with love of order and stable govern- 
ment. No man's private character can be fairer 
than his. No man has given stronger proofs than 
he of disinterested and intrepid patriotism. We 
will therefore support him as far preferable to any 
one who is likely to be opposed to him." 

Private Correspondence 27 

Who will be seriously opposed to him, I am yet at 
a loss to decide. One while, Governor Clinton ap- 
peared to be the man. Of late, there have been 
symptoms of Col. Burr's canvassing for it. Some 
say one or both of these will be played off as a diver- 
sion in favor of Mr. Jefferson. I do not scruple to 
say to you that my preference of Mr. Adams to 
either of these is decided. As to Mr. Clinton, he is 
a man of narrow and perverse politics, and as well 
under the former as under the present government, 
he has been steadily, since the termination of the 
war with Great Britain, opposed to national prin- 
ciples. My opinion of Mr. Burr is yet to form — but, 
according to the present state of it, he is a man whose 
only political principle is to mount at all events, to 
the highest legal honors of the nation, and as much 
further as circumstances will carry him. Imputa- 
tions not favorable to his integrity as a man rest upon 
him, but I do not vouch for their authenticity. 

There was a time when I should have balanced 
between Mr. Jefferson and Mr. Adams; but I now 
view the former as a man of sublimated and para- 
doxical imagination — cherishing notions incompati- 
ble with regular and firm government. 

Thus have I opened myself to you with frankness; 
I doubt not I am perfectly safe in doing it. 

You give me pain by telling me that you have 
declined serving in the House of Representatives 
after the third of March next, and that it is doubtful 
whether you will attend the next session. I anx- 
iously hope that you will find it convenient to at- 
tend, and that you will change your resolution as to 

^■i 

28 Alexander Hamilton 

not serving in a future House. The ensuing session 
will be an interesting one, and the next Congress 
will either anchor the government in safety or set it 
afloat. 

My apprehension is excited when I see so many 
valuable members dropping off. Mr. Lawrence ' 
and Mr. Benson ^ will not serve again. Mr. Bam- 
well ^ also declines. The House will, I fear, lose 
more of its talents than it can spare. 

TO JOHN ADAMS 

October, 1792. 

I trust you are sufficiently convinced of my re- 
spect for you and attachment to you to render an 
apology for the liberty I am going to take, unneces- 
sary. I learn with pain that you may not probably 
be here till late in the session. I fear that this wiU 
give some handle to your enemies to misrepresent, 
and though I am persuaded you are very indifferent 
personally to the event of a certain election, yet I 
hope you are not so as regards the cause of good 
government. The difference in that view is, in my 
conception, immense between the success of Mr. 

^ John Lawrence, an Englishman by birth and a soldier in the 
Revolution, was an eminent lawyer of New York, at this time a 
member of Congress, and afterwards U. S. District Judge and Senator 
from New York. 

* Egbert Benson, at this time a member of Congress from New York, 
and again in 181 3. Attorney-General of New York, 1 780-1789, and 
from 1 794 to 1 80 1 a Judge of the Supreme Court of the State. 

3 Robert Barnwell, member of Congress from South Carolina from 
1791 to 1793. 

Private Correspondence 29 

Clinton or yourself, and some sacrifices of feeling are 
to be made. But this is not the only relation in 
which I deem your early presence here desirable. 
Permit me to say it best suits the firmness and 
elevation of your character to meet all events, 
whether auspicious or otherwise, on the ground 
where station and duty call you. One would not give 
the ill-disposed the triumph of supposing that an 
anticipation of want of success has kept you from 
your post. 

You observe, my dear sir, I speak without much 
menagement. You will ascribe it to my confidence 
and esteem. It is not necessary in any view to 
multiply words. I forbear it ; but allow me to add 
that it is the universal wish of your friends you 
should be as soon as possible at Philadelphia.' 

TO JOHN JAY 

My Dear Sir: Philadelphia, Dec 18, 1792. 

Your favors of the 26th of November and i6th 
inst. have duly come to hand. I am ashamed that 
the former has remained so long unacknowledged, 
though I am persuaded my friends would readily 
excuse my delinquencies could they appreciate my 
situation. 'T is not the load of proper official busi- 
ness that alone engrosses me, though this would be 
enough to occupy any man. 'T is not the extra at- 
tention I am obliged to pay to the course of legisla- 
tive manoeuvres that alone adds to my burden and 
perplexity. 'T is the malicious intrigues to stab me 

I Reprinted from the History of the Republic, v., 02. 

30 Alexander Hamilton 

in the dark, against which I am too often obliged to 
guard myself, that distract and harass me to a point 
which, rendering my situation scarcely tolerable, in- 
terferes with objects to which friendship and inclina- 
tion would prompt me. 

I have not, however, been unmindful of the sub- 
ject of your letters. Mr. King will tell you the state 
the business was in. Nothing material has happened 
since. The representation will probably produce 
some effect, though not as great as ought to be ex- 
pected. Some changes for the better, I trust, will 
take place. 

The success of the Vice-President is as great a 
source of satisfaction as that of Mr. Clinton would 
have been of mortification and pain to me. Will- 
ingly, however, would I relinquish my share of the 
command to the Anti-federalists if I thought they 
were to be trusted. But I have so many proofs of 
the contrary, as to make me dread the experiment 
of their preponderance.' 

TO RICHARD HARRISON ' 

Philadelphia, Jan. 5, 1793. 

Dear Sir: 

Le Roy has not yet appeared with the powers 
and receipts mentioned in your letter of the 31st 

' Reprinted from Life of Jay, ii., 213. 

^ Richard Harrison was bom in 1750. He was our Consul at Cadiz 
for five years, and this letter seems to have been written at the time of 
his return from his consulship and on the presentation of his accounts. 
In this year, 1793, he was appointed Auditor of the Treasury, a position 
which he held until his death, in 1841. 

Private Correspondence 31 

December. Every practicable facility will be given 
to the business when it conies forward. But I be- 
lieve, according to the course of the Treasury, a cer- 
tificate, not money, will be given for the balance. 
Your account is returned with directory remarks 
upon it. I am sorry you should have the trouble of 
so many different applications, but the course of 
public business requires it. 

I am more sorry that we have been deprived of 
the pleasure of seeing you. Every friend I see from 
a place I love is a cordial to me, and I stand in need 
of something of that kind now and then. 

The triumphs of vice are no new thing under the 
sim, and I fear, till the millennium comes, in spite of 
all our boasted light and purification, hypocrisy and 
treachery will continue to be the most successful 
commodities in the political market. It seems to 
be the destined lot of nations to mistake their foes 
for their friends, their flatterers for their faithful 
servants. 

TO WILLIAM SHORT ^ 

(Private.) 

Philadelphia, Feb. 5, 1793. 

Sir: 

The spirit of party has grown to maturity sooner 
in this country than perhaps was to have been 
counted upon. You will see a specimen of it in 

I William Short, of Virginia, was Minister to the Hague and in 
charge of our financial negotiations in Holland, and was afterwards 
Minister to Spain. 

32 Alexander Hamilton 

the inclosed speech of Mr. Giles, a member from 
Virginia. The House of Representatives adopted 
the resolutions proposed by him, nemine contra- 
dicente. The object, with a majority, was to con- 
found the attempt, by giving a free course to 
investigation. 

I send you, also, a printed copy of a letter from me 
to the House of Representatives, of yesterday's date 
being the first part of an answer to those resolutions. 
The statements referred to in it could not yet be 
printed, but lest the thing should pass the Atlantic 
and be made an ill use of to the prejudice of our 
country, I send you the antidote, to be employed or 
not, as you may see occasion. 

An investigation intended to prejudice me is begun 
with respect to the circumstances attending the last 
payment on account of the French debt, which, in 
its progress, may draw your conduct into question. 
I think, however, you need be under no anxiety for 
the result. Your hesitations, at a certain stage, 
were so natural, and your reasons so weighty for 
them, that they will give little handle against you, 
besides the coincidence in opinion here about the 
expediency of a suspension of payment. The popu- 
lar tide in this country is strong in favor of the last 
revolution in France; and there are many who go, 
of course, with that tide, and endeavor always to 
turn it to account. For my own part, I content my- 
self with praying most sincerely that it may issue in 
the real advantage and happiness of the nation. 

Private Correspondence 33 

TO RUFUS KING 
T., T-v r, Philadelphia, April 2, 170'?. 

My Dear Sir: - p ' /y^ 

When you are acquainted with all the facts, I 
think you will alter the opinion you appear to enter- 
tain. My application comes literally within your 
rule. The loan is necessary for the current expendi- 
ture, independent of any new advance to France, or 
of purchases of the debt. This has arisen from my 
having been under the necessity of remitting to 
Holland, for a payment in June of 1,000,000 guilders, 
as an instalment of the principal, and 470,000 guild- 
ers for interest of the Dutch debt. 

Late advices rendering it problematical whether a 
loan could be obtained for the purpose of the instal- 
ment, it became necessary to make this remittance 
to avoid danger to the public credit. 

Hence, without a loan from the bank, I ought to 
calculate upon a deficiency in the present quarter 
(remember we are in April) of 672,023 dollars and 
26 cents, and in the next, of 325,447 dollars and 28 
cents. 

This is the result of as accurate a view of receipts 
and expenditures as can now be taken. You will 
anticipate that, by all the expenditures not falling 
actually within the periods to which they are applica- 
ble, the real deficiency would not be so great as the 
calculated ; but you will, at the same time, perceive 
that the view given supposes a state of the Treasury 
which renders an auxiliary indispensable. 

At the same time, I cannot but think that you 
apply your principle too rigorously. I ought not to 

VOL. X.— 3. 

34 Alexander Hamilton 

be forced to divert for a length of time funds appro- 
priated for other purposes, to the current expendi- 
ture. To compel this would be, in substance to 
withhold the means necessary for the public service ; 
for it would oblige the Treasury to employ an adven- 
titious resource, which ought not be so employed, 
and that too at a time when it could be employed ad- 
vantageously, according to its original and true des- 
tination. I therefore think, independent of the real 
exigency, the bank ought to make the loan. 

The loans to government stand on very different 
considerations from those to individuals. Besides 
the chartered privileges, which are the grant of the 
government, the vast deposits constantly on hand, 
and which ordinarily exceed the loans from the bank, 
frequently very greatly, are an advantage which, 
generally speaking, bears no proportion to the ad- 
vantages of the dealings between individuals and the 
bank. Consider, too, what has been the state of 
things for some time past, and the real sacrifices 
which have been made not to distress the institution. 

If for such accommodations equivalent services 
are not to be rendered, they could not easily be 
defended. 

Besides, from the necessity of having a consider- 
able sum on hand in the Treasury, and the natural 
course of the business, the bank is pretty sure of 
having always on deposit a large part of what it 
lends to the government. This does not exist in any 
thing like the same degree, in the case of individuals. 

You seem to calculate that the past advances will 
not be replaced. On the contrary, it is my inten- 

Private Correspondence 35 

tion, pursuant to stipulation, to repay as fast as the 
funds come in applicable to it ; and in the last quarter 
of the year I hope to make a considerable progress in 
the reimbursement; till then, it will not be prac- 
ticable. 

I do not know whether Mr. Kane stated to you the 
nature of my proposal. It was that the payments 
should be made in four equal monthly instalments — 
the first on the first of June — and that each instal- 
ment should be reimbursed in six months. The real 
advance of the bank will be very temporary indeed 
before greater sums will come into its vaults from 
the duties. In the last quarter of the present and 
the first quarter of the ensuing year, very large re- 
ceipts may be expected. 

You are sure that while I seek to put myself in a 
proper posture, I shall not fail to have a due regard 
to the safety of the institution. 

It is much to be wished that I could be enabled to 
make some purchases, though this will not be the 
case with the loan in question, unless a loan shall 
also have been obtained in Europe. 

A meeting of the commissioners has lately been 
called by Mr. Jefferson, out of the course heretofore 
practised, in which I have been pressed to declare 
whether I had or had not funds applicable to purchases. 
I answered so as to be safe. But you readily perceive 
the design of this movement. There is no doubt in 
my mind that the next session will revive the attack 
with more system and earnestness — and it is surely 
not the interest of any body or any thing that a 
serious handle should be furnished. 

36 Alexander Hamilton 

On the whole, I am persuaded that the bank can 
do what I ask without real inconvenience to itself; 
and my situation is such that I shall be compelled 
to find an aiixiliary. 

All the cry here is for peace. How is it with you? 

TO WASHINGTON 

Philadelphia, April 5, i793- 

Sir: 

The ship John Buckley is just arrived here from 
Lisbon, which place she left on the 23d of February. 

The Messrs. Wains, a respectable mercantile house 
here, have received a letter from Mr. John Buckley, 
a respectable merchant of Lisbon, after whom the 
ship is named, of which the following is an extract : 

" By letters from France, by this day's post, we 
find that an embargo took place there the 2d instant 
on all English, Russian, and Dutch vessels, which is 
certainly the prelude of war." This letter is dated 
the 2 2d of February. 

Messrs. Wains, in addition, inform , that on 

the 23d of February, the moment the ship was getting 
under way, Mr. Buckley came on board with a letter 
from Mr. Fenwick, of Bordeaux, informing him that 
war had been declared by France against England, 
Russia, and Holland. The foregoing particulars I 
have directly from the Wains. 

The report in the city is that the war was declared 
on the 8th of February. 

Combining this with the letter of Lord Grenville to 

Private Correspondence 37 

Mr. Chauvelin, requiring his departure, and the king's 
message to the House of Commons, foimded upon it 
— there seems to be no room for doubt of the exist- 
ence of war. 

P. S. — I this instant learn that there are EngHsh 
papers in town, by way of St. Vincent, which men- 
tion that on the 8th of February the late Queen of 
France was also put to death, after a trial and con- 
demnation. 


Philadelphia, April 8, 1793. 


The papers of to-day, which I take it for granted 
are forwarded to you, will inform you of the con- 
firmation of the war between France, England, and 
Holland, and of such other leading particulars as are 
contained in the English papers brought by the 
packet. 

The object of this letter is merely to apprise you 
that the whole current of commercial intelligence^ 
which comes down to the i ith of February, indicates 
thus far an unexceptionable conduct on the part of 
the British Government towards the vessels of the 
United States. 

The information is received here with very great 
satisfaction, as favorable to the continuance of peace, 
the desire of which may be said to be both universal 
and ardent. 

P. S. — Lest the papers may not be regularly 
transmitted, I enclose the two of this morning. 

38 Alexander Hamilton 

TO JOHN JAY 
Dear Sir* Philadelphia, April 9, 1793. 

When we last conversed together on the subject, 
we were both of opinion that the minister expected 
from France should be received. 

Subsequent circumstances have perhaps induced an 
additional embarrassment on this point, and render 
it advisable to reconsider the opinion generally, and 
to raise this further question, Whether he ought to 
be received absolutely or with qualifications. The 
king has been decapitated. Out of this will arise a 
regent, acknowledged and supported by the powers 
of Europe almost universally, in capacity to act, and 
who may himself send an ambassador to the United 
States. Should we in such case receive both? If 
we receive one from the republic and refuse the 
other, shall we stand on ground perfectly neutral? 
If we receive a minister from the republic, shall we 
be afterward at liberty to say. We will not decide 
whether there is a government in France competent 
to demand from us the performance of the existing 
treaties? What the government of France shall be 
is the very point in dispute. Till that is decided, 
the applicability of the treaties is suspended. When 
that government is established, we shall consider 
whether such changes had been made as to render 
their continuance incompatible with the interest of 
the United States. If we shall not have concluded 
ourselves by any act, I am of opinion that we have 
at least a right to hold the thing suspended. Till 
the point in dispute is decided, I doubt whether we 

Private Correspondence 39 

could bona fide dispute the ultimate obligation of the 
treaties. Will the unqualified reception of a min- 
ister conclude us? If it will, ought we so to con- 
clude ourselves? Ought we not rather to refuse 
receiving, or to receive with qualifications ; declaring 
that we receive the person as the representative of 
the government, in fact, of the French nation, re- 
serving to ourselves the right to consider the ap- 
plicability of the treaties to the actual situation 
of the parties? These are questions which require 
our utmost wisdom. I would give a great deal for 
a personal discussion with you. Imprudent things 
have already been done, which render it proportion- 
ally important that every succeeding step should be 
well considered.' 


Philadelphia, April 9, 1793. 

My Dear Sir: 

I have already written you by this post. A fur- 
ther question occurs — Would not a proclamation 
prohibiting our citizens from taking commissions on 
either side be proper? Would it be well that it 
should include a declaration of neutrality? If you 
think the measure prudent, could you draught such 
a thing as you would deem proper? I wish much 
you could.^ 

^ Reprinted from Life of Jay, i., 298. ' Ibid., 300. 

40 Alexander Hamilton 

TO RUFUS KING 

Philadelphia, May 2, 1793. 

The failures in England will be so seriously felt in 
this country as to involve a real crisis in our money 
concerns. 

I anxiously wish you could be here to assist in the 
operations of the Bank of the United States. Never 
was there a time which required more the union of 
courage and prudence than the present and approach- 
ing juncture. You can imagine all that I could add 
on this subject. Is it possible for you to spend a 
month with us? 

TO JEFFERSON ' 

Treasury Department, May 3, 1793. 

Sir: 

I regret extremely that I did not receive your 
letter respecting Mr. Temant's application till two 
o'clock yesterday, after a warrant had issued in his 
favor for the sum requested. 

Agreeing entirely in opinion with you, that all ap- 
plications from diplomatic characters, as well those 
relating to pecuniary matters as others, ought to be 
addressed to your department, I should have taken 
no step on the present occasion, had it not been put 
on the footing of a previous arrangement (as you will 
perceive by the copy of Mr. Ternant's note to me), 
and had I not myself carried along in my mind a 

I This, and the other letters to Jefferson which follow, simply show 
the strained relations between Jefferson and Hamilton, and the widen- 
ing of the breach which finally resulted in open enmity. 

Private Correspondence 41 

general impression that the spirit of what had passed 
would comprise the advance requested in the par- 
ticular case. 

For greater caution, however, I thought it advis- 
able to mention the matter to the President, which 
was followed (if I remember right, upon my own 
suggestion) by the conversation which I had with 
you. 

You will remember that though your recollection 
at the time of what had passed from you agreed with 
what had been the result of your subsequent ex- 
amination, yet you expressed an opinion that in the 
special case (adhering as a general rule to the spirit 
of your late communication) it ought to be ad- 
visable to make the advance desired, as it would be 
well ''to part friends.'' And it was at my request, 
subsequent to this declaration, that you engaged to 
review your communications to Mr. Temant. 

Having told Mr. Temant that the matter would be 
terminated the day succeeding his application — not 
having heard from you on that day — understanding 
it to be your opinion that, on the whole, it would be 
well to make the advance, — I waited on the Presi- 
dent yesterday morning, stated what had passed be- 
tween us, and obtained his consent for making the 
advance. 

I am thus particular from a desire that you 
may see the ground upon which I have proceeded, 
as it would give me pain that you should consider 
what has been done as the infringement of a rule of 
official propriety. I assure you this was not my 
intention. 

42 Alexander Hamilton 

TO ' 

May, 1793, 

You ask me if the newspapers of Philadelphia give 
a true picture of the conduct of its citizens on the 
occasion of the arrival of Mr. Genet, and whether the 
great body of them are really as indiscreet as those 
papers represent them. 

It gives me pleasure to be able to answer you in 
the negative. I can assure you upon the best evi- 
dence that, comparatively speaking, but a small pro- 
portion of them have had agency in the business. 

Though the papers, on the morning of the day of 
Mr. Genet's arrival, announced his approach, and at 

o'clock , three guns were fired from the 

frigate as a signal to those who were disposed to go 
to meet him at Gray's ferry, as had been previously 
concerted and notified in the papers, and though we 
are told by some of the printers that all the outlets 
from the city were crowded with persons going out 
to meet Mr. Genet, the fact is that a very inconsider- 
able number indeed went out. It is seldom easy to 
speak with absolute certainty in such cases, but from 
all I could observe or have been able to learn, I be- 
lieve the number would be stated high at a htmdred 
persons. 

In the evening of the same day, according to no- 
tice in an evening paper which came out earlier than 
usual for the purpose, a meeting was convened at 
the State House yard under the direction of the same 

' This letter is undated, but it must have been written at this time, 
as Genet reached Philadelphia May 16, 1793, and the letter relates to 
that event. 

Private Correspondence 43 

persons who had projected the going out to Gray^s. 
This meeting was also inconsiderable. From forty 
to one hundred persons give you the extremes of the 
numbers present, as reported by those who were at 
the meeting or in a situation to observe it. 

Here a committee was appointed to prepare an 
address to Mr. Genet; and another meeting of the 
citizens was advertised for the ensuing evening at 
the same place, the object of which, it seems, was 
to consider and approve the address. 

This last meeting is stated differently from three 
himdred to one thousand. An accurate observer, ^ 
who was a by-stander and paid particular attention 
to the matter, assures me that there were between 
five and six hundred assembled. I rely upon this as 
about the truth. 

The persons who were met approved the address 
which had been prepared, and, as you have seen, 
nominated a committee to present it, whom they 
accompanied to Mr. Genet's lodging at the City 
Tavern. 

On their way to the City Tavern their number 
was, as you will imagine, considerably increased. 
A crowd will always draw a crowd, whatever be the 
purpose. Curiosity will supply the place of attach- 
ment to or interest in the object. What number 
may have been assembled in the vicinity of the 
City Tavern, it is impossible to say. The evening 
being pretty far advanced, was alone an obstacle to 
judging. 

But the true test was the meeting in the State 
House yard. 'T is there we are to look for the real 

44 Alexander Hamilton 

partisans of the measure. And, according to this 
standard, it may be pronounced that not a tenth part 
of the city participated in it. 

You ask who were its promoters. I answer, that 
with very few exceptions they were the same men 
who have been uniformly the enemies and the dis- 
turbers of the government of the United States. It 
will not be surprising if we see ere long a curious 
combination growing up to control its measures, with 
regard to foreign politics, at the expense of the peace 
of the country — perhaps at a still greater expense. 

We too have our disorganizers. But I trust there 
is enough of virtue and good sense in the people of 
America to bafBe every attempt against their pro- 
sperity, though masked under the specious garb of an 
extraordinary zeal for liberty. They practically, I 
doubt not, adopt this sacred maxim, that without 
government there is no true liberty. 

I agree with you in the reflections you make on 
the tendency of public demonstrations of attach- 
ment to the cause of France. 'T is certainly not 
wise to expose ourselves to the jealousy and resent- 
ment of the rest of the world, by a fruitless display 
of zeal for that cause. It may do us much harm, and 
it can do France no good (unless indeed we are to 
embark in the war with her, which nobody is so 
hardy as to avow, though some secretly machinate 
it). It cannot be without danger and inconvenience 
to our interests to impress on the nations of Europe 
an idea that we are actuated by the same spirit 
which has for some time past fatally misguided the 
measures of those who conduct the affairs of France, 

Private Correspondence 45 

and sullied a cause once glorious, and that might 
have been triumphant. The cause of France is 
compared with that of America during its late revo- 
lution. Would to Heaven that the comparison were 
just. Would to Heaven we could discern in the 
mirror of French affairs the same humanity, the 
sam.e decorum, the same gravity, the same order, 
the same dignity, the same solemnity, which dis- 
tinguished the cause of the American Revolution. 
Clouds and darkness would not then rest upon the 
issue as they now do. I own I do not like the com- 
parison. When I contemplate the horrid and sys- 
tematic massacres of the 2d and 3d of September; 
when I observe that a Marat and a Robespierre, the 
notorious prompters of those bloody scenes, sit tri- 
umphantly in the convention and take a conspicuous 
part in its measures — that an attempt to bring the 
assassins to justice has been obliged to be aban- 
doned; when I see an unfortunate prince, whose 
reign was a continued demonstration of the good- 
ness and benevolence of his heart, of his attachment 
to the people of whom he was the monarch, who, 
though educated in the lap of despotism, had given 
repeated proofs that he was not the enemy of liberty, 
brought precipitately and ignominiously to the block 
without any substantial proof of guilt, as yet dis- 
closed— ^without even an authentic exhibition of 
motives, in decent regard to the opinions of man- 
kind; when I find the doctrines of atheism openly 
advanced in the convention, and heard with loud 
applause; when I see the sword of fanaticism ex- 
tended to force a political creed upon citizens who 

46 Alexander Hamilton 

were invited to submit to the arms of France as the 
harbingers of liberty; when I behold the hand of 
rapacity outstretched to prostrate and ravish the 
monuments of religious worship, erected by those 
citizens and their ancestors; when I perceive pas- 
sion, tumult, and violence usurping those seats, 
where reason and cool deliberation ought to preside, 
I acknowledge that I am glad to believe there is no 
real resemblance between what was the cause of 
America and what is the cause of France — that the 
difference is no less great than that between liberty 
and licentiousness. I regret whatever has a ten- 
dency to compound them, and I feel anxious, as an 
American, that the ebullitions of inconsiderate men 
among us may not tend to involve our reputation in 
the issue. 

TO RUFUS KING 

June 15, 1793. 

Dear Sir: 

The ideas expressed in your letter of the 14th 
correspond with my view of the subject in general. 
I did not perceive that any process could be devised 
to detain the privateer, and concluded that the issue 
would be to leave her in military custody. Indeed, 
I believe this was rather the expectation with all, 
though it was thought advisable to make the experi- 
ment of a reference to the civil tribunal. 

With regard to the Catharine ^ I also entertain the 
doubt you appear to have. In the case of the 
Grange, the surrender was brought about by a de- 

Private Correspondence 47 

mand of Mr. Genet and his interposition. But it 
was in contemplation of employing the military in 
case of refusal. 

Yet, since that time, a libel has been filed in the 
District Court in the case of another vessel alleged 
to have been captured within the limits of our ju- 
risdiction. And both Mr. Lewis and Mr. Rawle, 
Attorney of the District, hold that the District or Ad- 
miralty Court will take cognizance of this question. 
They argue that it would be a great chasm in the law 
that there should not be some competent judicial 
authority to do justice between parties in the case 
of an illegal seizure within our jurisdiction. That 
the Court of Admiralty has naturally cognizance of 
tortious takings on the high seas, and as she gives re- 
lief in rem, may cause a re-delivery. That though, 
as a general principle, a court of a neutral nation will 
not examine the question of prize or not prize be- 
tween belligerent powers, yet this principle must ex- 
cept the case of the infraction of the jurisdiction of 
the neutral power itself. Quoad this fact, its courts 
will interpose and give relief. 

This is their reasoning, and it has much force. 
The desire of the Executive is to have the point as- 
certained, and if possible to put the affair in this 
train. There may arise nice difficulties about the 
factj and nice points about the extent of jurisdiction 
at sea, which the courts had best settle. 

The contest in form must, as you say, be between 
the owners and the captors. For this purpose Mr. 
Hammond is to cause the proper instructions to be 
given. 

48 Alexander Hamilton 

There is a letter from me to Harrisons If Troup 
has not opened it, let him do it. 

TO GEN. OTHO H. WILLIAMS 

(Private and Confidential.) 

Philadelphia, June 21, 1793. 

My Dear Sir: 

I learnt with real pleasure your return from the 
West Indies in improved health. Be assured that I 
interest myself with friendship in your welfare. 

The Collector of Annapolis has announced his in- 
tention to resign by the first of next month. Do 
you know a character there fit and probably willing 
to serve? There is a salary of 200 dollars a year, 
besides the percentage and fees. The whole, how- 
ever, is moderate enough. 

If any inquiry is made, it must be so as to avoid 
all possible commitment. For it is the President's 
practice to seek information through different chan- 
nels and to decide according to the result of the 
whole.* 

TO WASHINGTON 


Sir: 

Considerations relative to both the public interest 
and to my own delicacy have brought me, after 
mature reflection, to a resolution to resign the office 

' Richard Harrison mentioned above. 

2 Now first printed from the original in the possession of Mr. Otho H. 
Williams, of Baltimore. 

Private Correspondence 49 

I hold towards the close of the ensuing session of 
Congress. 

I postpone the final act to that period, because 
some propositions remain to be submitted by me to 
Congress which are necessary to the full development 
of my original plan, and, as I suppose, of some con- 
sequence to my reputation, and because, in the sec- 
ond place, I am desirous of giving an opportunity, 
while I shall still be in office, to the revival and more 
deliberate prosecution of the inquiry into my con- 
duct which was instituted during the last session. 

I think it proper to communicate my determina- 
tion thus early, among other reasons, because it will 
afford full time to investigate and weigh all the con- 
siderations which ought to guide the appointment of 
my successor. 

TO ONE OF THE CREDITORS OF COL. DUER ' 

August, 1793. 

Dear Sir: 

Poor Duer has now had a long and severe confine- 
ment, such as would be adequate punishment for no 
trifling crime. I am well aware of all the blame to 
which he is liable and do not mean to be his apolo- 
gist, though I believe he has been as much the dupe 
of his own imagination as others have been the vic- 
tims of his projects. But what then? He is a man 
— ^he is a man with whom we have both been in 

* Colonel Duer remained in prison for five years {Reminiscences of 
James A. Hamilton, p. 5). I give this letter as dated in the edition of 
1850, where it is misplaced, but its language would suggest a later 
period, somewhat near the end of Duer's confinement in 1797. 

VOL. X.— 4. 

50 Alexander Hamilton 

habits of friendly intimacy. He is a man who, with 
a great deal of good zeal, has in critical times ren- 
dered valuable services to the country. He is a 
husband who has a most worthy and amiable wife 
perishing with chagrin at his situation; your rela- 
tion by blood, mine by marriage. He is a father 
who has a number of fine children destitute of the 
means of education and support, every way in need 
of his future exertions. 

These are titled to sympathy, which I shall be 
mistaken if you do not feel. You are his creditor. 
Your example may influence others. He wants per- 
mission, through a letter of license, to breathe the 
air for five years. Your signature to the inclosed 
draft of one will give me much pleasure. 

TO RUFUS KING * 
Dear Sir: Philadelphia, Aug. 13, 1793. 

The post of to-day brought me your letter of the 
loth, but I was too much engaged to reply to it by 
return of post. 

The facts with regard to Mr. Genet's threat, to 
appeal from the President to the people, stand thus: 

On Saturday, the 6th of July last, the warden of this 
port reported to Governor Mifflin that the brig Little 

^ Chief-Justice Jay and Mr. King had declared publicly that Genet 
had threatened to appeal to the people against the President, which 
produced profound indignation, and turned the c\irrent of public feel- 
ing against Genet and his partisans. Freeman's Gazette was frantic in 
its abuse of the informers, as it called them, and Genet denied the 
charge. Finally Jay and King made a decisive cotmter-statement, 
and this letter was written probably to aid in its preparation. 

Private Correspondence 51 

Sarah, since called the Petit Democrat {an English 
merchant vessel, mounting from two to four guns, taken 
off our coast by the French frigate the Ambuscade, and 
brought into this port), had very materially altered her 
military equipments, having then fourteen iron cannon 
and six swivels mounted, and it being understood that 
her crew was to consist of one hundred and twenty men. 

Governor Mifflin, in consequence of this informa- 
tion, sent Mr. Dallas to Mr. Genet to endeavor to 
prevail upon him to enter into an arrangement for de- 
taining the vessel in port, without the necessity of em- 
ploying for that purpose military force. 

Mr. Dallas reported to Governor Mifflin that Mr. 
Genet had absolutely refused to do what had been re- 
quested of him, that he had been very angry and in- 
temperate, that he had complained of ill-treatment from 
the government, and had declared that ''he would ap- 
peal from the President to the people ' '; mentioned his 
expectation of the arrival of three ships of the line, 
observing that he would know how to do justice to 
his country, or, at least, he had a frigate at his com- 
mand, and could easily withdraw himself from this; 
said that he would not advise an attempt to take posses- 
sion of the vessel, as it would be resisted. ^ 

The refusal was so peremptory that Governor Mifflin, 
in consequence of it, ordered out 120 men for the pur- 
pose of taking possession of the vessel. 

This conversation between Genet and Dallas was 
in toto repeated by General Mifflin to General Knox 
the day following, and the day after that the gov- 
ernor confirmed to me the declaration with regard to 
appealing to the people, owned that something like 

52 Alexander Hamilton 

the threat to do justice to his country by means of 
the ships of the line was thrown out by Mr. Genet, 
but showed an unwillingness to be explicit on this 
point, objecting to a more particular disclosure, that 
it would tend to bring Mr. Dallas into a scrape. 

Mr. Jefferson, on Sunday, went to Mr. Genet, to 
endeavor to prevail upon him to detain the Petit Demo- 
crat until the President could return and decide upon 
the case, hut, as Mr. Jefferson afterwards communi- 
cated, he absolutely refused to give a promise of the 
kind, saying only that she would not probably be ready 
to depart before the succeeding Wednesday, the day of 
the President's expected return. This, however, Mr. 
Jefferson construed into an intimation that she would 
remain. Mr. Jefferson also informed that Mr. Genet 
had been very unreasonable and intemperate in his 
conversation (though he did not descend to par- 
ticulars), and that Dallas had likewise told him {Mr. 
Jefferson) that Genet had declared he would appeal 
from the President to the people. 

The Petit Democrat, instead of remaining, as Mr. 
Jefferson had concluded, fell down to Chester previous 
to the Wednesday referred to, where she was when 
the President returned. A letter was written to Mr. 
Genet, by order of the President, informing him that the 
case of the vessel, among others, was under considera- 
tion, and desiring that she might be detained until he 
should come to a decision about her, but this requisition 
was disregarded. She departed in defiance of it. 

I give this detail that you may have the whole 
subject before you, but I cannot authorize you to 
make use of it all. The circumstance of the letter 

Private Correspondence 53 

may be omitted. It may be said generally that a 
requisition was made of Mr. Genet, by order of the 
President, for the detention of the vessel. All that 
part, however, which is scored or underlined, may be 
freely made up. This part is so circumstanced as to 
take away all scruples of personal or political deli- 
cacy. 'T is not so with the rest. It can therefore 
only be confidentially disclosed to persons whose 
discretion may be relied on, and whose knowledge of 
it may be useful. 

It is true (as you have heard) that things, if possi- 
ble still more insulting, have since been done by Mr. 
Genet; but of this at present no use can be made, 
no more than of some antecedent transactions nearly, 
if not quite, as exceptional. The mass would con- 
found Mr. Genet and his associates. Perhaps it may 
not be long before a promulgation will take place. 

I am of opinion with you that the charge ought to 
be insisted upon. 

P. S. — The case does not require the naming Gen- 
eral Knox or myself, and it will therefore not be done. 
It is to be observed that the equipments of the Petit 
Democrat are, in the strictest sense, an original fitting 
out. She was before a merchant vessel; here she 
was converted into a vessel commissioned for war, of 
considerable force. 

to rufus king 

My Dear Sir: ''"^^'' ''''' 

It is not yet finally determined that there shall be 
a publication, and there has been some difference of 

54 Alexander Hamilton 

opinion on the point. But it seems to me the pub- 
lication of the letters renders it indispensable that 
the whole should be told. Yet, when it appears, it 
will probably include only what is regularly official, 
so that the present question may be pursued inde- 
pendently. 

Perhaps you will not think it necessary at first to 
say to whom Dallas reported the conversation. Yet, 
if you deem it essential, it may be done, and should 
it be finally necessary, which is not at all probable, 
General Knox and myself will come forward as 
witnesses. 

TO MRS. GENERAL GREENE 

Philadelphia, Sept. 3, 1793. 

It is not an uncommon thing for you women to 
bring us poor men into scrapes. It seems you have 
brought me into one. You will wonder how. Hear 
the tale. 

Shortly after I came into office, Wadsworth in- 
formed me that Baron Glaubeck was indebted to 
General Greene (to whom he had behaved in a very 
exceptionable manner), and that it was intended to 
endeavor to purchase of Glaubeck some pay which 
had been just granted to him by Congress, upon the 
plan of advancing to him a certain sum of money to 
satisfy his immediate necessities, and the residue 
that was due to him to be applied towards the in- 
demnification of the General's estate for what Glau- 
beck owed to it. I afterwards understood that the 
execution of this plan was committed to Flint or 

Private Correspondence 55 

Duer, or one or both of them, and that a purchase 
of the claim was, in fact, made — not, indeed, to 
Glaubeck, but of some person to whom he had parted 
with it for some trifling consideration — the object 
being throughout to benefit you by way of indemni- 
fication as above mentioned. 

It likewise would appear from the Treasury records 
that you have in fact received the whole benefit of 
the purchase. The conversations we had together 
when you were last in Philadelphia assure me at 
least that the certificate for four fifths of his claim 
accrued immediately to your use. 

Francis, late a clerk in my department (partly 
from resentment at a disappointment he has met 
with at the Treasury, and partly, I believe, from 
it having been made worth his while by some political 
enemies of mine), endeavors to have it believed that 
this transaction was a speculation in which I was 
engaged, and in proof of it, shows a draft of a power 
of attorney, corrected by some interlineations in my 
handwriting, as he asserts. 

I do not recollect this part of the business, though 
I think it very possible that such a correction, in 
such a draft, may have been made by me. 

For Duer or Flint, it seems, employed Francis to 
make the purchase, and it is not unlikely that a 
draft of a power for the purpose may have been 
brought to me, to know from me whether it would 
answer the purpose of the Treasury as a competent 
instrument, and that I (believing the design to be 
such as I have represented — one not only unexcep- 
tionable, but laudable — one in which my friendship 

56 Alexander Hamilton 

for you would naturally take part) may have taken 
up my pen and made such corrections as the draft 
might appear to stand in need of. 

I give you this detail to show you how I may have 
been implicated. 

What I wish of you is that you will have the good- 
ness to state in writing what you know of the affair, 
ascertaining that the purchase was for your benefit 
and the cause of it, and that you will take the trouble 
to make affidavit to the statement, and forward it to 
me. 

As it is an affair of delicacy, I will thank you to 
request some gentleman of the law to give form and 
precision to your narrative. 

You perceive that it is not in one way only that I 
am the object of unprincipled persecution; but I 
console myself with these lines of the poet — 

But optics sharp it needs, I ween, 
To see what is not to be seen; 

and with this belief, that in spite of caliminy the 
friends I love and esteem will continue to love and 
esteem me. 

TO JEREMIAH WADSWORTH 

Philadelphia, Sept. 3, 1793. 

My Dear Wadsworth: 

Shortly after I came into office I remember your 
having told me that Glaubeck (whom you repre- 
sented as a worthless and ungrateful fellow) was in- 
debted to General Green's estate, I think for money 
lent him, and that it was your intention to endeavor 

Private Correspondence 57 

to effect a purchase of his pubHc claim, and allow 
him some part of it for his immediate necessities, 
letting the residue be an indemnification [original 
illegible] estate; or, in other words, go to the [ori- 
ginal illegible] that he would [original illegible] some- 
thing [original illegible] you left the city; that you 
had left the business in charge with Flint. 

The purchase of the claim was afterwards made 
through a second hand, and it appears in fact that 
Mrs. Greene has had the benefit of it. 

Francis, lately a clerk in my department, prompted 
partly by resentment and partly, I believe, by some 
political enemies, gives out that I assisted in this 
affair as a speculation, and, to prove it, shows the 
draft of a power for assigning the claim, with some 
corrections, which are said to be in my handwriting. 

Whether this be so or not I really do not now 
recollect, but I think it very possible that, having 
understood the matter in the light I have stated 
from you, and viewing the transaction [original il- 
legible] precision the course of the transaction as it 
stands in your recollection, partictilarly what passed 
between you and myself in the first instance. If 
not inconvenient to you, I should even be glad that 
you would attest to it. 

TO MISS ANGELICA HAMILTON 

September 21, 1793. 

I was very glad to learn, my dear daughter, that 
you were going to begin the study of the French 
language. We hope you will in every respect 

5^ Alexander Hamilton 

behave in such a manner as will secure to you the 
good- will and regard of all those with whom you are. 
If you happen to displease any of them, be always 
ready to make a frank apology. But the best way 
is to act with so much politeness, good manners, and 
circumspection as never to have occasion to make 
any apology. Your mother joins in best love to you. 
Adieu, my very dear daughter.^ 

TO 

Albany, October i, 1793. 

Contemptible as you are, what answer could I 
give to your last letter? The enclosed is a copy of 
what shortly will appear in one of the gazettes of the 
City of New York: 

'' One Andrew G. Francis, late clerk in the Treas- 
ury Department, has been endeavoring to have it 
believed that he is possessed of some facts of a na- 
ture to criminate the official conduct of the Secretary 
of the Treasury, an idea to which, for obvious rea- 
sons, an extensive circulation has been given by a 
certain description of persons. 

*' The public may be assured that the said Francis 
has been regularly and repeatedly called upon to 
declare the grounds of his suggestion, that he has 
repeatedly evaded the inquiry, that he possesses no 
facts of the nature pretended, and that he is a de- 
spicable calumniator." "^ 

^ Reprinted from Reminiscences of J. A. Hamilton, p. 4. 
2 This letter is reprinted from the History of the Republic, vol. v., p. 
424. At the previous session Giles and Madison had made this attack 

Private Correspondence 59 

TO COLONEL OLNEY ' 
Dear Sir* Philadelphia, Nov. 26, 1793. 

Some embarrassment has arisen on the subject of 
a fit person for District Attorney of Rhode Island. 
Mr. Howell ^ has been strongly recommended on the 
one hand, and positively objected to on another, and 

Mr. has been proposed in opposition. Your 

opinion does not appear on either side. 

The President is desirous of further information, 
and I have undertaken to procure it for him. In 
addressing myself to you on the point, I proceed on 
an assurance of your judgment and candor. I re- 
quest your ideas of the candidates fully and freely, 
promising that it shall not in any shape compromit 
you. Be so good as to state not only the qualifica- 
tions of each, but the collateral circumstances affecting 
the public service, which will be likely to attend the 
appointment of either. 

on Hamilton, who had replied to them, and who then, on December 16, 
1792, asked for another inquiry. Before this his enemies attempted to 
arouse feeling against him by procuring one Francis, a dismissed clerk, 
to declare that Hamilton had speculated in soldiers' certificates, and 
they are said even to have sent a lawyer to Philadelphia to collect 
evidence. Hamilton thereupon published the card quoted above, which 
dashed the whole slander to pieces. It was in this connection that 
this letter was written, but the whole matter is so blindly stated in the 
History of the Republic that it is impossible to tell whether the letter 
was addressed to the lawyer just referred to, to some anonymous 
assailant, or to some one of the Secretary's open enemies. 

' Colonel Jeremiah Olney, of Rhode Island, a soldier of the Revolu- 
tion and Collector of Customs at Providence. 

2 David Howell, of Rhode Island, Professor of Law in Brown Uni- 
versity. He had been delegate to Congress, 1 782-1 785, and Attorney- 
General and Judge of the Supreme Court of Rhode Island. He was 
appointed District Attorney, and from 1812 till his death, in 1824, was 
U. S. District Judge. 

6o Alexander Hamilton 

It is regretted that the affair has assumed too 
much a party complexion. This suggests an in- 
quiry whether there be not some third character 
competent, eligible, and who would not be liable to 
a similar difficulty. The more speedy your answer, 
the more it will oblige. 

TO THE UNITED STATES SENATE 
^ Treasury Department, Feb. 22, 1794. 

Sir: 

I have received a late order of the Senate on the 
subject of a petition of Arthur Hughes. Diligent 
search has been made for such a petition, and it 
has not been found. Neither have I now a distinct 
recollection of ever having seen it. Whether, there- 
fore, it may not have originally failed in the trans- 
mission to me, or may have become mislaid by a 
temporary displacement of the papers of my imme- 
diate office, occasioned by a fire which consumed a 
part of the building in the use of the Treasury, or by 
some of those accidents which in an extensive scene 
of business will sometimes attend papers, especially 
those of inferior importance, is equally open to con- 
viction. There is no record in the office of its having 
been received, nor do any of my clerks remember to 
have seen it. A search in the Auditor's office has 
brought up the enclosed paper, which it is presumed 
relates to the object of the petition; but this paper, 
it will appear from the memorandum accompanying 
it, was placed in that office prior to the reference of 
the petition. 

Private Correspondence 6i 

The Auditor of the Treasury is of opinion, though 
his recollection is suppositive, that the claim had 
relation to the services of John Hughes as forage 
master. Two objections opposed its admission: (i) 
the not being presented in time; (2) the name of 
John Hughes, in the capacity in which he claimed, 
not appearing upon any return in the Treasury. 

If these be the circumstances, I should be of opin- 
ion that it would not be advisable by a special legis- 
lative interposition to except the case out of the 
operation of the acts of limitation. 

The second order of the Senate on the subject of 
this petition leads to the following reflections : 

Does this hitherto unusual proceeding (in a case 
of no public and no peculiar private importance) 
imply a supposition that there has been undue delay 
or negligence on the part of the Secretary of the 
Treasury ? 

If it does, the supposition is unmerited; not merely 
from the circumstances of the paper, which have 
been stated, but from the known situation of the 
officer. The occupations necessarily and perman- 
ently incident to the office are at least sufficient fully 
to occupy the time and faculties of one man. The 
burden is seriously increased by the numerous pri- 
vate cases, remnants of the late war, which every 
session are objects of particular reference by the two 
Houses of Congress. These accumulated occupa- 
tions again have been interrupted in their due course 
by unexpected, desultory, and distressing calls for 
lengthy and complicated statements, sometimes with 
a view to general information, sometimes for the 

62 Alexander Hamilton 

explanation of points which certain leading facts, wit- 
nessed by the provisions of the laws and by informa- 
tion previously communicated might have explained 
without those statements, or which were of a nature 
that did not seem to have demanded a laborious, 
critical, and suspicious investigation, unless the 
officer was understood to have forfeited his title 
to a reasonable and common degree of confidence. 
Added to these things, it is known that the affairs of 
the country in its external relations have for some 
time past been so circumstanced as unavoidably 
to have thrown additional avocations on all the 
branches of the Executive Department, and that a 
late peculiar calamity in the city of Philadelphia has 
had consequences that cannot have failed to derange 
more or less the course of public business. 

In such a situation, was it not the duty of the 
officer to postpone matters of mere individual con- 
cern to topics of public and general concern, to the 
preservation of the essential order of the department 
committed to his care? Or, is it extraordinary that 
in relation to cases of the first description there 
should have been a considerable degree of procrasti- 
nation? Might not an officer who is conscious that 
public observation and opinion, whatever deficien- 
cies they may impute to him, will not rank among 
them want of attention and industry, have hoped 
to escape censure, expressed or implied, on that 
score ? 

I will only add that the consciousness of devoting 
myself to the public service to the utmost extent of 
my faculties and to the injury of my health, is a 

Private Correspondence 63 

tranquillizing consolation of which I cannot be de- 
prived by any supposition to the contrary. 

With perfect respect, etc. ' »*^'fl'*>' 

—————— i < * .'^ 

TO WASHINGTON i tV' 

March 8, 1794. 

The present situation of the United States is un- 
doubtedly critical, and demands measures vigorous, 
though prudent. We ought to be in a respectable 
military posture, because war may come upon us, 
whether we choose it or not; and because, to be in a 
condition to defend ourselves, and annoy any who 
may attack us, will be the best method of securing 
our peace. If it is known that our principal mari- 
time points are out of the reach of any but formal 
serious operations, and that the government has an 
efficient active force in its disposal for defence or 
offence on an emergency, there will be much less 
temptation to attack us, and much more hesitation 
to provoke us. 

It seems then advisable — 

1. To fortify the principal ports in the several 
States (say one in each State), so as to be able to 
resist a merely maritime attack, or any thing but a 
regular siege. 

2. To raise 20,000 auxiliary troops, upon a plan 
something like the following, viz. : 

To be divided into ten regiments. 

'Reprinted from American State Papers, "Claims," p. 77. This 
letter has also been reprinted in Adams's Life of Gallatin, p. 116, It is 
a very interesting and somewhat amusing document, and it may be 
doubted if any other Secretary of the Treasury ever dared to lecture 
the Senate in this way. 

64 Alexander Hamilton 

Each regiment to consist of two battalions, and of 
the following officers and men: 

I colonel, 2 majors, lo captains, 20 lieutenants, 2 
lieutenants and adjutants, 2 sergeant-majors, 40 
sergeants, 4 musicians, and 1,000 rank and file. 

These troops to be engaged upon the following 
terms: 

To be enlisted for two years ; but upon condition, 
that if a war should break out with any European 
power, they shall be obliged to serve four years from 
the commencement of such war, upon the same terms 
as the troops of the establishment. 

To receive as a bounty, clothes with 1 2 dollars per 
man. 

To be under an obligation to meet forty days in 
the year, and thirty of these days to encamp. When 
assembled, to be paid, officers and men, as the troops 
of the establishment, and to have the same subsis- 
tence and rations. To be furnished with arms and 
accoutrements by the United States, to be surren- 
dered at the expiration of their term of service. 

The officers in time of war to rank and rise with the 
officers of the military establishment. The arrange- 
ment to cease, ipso facto, at the expiration of a cer- 
tain term (about two years). 

The expense of these operations would be, 

For the fortifications, $150,000 

For the auxiliary troops, per annum 350,000 

$500,000 

In addition to this, the Legislature ought to vest 
the President of the United States with the power 

Private Correspondence 65 

to lay an embargo, partial or general, and to arrest 
the exportation of commodities, partially or gener- 
ally. 

It may also deserve consideration whether the 
Executive ought not to take measures to form some 
concert of the neutral powers for common defence. 

Mr. Hamilton presents his respects to the Presi- 
dent— submits to him some reveries which have oc- 
cupied his imagination. It may be interesting for 
the President to consider whether some such plan is 
not demanded by the conjunction of affairs; and if 
so, whether there ought not to be some Executive 
impulse. Many persons look to the President for 
the suggestion of measures corresponding with the 
exigency of affairs. As far as this idea may be 
founded, many important and delicate ideas are in- 
volved in the consideration. 

The pains taken to preserve peace, include a pro- 
portional responsibility that equal pains be taken 
to be prepared for war. 

TO WASHINGTON 

Philadelphia, May 27, 1794. 

Sir: - ^ 

I some time since communicated my intention to 

withdraw from the office I hold, towards the close of 

the present session. 

This I should now put in execution, but for the 

events which have lately accumulated, of a nature 

to render the prospects of the continuance of our 

peace in a considerable degree precarious. I do not 

perceive that I could voluntarily quit my post at 

VOL. X. — 5. 

66 Alexander Hamilton 

such a juncture consistently with considerations 
either of duty or character; and therefore I find 
myself reluctantly obliged to defer the offer of my 
resignation. 

But if any circumstances should have taken place 
in consequence of the intimation of an intention to 
resign, or should otherwise exist, which serve to 
render my continuance in ofhce in any degree incon- 
venient or ineligible, I beg leave to assure you, sir, I 
should yield to them with all the readiness naturally 
inspired by an impatient desire to relinquish a situa- 
tion opposed by the strongest personal and family 
relations, and in which even a momentary stay could 
only be produced by a sense of duty or reputation. 

TO JAY 

Philadelphia, June 4, 1794. 

My Dear Sir: 

The session of Congress is about to close better 
than I expected. All mischievous measures have 
been prevented, and several good ones have been 
established. Among these, additional provisions of 
revenue and some of force, are not the least im- 
portant. 

But as more immediately connected with the ob- 
jects of your mission, you will learn with satisfaction, 
that the bill which had passed the Senate before you 
left this, for punishing and preventing practices con- 
trary to neutrality, has become a law with only one 
material alteration, the rejection of the clause which 
forbids the selling of prizes. I now consider the 
Executive and the Judiciary, as armed with ade- 

Private Correspondence 67 

quate means for repressing the fitting out of priva- 
teers, the taking of commissions, or enlisting in 
foreign service, the unauthorized imdertaking of 
mihtary expeditions, etc. 

At Charleston some considerable irregularities have 
lately happened. But means have been taken, and 
are in train, v^hich will no doubt arrest their pro- 
gress, and correct the evil. 

I believe it would be useful for you to collect and 
communicate exact information with regard to the 
usage of Europe as to permitting the sale of prizes in 
neutral countries. If this should be clearly against 
the toleration of the practice, the Executive might 
still, perhaps, disembarrass itself. 

Men's minds have gotten over the irritation by 
which they were some time since possessed, and if 
Great Britain is disposed to justice, peace, and con- 
ciliation, the two countries may still arrive at a bet- 
ter imderstanding than has for some time subsisted 
between them. Is there not a crisis which she ought 
not to suffer to pass, without laying a solid founda- 
tion for future harmony? I think there is. 

Adieu, my dear sir: not knowing how far any 
press of business on the Department of State might 
delay its communications, I thought a few hasty 
lines would not be unacceptable. 

TO WASHINGTON 

Treasury Department, Jtdy 13, 1794. 

I have considered the two subjects upon which you 
desire my opinion, as maturely as my situation has 
permitted. 

68 Alexander Hamilton 

With regard to the proceedings in Kentucky, I 
perceive nothing that can, with propriety or utility, 
be done, unless the attorney-general, on full and 
careful examination, should be of opinion that they 
furnish indictable matter, in which case I should 
think it very material that prosecutions against 
the ostensible and leading characters should be 
instituted. 

With regard to the affair in Georgia, the following 
course presents itself as eligible : 

1. To urge the Governor of Georgia to employ, 
efficaciously, all the means in his power (that of mili- 
tary coercion, if necessary, excepted) to prevent the 
establishment supposed to be meditated, referring 
him to the late act of Congress, and informing him 
that the expense will be borne by the United States. 
The commanding officer of the troops of the United 
States to be directed to co-operate. 

2. To apprise the Creek nation of the information 
which has been received, and to assure them that the 
United States will co-operate with them to prevent 
the intrusion in the first instance, and afterwards to 
dispossess the intruders. It may, perhaps, be made a 
consideration for urging them to run the line of the 
last treaty. 

3. To mention the matter informally to the Span- 
ish commissioners, expressing the disapprobation of 
the government, and its intention to exert all the 
measures in its power to frustrate the enterprise. 

Private Correspondence 69 

TO RUFUS KING 

Philadelphia, Sept. 17, 1794. 

When you recollect that I have two departments 
on my shoulders, and when I tell you that I have 
been out of health in the bargain, you will perhaps 
admit an excuse for my not answering sooner your 
letter some time since received. 

Mr. Jay has given nothing conclusive. His letters 
to the 26th of June barely gave the idea that ap- 
pearances were not unfavorable. The last letter, I 
forget the date, but it came by the last arrival at 
New York, refers to letters which were not received, 
but which are supposed to have been confided to the 
Portuguese Minister. This letter is couched in the 
same cautious terms, considers the scale as capable 
of turning either way, and advises not to relax in 
military preparation. The ministry, however, have 
certainly continued to countenance shipments to 
this country, and very large ones were making. It is 
a strange, mysterious business. The change in ad- 
ministration had made some pause in the negotia- 
tion. 

Nothing from the Western country authorizes an 
expectation of a pacific termination of that business. 
All the militia are going forward as fast as they can 
be got forward. Virginia, all below the mountains, 
is zealous; beyond, neutral in conduct and divided 
in affection. Jersey is also zealous; so are the 
eastern shore of Maryland and the town of Balti- 
more. Thence to Frederictown a pretty good temper 
prevails; beyond that a very insurgent spirit and 
some insurrection. In Philadelphia an excellent and 

^o Alexander Hamilton 

productive zeal, embracing all parties, has been 
kindled. A good spirit will generally pervade the old 
counties. But there is much bad leaven in the new 
counties this side of as well as beyond the mountains 
— Cumberland, Franklin, Mifflin, and even North- 
umberland. 

Governor Lee is at the head of the Virginia militia, 
and will command if the President does not go out; 
he is all zeal. Governor Howell, with equal zeal, 
was to march from Trenton to-day with the van of 
the Jersey militia, consisting of 500 horse. Mifflin, 
who at first showed some untoward symptoms, ap- 
pears now to be exerting himself in earnest and with 
great effect, and goes at the head of his militia. 

The President will be governed by circumstances. 
If the thing puts on an appearance of magnitude, he 
goes; if not, he stays. There is a pro and a con in 
the case. If permitted, I shall at any rate go. 


September 22, 1794. 

I thank you, my dear sir, for your letter of the 
A few days previously I wrote you pretty 

fully. I hope my letter got to hand. 

The inclosed paper gives you the substance of our 
European intelligence under the Philadelphia head. 

The returns from the western counties of this 
State are just come to hand. They show a valuable 
division, ranging on the side of the laws the most in- 
fluential men, and a respectable body of others — 
but leaving a great number still uncomplying and 

Private Correspondence 71 

violent, so as to afford no appearance of submission 
to the laws without the application of force. It will 
give you pleasure to learn that there is every pro- 
spect of our being able to apply this effectually, and 
of the issue being favorable to the authority of the 
laws. It will occasion a large bill of costs, but what 
is that compared with the object? Adieu. 

TO GEORGE MATTHEWS, GOVERNOR OF GEORGIA 

War Department, Sept. 25, 1794. 

Sir: 

In the absence of the Secretary of War, I have the 
honor to acknowledge the receipt of your letters to 
his department of the 5th, 19th, and 30th of August, 
and to reply to such parts as are the most pressing, 
referring the others to the return of that officer. 

Among the posts which have been established, 
that of Doctor's Town creates a question, in conse- 
quence of Lieutenant Colonel Gaither's information 
that it is within the Indian boundary. 

This is a matter which ought to be unequivocally 
ascertained, and if found to be within the Indian 
line, or if it be even doubtful whether that be the 
case, the post must be immediately removed. It is 
deemed essential that no encroachment should take 
place. And your Excellency is relied upon for a 
strict and scrupulous adherence to this principle. 

Under the circumstances which led to it, the 
President has thought proper to authorize the 
adoption by the United States of the new troop 
ordered by you into service, from the time of its 

72 Alexander Hamilton 

commencement, and to continue until the first of 
November ensuing, when it is to be disbanded. 

And you are at liberty, if the state of things shall 
render it, in your judgment essential, to substitute 
at that time a company of infantry for the same 
purpose. Corps of horse, upon the terms on which 
that in question is engaged, are expensive in the 
extreme, and in a much greater proportion, com- 
pared with infantry, than any supposable superior- 
ity of usefulness can justify. Indeed, it would 
require a treasury much better supplied than that of 
the United States to support the expense of a multi- 
plication or extension of such corps. Consequently, 
that multiplication or extension would tend to de- 
feat its own object, for our instruments of defence, 
to be durable, must be relative to our means of sup- 
porting them. And when we find, as in the instance 
of the insurrection now existing in the western parts 
of Pennsylvania, that those for whose immediate 
benefit the objects of military expenditure occur 
are among the first to resist, even to violence, the 
necessary means of defraying them, it is easy to 
appreciate the perplexing dilemma to which the 
government is reduced, between the duty and the 
means of affording protection, and the necessity, 
consequently, of economy in the modes of effecting it. 

Your Excellency is pleased to express your con- 
cern at being so repeatedly compelled to solicit pro- 
tection for the State of Georgia. 

This is not understood as implying any want of 
due disposition on the part of the Executive of this 
government to afford all the protection which is 

Private Correspondence 73 

within the compass of the means placed within its 
power, having regard to all the objects which, along 
a very extended frontier, equally demand attention. 
It is not doubted that you render justice, in this re- 
spect, to the views of the Executive. 

But the observation you have made in this par- 
ticular naturally leads to another, which calls for 
the most serious attention of the governments of the 
States exposed to Indian depredations. It is this, 
that there is a reciprocal duty in the case. The ob- 
ligation upon the United States to afford adequate 
protection to the inhabitants of the frontiers is no 
doubt of the highest and most sacred kind. But 
there is a duty no less strong upon those inhabitants 
to avoid giving occasion to hostilities by an irreg- 
ular and improper conduct, and upon the local gov- 
ernments sincerely and effectually to punish and 
repress instances of such conduct, and the spirit 
which produces them. If these inhabitants can 
with impunity thwart all the measures of the United 
States for restoring or preserving peace, if they can 
with impunity commit depredations and outrages 
upon the Indians, and that in violation of the faith 
of the United States, pledged not only in their gen- 
eral treaties, but even in the special (and among all 
nations peculiarly sacred) case of a safe conduct, as 
in the instance of the attack upon the Indians while 
encamped within our protection, on the loth of May 
last, can it be surprising if such circumstances 
should abate the alacrity of the national councils to 
encounter those heavy expenses which the protec- 
tion of the frontiers occasions, and the readiness 

74 Alexander Hamilton 

of the citizens of the United States distant from the 
scenes of danger to acquiesce in the burdens they 
produce? It is not meant by these remarks to 
diminish the force of the excuse within due limits 
which is drawn from the conduct of the Indians 
towards the frontier inhabitants. It cannot be 
denied that frequent and great provocations to a 
spirit of animosity and revenge are given by them, 
but a candid and impartial survey of the events 
which have from time to time occurred can leave no 
doubt that injuries and provocations have been too 
far mutual, that there is much to blame in the con- 
duct of the frontier inhabitants, as well as in that of 
the Indians. And the result of a full examination 
must be that, unless means to restrain by punishing 
the violences which those inhabitants are in the 
habit of perpetrating against the Indians can be put 
in execution, all endeavors to preserve peace with 
them must be forever frustrated. 

An example worthy of imitation in its spirit 
has lately been given by the surrender to Governor 
Blount of some Indians who lately committed a 
murder upon one John Ish, an inhabitant of the 
southwestern territory, and who have been tried and 
executed. The record of such an example of justice 
and fair dealing will give occasion to us to blush, if 
we can cite no instance of reciprocity amidst the 
numerous occasions which are given for the exercise 
of it. 

These reflections, your Excellency may be as- 
sured, are merely designed to present to consider- 
ation some very important truths — truths a due 

Private Correspondence 75 

attention to which is of the most serious concern to 
those States which have an exposed frontier. To 
give full weight to their claims upon the exertions of 
the Union to afford the requisite protection, it is of 
great moment to satisfy the United States that the 
necessity for them has not been created or pro- 
moted by a culpable temper, not sufficiently re- 
strained among those to whom the protection is 
immediately to be extended. 

The President learns with great pleasure the meas- 
ures your Excellency had begun and was about to 
pursue for the removal of the settlers under General 
Clarke. It is impossible to conceive a settlement 
more unjustifiable in its pretexts, or more dangerous 
in its principle than that which he is attempting. It 
is not only a high-handed usurpation of the rights 
of the general and State governments, and a most 
unwarrantable encroachment upon those of the In- 
dians, but proceeding upon the idea of a separate 
and independent government, to be erected on a 
military basis, it is essentially hostile to our repub- 
lican systems of government, and is pregnant with 
incalculable mischiefs. It deeply concerns the great 
interests of the country that such an establishment 
should not be permitted to take root, and that the 
example should be checked by adequate punish- 
ment, in doing which no time is to be lost, for such 
is the nature of the establishment that it may be 
expected rapidly to attain to a formidable magni- 
tude, involving great expense and trouble to sub- 
vert it. 

The President therefore depends absolutely upon 

76 Alexander Hamilton 

measures equally prompt and efficacious to put an 
end to it. 

TO OLIVER WOLCOTT ' 

Treasury Department, Sept. 29, 1794. 

Sir: 

Being about to leave the seat of government for 
a few weeks, to accompany the army in its march 
against the western insurgents of Pennsylvania, I 
commit to you during my absence the management 
of those matters which are reserved to my superin- 
tendence, under the constitution and regulations of 
the department, especially the receipts and expendi- 
tures of money, and I rely upon your diligence and 
zeal that nothing will suffer during my absence. 
With regard to remissions and mitigations of penal- 
ties and forfeitures, it will be best to avoid acting in 
any case in which particular inconvenience will not 
arise from delay, as there is not time to explain the 
principles which have governed in the past, and the 
course of policy may, without such explanation, be 
innovated upon so as to occasion something like in- 
consistency. But in urgent cases you will act, con- 
sulting the most recent precedents in similar cases. 
To preserve the usual forms, I have signed and left 
in my office a large number of blank warrants of the 
different kinds which issue. Enclosed is a letter to 
the President and Directors of the Bank of New 
York. If they agree to loan you will conclude it. 
You will find in the office a power from the President 

* Comptroller of the Treasury. 

Private Correspondence ^^ 

for the purpose. It will be regular in any contract 
which may be made to pursue the terms of the 
power as to parties/ 

TO RUFUS KING 

Jones' Mill, Oct. 30, 1794. 

Dear Sir: 

Our light corps, the Jersey infantry, and a brigade 
of cavalry, are about eight and a half miles in front, 
beyond all the mountains. This division, which has 
been delayed by a somewhat worse route and the 
incumbrance of the public stores, will be at the same 
place this evening. The left wing is at a corre- 
sponding point. All is essentially well; no appear- 
ance of opposition. It is of great consequence that 
a law should, if possible, be expedited through Con- 
gress for raising 500 infantry and 100 horse, to be 
stationed in the disaffected country. Without this, 
the expense incurred will be essentially fruitless. 

A law regulating a peace process of outlawry is 
also urgent; for the best objects of punishment will 
fly, and they ought to be compelled by outlawry 
to abandon their property, homes, and the United 
States. This business must not be skinned over. 
The political putrefaction of Pennsylvania is greater 
than I had any idea of. Without rigor everywhere, 
our tranquillity is likely to be of very short dura- 
tion, and the next storm will be infinitely worse 
than the present one. 

I Reprinted from Administrations of Washington and Adams, i., 155. 

78 Alexander Hamilton 

TO A FRIEND IN EUROPE 

1794. 

My own hope of making a short excursion to 
Europe the ensuing spring increases. Believe me, I 
am heartily tired of my situation, and wait only the 
opportunity of quitting it with honor and without 
decisive prejudice to the public affairs. This winter, 
I trust, will wind up my plans so as to secure my 
reputation. The present appearance is that the de- 
pending elections will prove favorable to the good 
cause and obviate anxiety for the future. In this 
event my present determination is to resign my po- 
litical family and set seriously about the care of my 
private family. Previous to this I will visit Europe. 
There I shall have the happiness of meeting you once 
more. But will not a few months afterwards give 
us the pang of a final separation? Let us hope the 
best. Adieu.' 

TO THOMAS FITZSIMMONS 

Philadelphia, Nov. 27, 1794. 


Seeing the debates on the subject of Democratic 
Societies, I called at your house to state some facts. 

It is true that the opposition to the excise laws 
began from causes foreign to Democratic Societies, 
but it is well ascertained by proof in the course of 

' Reprinted from the History of the Republic, vi., 193, where it has 
neither address nor date. This letter, however, must have been 
written in the autumn of 1794, as the reference to the pending elections 
and the writer's resignation in the following winter shows. 

Private Correspondence 79 

judiciary investigations that the insurrection imme- 
diately is to be essentially attributed to one of those 
societies sometimes called the Mingo-Creek Society, 
sometimes the Democratic Society. An early and 
active member of it commanded the first attack 
at Neville's House; another active member of that 
Society, McFarlane, the second attack. Benjamin 
Parkinson, the president, and several other members 
of it seemed to have directed the second attack as a 
committee. This may be asserted as founded upon 
good proof and information recently received, though 
it would not be consistent with decorum to name 
me. Make what use you please of this, and com- 
municate it to other friends.' 

TO WASHINGTON 

Philadelphia, Dec. i, 1794. 

Sir: 

I have the honor to inform you that I have fixed 
upon the last of January next as the day for the 
resignation of my office of Secretary of the Treasury. 
I make the communication now that there may be 
time to mature such an arrangement as shall appear 
to you proper to meet the vacancy when it occurs. 

TO WASHINGTON , j->P^ ■' 

December 2, 1794. 

The Secretary of the Treasury has the honor re- 
spectfully to make the following representation to the 

^ Reprinted from the History of the Republic, vi., 123. 

8o Alexander Hamilton 

President of the United States, in order that he may 
determine on the expediency of laying the subject of 
it before Congress. 

The procuring of military supplies generally is, 
with great propriety, vested by law in the Depart- 
ment of the Treasury. That department, from situ- 
ation, may be expected to feel a more habitual 
solicitude for economy than any other, and to pos- 
sess more means of information respecting the best 
modes of obtaining supplies. 

It is, however, important that the particular ar- 
rangement should be such as to enable the depart- 
ment to execute the trust in the best manner. This 
branch of business forms a very considerable one of 
the public expenditure. Including supplies for the 
navy, it is so extensive as, to be well executed, would 
occupy the whole time and attention of one person, 
possessing the requisite qualifications. This, with 
the growth of the country, must be every year more 
and more the case. It cannot, therefore, be con- 
ducted in detail by the head of the department, or 
by any existing officer of it, now charged with other 
duties, and without being less well executed than 
it ought to be, or interfering with other essential 
duties, or without a portion of both these incon- 
veniences, to the material detriment of the public 
service. Experience has already verified the posi- 
tion. 

It must then, of necessity, either be confided to a 
special agent, employed by the head of the depart- 
ment, or to a new officer of the department, to be 
constituted by law, and to act under the discretion 

Private Correspondence 8i 

and superintendence of that head. The last mode is 
preferable to the first, for obvious reasons. 

Whenever an object of public business is likely to 
be permanent, it is more fit that it should be trans- 
acted by an officer of the government, regularly 
constituted, than by the agent of a department, 
specially intrusted. 

The officer can be placed, by law, under more 
effectual checks. In the present case, that idea is 
particularly important. The person intrusted ought 
to be prohibited, under penalties, from all dealing, 
on his own account, in the objects of supply. 

The duration and emoluments of mere agency 
being precarious, a well-qualified man, disposed to 
make the necessary sacrifices of other pursuits, and 
to devote himself exclusively to the business, could 
with much greater difficulty, if at all, be found. 

The compensation to such an officer ought, it is 
conceived, to weigh nothing as an objection. Inde- 
pendent of the equivalent expense, arising from the 
necessity of employing and compensating an agent, 
it is morally certain that the close, constant, un- 
divided attention of a person, charged exclusively 
with this object, and in condition, for that reason, 
to make the minute as well as extensive inquiries 
and investigations which are often requisite, would 
produce savings to the United States with which the 
salary of the officer could bear no comparison. It 
is equally evident that it would contribute greatly 
to ptmctuality, despatch, and efficiency in procuring 
the supplies. 

VOL. X. — 6. 

82 Alexander Hamilton 

TO WASHINGTON 

Philadelphia, Jan. 26, 1795. 

Sir: 

Mr. Wolcott has just informed me that the Secre- 
tary of State had called upon him as by your direc- 
tion, to confer on the subject of a person to be 
appointed Comptroller, in the event of his appoint- 
ment as Secretary of the Treasury; and intimated 
that you had concluded to take some gentleman from 
the South ; that Mr. Habersham (brother of the col- 
lector of Savannah) was more particularly in your 
eye, and that if he or I had any different view of the 
subject, it was your wish that it might be speedily 
communicated, as you were desirous of coming to a 
conclusion. 

This I accordingly feel it my duty to do. 

It is of the greatest importance to the proper con- 
ducting the business of the Treasury Department 
that the Comptroller should be a man of the follow- 
ing description : of strong sense, of clear discernment, 
sound judgment, indefatigable industry, firmness, 
and prompt decision of temper; possessing a com- 
prehensive knowledge of accounts, and of course 
good principles. 

As well from the nature of the office as from the 
particular situation of the department, as it will 
stand at the moment of my resignation, it is of pe- 
culiar consequence that there should be no mistake 
in the selection of the proper character for Comp- 
troller. It will be easy for the department to run 
into disorder if such a mistake should happen. 

Private Correspondence 83 

From all the light I have been able to obtain on 
the subject, though it results in a favorable impres- 
sion of Mr. Habersham generally, yet it leaves a con- 
siderable doubt on my mind that he would be an 
eligible appointment as Comptroller of the Treasury. 
I cannot, therefore, add my opinion to the rest of 
the opinions which may favor it. 

There is one gentleman South, whom I have be- 
fore mentioned, of whose fitness in every respect, 
from trial of him in different public situations, it 
appears to me impossible to entertain a doubt — I 
mean Colonel Edward Carrington. I will pledge my 
reputation to the President for his proving, if ap- 
pointed, an excellent Comptroller, and a valuable 
acquisition to the department. 

I have fully reflected on the objection which 
from the distributive geographical rule, is supposed 
to be against him — and I beg leave to submit, as my 
opinion, that it ought not to be conclusive. This 
rule is doubtless a good one; but if carried so far as 
to hazard the appointment of unqualified persons to 
offices of material importance to the general admin- 
istration of the government, it will become a bad 
one, sacrificing primary to secondary considerations. 

I have offered my opinion with the less reserve 
because I ought to be explicit in a case not only of 
much moment to the public service, but when the 
arrangements which may be made, may, naturally 
from situation, be presumed to have had the con- 
currence of my opinion, and where, therefore, my 
reputation is more particularly concerned. 

84 Alexander Hamilton 

TO WILLINK, VAN STAPHORST, & HUBBARD ' 

Treasury Department, Jan. 31, 1795. 

Gentlemen: 

It is probable that before this reaches you, you 
will have heard of my determination to resign my 
office as Secretary of the Treasury as on this day. 
The event will accordingly take place. 

I could not permit myself to renoimce my official 
situation without placing among my last acts the 
expression of the high sense I continue to entertain 
of the fidelity and ability with which you have imi- 
formly served the United States. This testimony is 
due to you, and it is with great pleasure I give it. 

The gentleman whom the President has deter- 
mined to nominate as my successor, and who will be 
no doubt appointed, is Oliver Wolcott, Esquire, the 
present Comptroller of the Treasury. I do him no 
more than justice by assuring you that he is a gen- 
tleman of undoubted intelligence, probity, and good 
principles with regard to public credit. The con- 
fidence of yourself and your cotmtrymen may be 
safely reposed in him. 

to WASHINGTON 


Sir: 

Agreeably to the intimation heretofore given, I 
have the honor now to tender you my resignation 
of the office of Secretary of the Treasury, and to be 

' The Dutch bankers who had charge of our financial negotiations in 
Holland. 

Private Correspondence 85 

with sincere respect and affectionate attachment, 
sir, etc. 

WASHINGTON TO HAMILTON 

Sunday, Feb. i, 1795. 

Dear Sir: 

I received the enclosed letter, with the document 
therein, last night. 

For reasons which will appear obvious, I make you 
acquainted with the contents of them — being yours, 

G. Washington. 

Endorsement on this letter by A, H, 

This covered a letter from Mr. Coxe, of the 31st 
January,' 1795, containing a charge against Mr. 
Wolcott, for my having committed to him, and 
he having exercised, the duties of Secretary of the 
Treasury in my absence on the Western expedition. 

A. H. 


Philadelphia, Feb. 2, 1795. 


After so long an experience of your public services, I 
am naturally led, at this moment of your departure from 
office — which it has always been my wish to prevent — 
to review them. 

In every relation which you have borne to me I have 
found that my confidence in your talents, exertions, and 
integrity, has been well placed. 

' This letter ciiriously shows the hostility which pursued Hamilton 
even when leaving office. The writer was Tench Coxe, who was an 
officer in the Department. See following letter of Feb. 12, to Wash- 
ington. 

86 Alexander Hamilton 

I the more freely render this testimony of my ap- 
probation, because I speak from opportunities of in- 
formation which cannot deceive me, and which furnish 
satisfactory proof of your title to pubHc regard. 

My most earnest wishes for your happiness will attend 
you in your retirement, and you may assure yourself of 
the sincere esteem, regard, and friendship of, etc. 

TO WASHINGTON 

Philadelphia, Feb. 3, 1795. 

Sir: 

My partictilar acknowledgments are due for your 
very kind letter of yesterday. As often as I may 
recall the vexations I have endured, your approba- 
tion will be a great and precious consolation. 

It was not without a struggle that I yielded to the 
very urgent motives which impelled me to relin- 
quish a station in which I could hope to be in any 
degree instrumental in promoting the success of 
an administration under your direction; a struggle 
which would have been far greater had I supposed 
that the prospect of future usefulness was propor- 
tioned to the sacrifices to be made. 

Whatsoever may be my destination hereafter, I 
entreat you to be persuaded (not the less for my 
having been sparing in professions) that I shall never 
cease to render a just tribute to those eminent and 
excellent qualities which have been already produc- 
tive of so many blessings to your country, that you 
will always have my fervent wishes for your public 
and personal felicity, and that it will be my pride to 
cultivate a continuance of that esteem, regard, and 

Private Correspondence ?>y 

friendship of which you do me the honor to assure 
me. With true respect and affectionate attach- 
ment, etc. 

(Private.) 

Philadelphia, Feb. 12, 1795. 


I have maturely reflected on the subject of the 
within papers. I do not hesita,te to give it as my 
opinion that, if it were not for very peculiar personal 
circumstances, the fittest arrangement, upon the 
whole, would be to consign the temporary execution 
of the comptroller's office to the commissioner of 
the revenue. But I could not advise this, because 
it could not fail, for strong reasons, to be unpleasant 
to Mr. Wolcott, and because there is real danger 
that Mr. Coxe would first perplex and embarrass, 
and afterward misrepresent and calumniate. 

The treasurer would by no means answer, because, 
as the keeper of the money, it is particularly essential 
that all the checks upon him should be maintained 
in full vigor, and the comptroller is the officer who, 
in the last resort, settles his accounts, as well as 
concurs, in the first instance, in authorizing, by the 
warrants which are issued by the secretary, and 
countersigned by the comptroller, the payments 
and receipts of the treasurer. 

The register is also one of the principal checks of 
the department : first, upon the secretary and comp- 
troller, whose warrants he must register and sign be- 
fore they can take effect; and secondly, upon the 

SB Alexander Hamilton 

settlements of the comptroller and auditor, by re- 
cording their acts, and entering them upon the books 
to the proper accounts. 

Of any of the officers of the department, except 
the commissioner of the revenue, the business can be 
best managed through the auditor, consistently with 
the preservation of the most material checks, with 
the restriction I mentioned this morning, of his not 
deciding, as comptroller, upon any account he may 
have settled as auditor. The temporary suspension 
of the final conclusion of the accounts — all the pre- 
vious examinations going on, cannot be attended 
with any serious inconvenience. If the laws admit 
of it (which I doubt, as they now stand), the ap- 
pointment of the auditor's first clerk to act as the 
auditor in his stead will be a conveniency. I do not 
think this would be liable to the same objections as 
the appointing a clerk to act as comptroller, whose 
office imports the second trust in the department. 
In one sense, to appoint the auditor to act as comp- 
troller, would comport best with the spirit of the 
constitution of the department. This is, that the 
officer who is to settle the accounts by countersigning 
the warrants for receipts and payments, shall have 
an opportunity to observe this conformity with the 
course of business as it appears in the accounts, and 
shall have notice in the first instance of all payments 
and receipts, in order to the bringing all persons to 
account for public moneys. This reason operates 
to make the auditor, who is the coadjutor of the 
comptroller in settlements, his most fit substitute in 
this particular view. 

Private Correspondence 89 

On the whole, I am of opinion that it is most ad- 
visable to appoint the auditor.' 

A clerk, for reasons already mutually adverted to, 
does not appear to be expedient. I have the honor 
to be, etc. 

P. S. — The restriction above suggested, for greater 
caution, had best be in writing in a letter to the 
Secretary of the Treasury. 

The instrument appears to me to be in proper 
form. 

TO THEODORE SEDGWICK 

Bristol, Feb. i8, 1795. 

My Dear Sedgwick: 

Every moment's reflection increases my chagrin 
and disgust at the failure of the propositions con- 
cerning the unsubscribed debt. I am tortured by 
the idea that the country should be so completely 
and unnecessarily dishonored. A day of reckoning 
must come. I pray you let the yeas and nays sepa- 
rate the wheat from the chaff. I may otherwise have 
to feel the distress of wounding a friend by a shaft 
levelled at an enemy. The case is an extreme one. 
Managements are every way improper. 

TO RUFUS KING 

Kingston, Feb. 21, 1795. 

My Dear King: 

The unnecessary and capricious and abominable 
assassination of the national honor by the rejection 

' Richard Harrison. 

90 Alexander Hamilton 

of the propositions respecting the unsubscribed debt 
in the House of Representatives haunts me every 
step I take, and afflicts me more than I can express. 
To see the character of the government and the 
country so sported with — exposed to so indelible a 
, blot — puts my heart to the torture. Am I, then, 
1 ■ more of an American than those who drew their first 
breath on American ground ? Or what is it that thus 
torments me at a circumstance so calmly viewed by 
almost everybody else? Am I a fool — a romantic 
Quixote — or is there a constitutional defect in the 
American mind? Were it not for yourself and a 
few others, I could adopt the reveries of De Paux ' 
as substantial truths, and could say with him that 
there is some thing in our climate which belittles 
every animal, human or brute. 

I conjure you, my friend, make a vigorous stand 
for the honor of your country! Rouse all the ener- 
gies of your mind, and measure swords in the Senate 
with the great slayer of public faith — the hackneyed 
veteran in the violation of public engagements. 
Prevent him if possible from triumphing a second 
time over the prostrate credit and injured interests 
of his country.^ Unmask his false and horrid hypo- 
thesis. Display the immense difference between an 
able statesman and the man of subtleties. Root out 
the distempered and noisome weed which is at- 

* The Abbe de Paux, or Pauw, a distinguished scholar, bom in 
Amsterdam. The work referred to is his Recherches Philosophiques sur 
les Americains. He wrote similar works on the Chinese, Egyptians, 
Greeks, and ancient Germans. 

* Witness the forty for one scheme — a most unskilful measure, to 
say the best of it. 

Private Correspondence 91 

tempted to be planted in our political garden, to 
choke and wither in its infancy the fair plant of 
public credit. 

I disclose to you without reserve the state of my 
mind. It is discontented and gloomy in the ex- 
treme. I consider the cause of good government as 
having been put to an issue and the verdict ren- 
dered against it. 

Introduce, I pray you, into the Senate, when the 
bill comes up, the clause which has been rejected, 
freed from embarrassment by the bills of credit, 
bearing interest on the nominal value. Press its 
adoption in this, the most unexceptionable shape, 
and let the yeas and nays witness the result. 

Among the other reasons for this is my wish that 
the true friends of public credit may be distinguished 
from its enemies. The question is too great a one 
not to undergo a thorough examination before the 
community. It would pain me not to be able to 
distinguish. Adieu. God bless you! 

P. S. — Do me the favor to revise carefully the 
course of the bill respecting the unsubscribed debt 
and let me know the particulars. I wish to be 
able to judge more particularly of the under -plot I 
suspect. 

TO RUFUS KING 

New York, Feb. 26, 1795. 

My Dear Sir: 

I have received your letter with the printed bills. 
The new clause is an additional bad feature, yet 't is 

m 

92 Alexander Hamilton 

better the thing should pass as it is than not at all. 
Every thing should be gained that can be. 

So it seems that under the present administration 
of the department, Hillhouse ' and Goodhue ' are to 
be the ministers in the House of Representatives, 
and Ellsworth ^ and Strong "^ in the Senate. Fine 
work we shall have! 

But I swear the nation shall not be dishonored 
with impunity.^ 

TO OLIVER WOLCOTT 

Albany, April lo, 1795. 

Dear Sir: 

I wrote you a few lines by the last post. I sit 
down to fulfil my promise then made. 

The fulfilment of our foreign engagements under 
the existing circumstances is no doubt a perplexing 
task. But I hope it will not be found impracticable 
to effect enough to preserve character and credit. 

Every thing must be done to this end, though with 
considerable sacrifices, provided you do not go so far 
as to endanger credit at home. This must at all events 
be kept sound, since a shock there will be fatal, 
while the extraordinary situation of the times will 
furnish an apology for any omissions which may 

^ James Hillhouse, of Connecticut. 

2 Benjamin Goodhue, of Massachusetts. 

3 Oliver Ellsworth, of Connecticut. 

4 Caleb Strong, of Massachusetts. 

5 All the persons mentioned in this letter were staunch Federalists 
and warm friends of Hamilton. He wrote evidently in great but 
momentary irritation on account of the course of Congress as to the 
unsubscribed debt. 

Private Correspondence 93 

happen abroad; and, by eventual indemnification, 
the v^ounds v^hich may be given to foreign credit 
may be healed. The opinion which some entertain 
is altogether a false one — that it is more important 
to miaintain our credit abroad than at home. The 
latter is far the most important nursery of resources, 
and, consequently, far the most important to be in- 
violably maintained. A failure here would be the 
more material, because it would argue want of means, 
and could not shelter itself under the plea of tem- 
porary embarrassments from external causes, and be- 
cause it would derange our whole internal economy. 

But, except the compromitting our whole domes- 
tic credit, nothing must be left imdone to preserve 
external credit. 

I do not doubt that the means which have been 
taken down to the first of June, inclusively, will be 
deemed adequate, considering the circumstances. 
They may, however, fail of the effect intended. But 
I do not apprehend any material evil from the delay 
of reimbursing the instalment of principal, if the in- 
terest is but punctually and honestly paid. I hope 
our commissioners, with the public and their own 
resources, will effect this, till further provision can 
be brought into action. 

As to sending specie from this country, 't is out 
of the question. 'T would derange every thing, and 
our commissioners ought to be frankly told that it 
is impracticable, owing to the interruption by the war 
of some of the usual channels through which we have 
derived our supplies of specie. 

But commodities may be remitted on the public 

94 Alexander Hamilton 

account, and this (the resource of stock failing) 
must, for aught I see, be done, unless what I shall 
now mention can be accomplished, with the judg- 
ment of our commissioners in its favor, to wit: 

Let them enter into an arrangement with the con- 
stituted authorities of Holland or France (preferring 
the former) to receive at Amsterdam the sums neces- 
sary for paying those which we shall owe, giving 
drafts upon our treasury for equivalent sums. This 
will enable the French or Dutch government to ob- 
tain supplies here, which they will want. 

But may they for this purpose receive and pay 
assignats? Not so, if assignats are not the general 
currency of the country; but if they are, there may 
be no choice. Gold and silver may not then be 
obtainable at all. Perhaps the commissioners may 
be able to raise funds by the sale of bills upon this 
country; otherwise, as many may wish, to remit 
from the Netherlands. 

Yet our creditors must not be paid without 
a reasonable indemnification in depreciated paper. 
Consequently our commissioners must be authorized, 
if obliged to pay in assignats, to augment the rate, 
so as to allow an equivalent. 

Accordingly, if the arrangement I have intimated 
can be effected, the commissioners may give bills, 
-florin for florin, of gold or silver (or a dollar for 2^ 
florins) ; but if they are obliged to receive assignats, 
they ought to secure a premium of exchange equal 
to the depreciation. 

This transaction ought to be managed under the 
superintendence of our minister. 

Private Correspondence 95 

What I wish you were able immediately to do is 
this: To ship without delay commodities sufficient, 
together with the moneys certainly in the command 
of the commissioners, independent of sales of stock, 
to pay interest to September, inclusively, writing 
them a letter suggesting the above plan, and au- 
thorizing them to act upon it if they approve. 

The stock remitted may be ordered to be sold in 
England, which will furnish a fund upon which you 
can draw, in order to prosecute other methods of 
remittance. 

At the same time, I think it may be well to take 
measures for ascertaining whether some arrange- 
ment could not be relied upon for remitting through 
England to Amsterdam. I know of no impediment, 
even now, to sending bullion (including Spanish and 
other foreign gold and silver coin) in American bot- 
toms to Amsterdam, but impediments might arise. 
Perhaps in this case London might be made an inter- 
mediary of remittances to Holland, either by sales 
of stock or commodities there. 

The commodities to be remitted ought to be such 
as to be liable to as little casualty as possible from 
war considerations, and they ought to be most 
effectually insured, and ought to appear authentic- 
ally as those of the United States sent to pay their 
debts on their own account and risk. I suspect, 
however, the other plan will be found practicable on 
satisfactory principles, but no agreement ought to 
be for a longer term than a year. 

If you are not able to send, immediately, com- 
modities for payment of interest to September, it 

g6 Alexander Hamilton 

may then be of necessity to wait further information, 
giving full latitude, if it has not already been given, 
to sell stock for payment of interest at any price; 
suggesting the possibility of doing some thing 
through London, and proposing the plan of the ar- 
rangement which has been suggested. All the stock 
not salable in Amsterdam ought to be placed in 
London, imder due precautions for security, to be 
sold there as a fund. 

The co-operation of our minister in Holland will 
be proper throughout; and pretty large discretions 
must be confided. 

If a very trusty and a clever fellow could go from 
hence, as agent for the treasury, with alternative 
instructions according to circumstances, it might be 
very useful. I believe William Smith, of South 
Carolina, would go and he would be safe and com- 
petent. Would not James Watson go? He wotild 
also do. 

In contemplating a possible course of things, I had 
my eye upon the expedient of issuing warrants upon 
the treasurer, payable at future periods, from two to 
twelve months, in nature of exchequer bills. This 
may be a means of providing for the current service 
of credit, besides the expedient of loans from the 
bank. By being negotiable, they may answer the 
purposes of contractors, though articles may there- 
by cost some thing more to the public, than on the 
plan of anticipated or prompt payment. 

I mention this, because I foresee that, from the 
embarrassment of foreign events, there may be a 
press upon the treasury. 

Private Correspondence 97 

If any thing further occurs, you shall have it. 
Write me as freely as you please. 

P. S. — There is one idea v^hich may deserve atten- 
tion— a depreciated paper naturally gives to gold 
and silver an artificial and exaggerated value. This 
may even occasion an undue loss to a debtor who is \ 
honorable enough to pay in gold and silver, when a | 
depreciated paper is the general currency. This is 
more than just. But it may be policy in a govern- 
ment to submit to it. Yet there may be bounds. 
The idea may be brought into the view of our min- 
ister and commissioners for this purpose: To sug- 
gest, that if such an artificial advancement of gold 
and silver takes place, the compensation for de- 
preciation may be adjusted upon some equitable 
ratio. But a moderate sacrifice, for simplicity of 
proceeding, may, in this case, be best. 

I send a letter to the Attorney-General which you 
will read, seal, and deliver. You will easily divine 
my reason for addressing it to him. The President 
ought to view this matter as it is, but I do not write 
to him, because I do not wish to appear officious. 

Have you taken any arrangement at Amsterdam, 
to facilitate the change of foreign and domestic debt, 
according to the law of last session? The moment is 
favorable. Facilities on the spot may promote the 
object. Our commissioners and our minister are 
worthy of trust. 

VOL. X.— 7. 

9^ Alexander Hamilton 

TO RUFUS KING 

April 24, 1795. 

Dear Sir: 

I return you a certain draft, with a little substi- 
tute for the close of it proposed by Mr. J , with 

an eye to your suggestion. 

Our petition went yesterday by express. It had 
more than 3,200 signers, which is within about 300 
of the highest poll we ever had in this city on both 
sides, at the most controverted election. Nothing 
can more clearly demonstrate our unanimity, and I 
feel no doubt of equal or greater imanimity through- 
out the State. 

The meeting-men have not dared to publish the 
names of the committee, because it impudently con- 
tained a considerable proportion of persons hostile to 
its object, several of them actually on our petition. 
You see by this their embarrassment and their 
weakness. 

TO WILLIAM BRADFORD ' 

May, 1795. 


Yours of the twenty-first of May, by going to Al- 
bany, did not reach me till yesterday. The ex- 
pectation of Mr. Adet properly varied the course of 
proceeding. I am glad the impression with you 
corresponded with mine. 

^ William Bradford, of Pennsylvania, at this time Attorney-General 
of the United States. He had been a soldier of the Revolution and a 
judge and Attorney-General of Pennsylvania. He was a man of ability 
and character, and his premature death shortly after the date of this 
letter, on August 23, 1795, was deeply regretted. 

Private Correspondence 99 

If Mr. Randolph showed Fauchet any part of the 
instructions to Mr. Jay, I do not much regret that he 
manifests displeasure at the withholding of a part. 
When shall we cease to consider ourselves as a colony 
of France? To assure her minister that the in- 
structions to Mr. Jay contained nothing which could 
interfere with our engagements to France might, 
imder all the circtimstances, have been expedient; 
but to communicate specifically any part of the in- 
structions to our envoy, was, in my judgment, im- 
proper in principle and precedent. 

I expect the treaty will labor. It contains many ] 
good things, but there is one ingredient in it which 
displeases me — of a commercial complexion. I am, 
however, of opinion, on mature reflection, that it is 
expedient to ratify, accompanied by a declaration 
that it is our intention, till there be a further ex- 
planation and modification of the article, to forbear 
the exercise of a certain privilege, and consequently 
the performance of the condition of it, or some thing 
equivalent. This, it is true, may or may not be 
accepted. But I believe it will create no difficulty, : 
and I would rather risk it than take the treaty im- 
qualifiedly. I prefer this course to that of sending 
back the treaty for a new negotiation, because 
(among other reasons) it may save time, and more 
speedily close certain matters which I deem it very 
important to terminate. I am also glad to learn 
that, since the date of your letter, there have been 
some convictions of the insurgents. This was very es- 
sential to the permanent good effects of the meas- 
ures which were pursued on that subject. You see, 

loo Alexander Hamilton 

I have not entirely lost my appetite for a little pol- 
itics; you must not infer that I have not a very 
good one for law. 

P. S. — I had almost forgotten a principal object of 
this letter. It concerns the Marquis Lafayette. In 
conversation, I think, but certainly by letter (this 
entre nous), I suggested to Mr. Jay that, in case the 
treaty with Great Britain turned favorably, it will 
be well to hint to the British minister that the 
United States took a very particular interest in the 
welfare of Lafayette, and that the good offices of 
that country, to procure his liberation, woiild be 
regarded as a valuable mark of friendship. I be- 
lieve I also had some conversation, in the same 
spirit, either with the President or the Secretary of 
State ; but I do not remember if any thing was done. 
If the thing has not been tried, and if the treaty is 
ratified, will it not be advisable to instruct the per- 
son who is to exchange it, to accompany it with an 
observation of the above import ? The moment will 
be a favorable one — and I imagine the time is fast 
approaching when Lafayette will recover his popu- 
larity in his own country. The chief thing against 
this is the rivalship of those who hold the power. 
But will they not be glad to consolidate their gen- 
eral plan by weight of a man who with all parties, 
has maintained the character of well-intentioned, 
and who probably has the good- will of the multitude, 
spite of all that has passed. I see no inconvenience 
in your taking occasion to ask Mr. Jay if the Mar- 
quis Lafayette was ever the subject of conversation 

Private Correspondence loi 

between him and the British ministry, and how it 
terminated. And I will thank you, if you feel your- 
self at liberty, to let me know whether any thing like 
the step I have suggested obtains.' 

TO RUFUS KING 

New York, Jime ii, 1795. 

Dear Sir: 

I thank you for your letter of the loth. The case 
has been with me as with you. Reflection has not 
mitigated the exceptionable point. Yet it will be to 
be lamented, if no mode can be devised to save the 
main object and close the irritable questions which 
are provided for. Every thing besides an absolute 
and simple ratification will put some thing in jeop- 
ardy. But while, on the one hand, I think it ad- 
visable to hazard as little as possible, on the other, 
I should be willing to hazard some thing, and un- 
willing to see a very objectionable principle put into 
activity. 

It is to be observed that no time is fixed for the 
ratification of the treaty. It may then be ratified 
with a collateral instruction to make a declaration, 
that the United States considers the article in ques- 
tion, aggregately taken, as intended by the king of 
Great Britain as a privilege ; that they conceive it for 
their interest to forbear the exercise of that privilege, 
with the condition annexed to it, till an explanation 
in order to a new modification of it shall place it on 
a more acceptable footing, or till an article to be 

' Reprinted from the History of the Republic, vi., 216. 

I02 Alexander Hamilton 

sent to our minister containing that modification 
shall be agreed upon between him and the British 
court as a part of the treaty — the ratification not to 
be exchanged without further instruction from this 
country, unless accepted in this sense and with this 
qualification. 

This course appears to me preferable to sending 
back the treaty to open the negotiation anew, be- 
cause it may save time on the points most interest- 
ing to us, and I do not see that if the ratifications be 
exchanged with this saving, there can be any doubt 
of the matter operating as intended. Adieu. 

TO OLIVER WOLCOTT 

New York, Jxine 13, 1795. 


Your letter from New York, after a circuit by 
Albany, found me here. 

I forgot to observe to you in my last, that unless 
there were objections to it which did not occur to 
me, it appeared advisable, if not done, to institute 
at Amsterdam a plan for subscribing the Dutch and 
Antwerp debt. It may be conducted under the 
management of our commissioners with the superin- 
tendence of our minister. In all such cases a con- 
siderable deal depends on facilities on the very spot, 
and the moment seems particularly favorable. 

P. S. — I will willingly testify what you mention 
respecting Mr. Cabot,' but having torn up your letter, 

^ George Cabot, Senator from Massachusetts, an intimate friend of 
Hamilton and Wolcott. It is impossible now to tell the meaning of 
the reference here made to him. 

Private Correspondence 103 

trusting to my memory, it havS left me in the lurch, 
and I do not know where Cabot is, whether here or 
in Europe. What prospects as to the treaty f ' 

TO RUFUS KING 

New York, June 20, 1795. 

My Dear Sir: 

A considerable alarm has been spread this morning 
by a report that the treaty had been disagreed to. 
I have assured those I have seen that I was con- 
vinced any rumor of a decision must be premature. 
The anxiety, however, about the result is extreme. 
The comimon opinion among men of business of all 
descriptions is that a disagreement to the treaty 
would greatly shock and stagnate pecuniary plans 
and operations in general. This is not a small source 
of disquietude. Others, who are not likely to be 
affected in that sense (and among these myself), 
look forward to the result with great solicitude, as 
fixing or endangering the stability of our present 
beneficial and desirable situation. 

My influence in seconding the wishes of our friend 
General Greene is, I fear, overrated. Unwilling to 
raise expectation which may not be realized, I will 
only say that it will give me real pleasure to be able 
to promote his accommodation or advantage, as my 
opinion of him entirely corresponds with yours. In 

I Now first printed from the Wolcott papers in the possession of the 
Connecticut Historical Society. I owe this and other letters from the 
same source to the kindness of the Hon. J. Hammond Trumbull, of 
Hartford. 

I04 Alexander Hamilton 

the meantime I will, as far as circumstances permit, 
have an eye to the affair. 

TO OLIVER WOLCOTT 

New York, Jiine 22, 1795. 

Dear Sir: 

I have received your letter of the i8th instant. I 
will reply to one or two points now, and to the rest 
hereafter. 

With regard to the measure of receiving Dutch 
bonds here to be exchanged, as is usual, it has differ- 
ent sides. To do it may be, in some measure, neces- 
sary to effectuate the main object, as there may be 
many individuals who, from circumstances, might 
not think themselves safe in employing the mode 
which has been adopted, and which is no doubt 
proper. Yet it is easy to see it might be attended 
with hazard of imposition. But some thing may 
depend on the nature of the checks which the course 
of the business originally gives to our agents at 
Amsterdam. If similitude of handwriting is the only 
internal check, perhaps it may be possible to manage 
the matter here. A conversation with Cazenove 
may furnish you with the requisite data. Yet I feel 
great doubts of the safety of the operation, and, if 
adopted at all, it ought to be upon condition that no 
definitive or alienable evidences are to be given in 
exchange for the original bonds till after a period 
(to be named) long enough to receive at the treasury 
the result of the operation in Holland, and a parti- 
cular and detailed statement of it; and that no 
interest be payable (in the meantime) without a 
guaranty for repayment. With these checks none 

Private Correspondence 105 

but respectable men will come forward, and there may 
be little or no risk. Yet, as I intimated, even the ex- 
pediency of this depends on the nature of the original 
checks, and it ought to be announced that the treasury 
reserves to itself entire discretion as to the admission 
or non-admission of the bonds presented here. 

With regard to the contract proposed by Mr. 
Swan, I answer, that I doubt much the advisability 
of concluding any thing with him here, for being 
concluded, it must be relied upon as a primary re- 
source with the auxiliary and contingent expedient 
of drawing in case of failure; and Mr. Swan is not 
of standing, or character, to justify the leaving the 
public credit to depend primarily upon his punc- 
tuality. If Mr. Swan is able to do what he offers, it 
must be on the basis of French government funds, or 
that of a powerful moneyed combination in Europe. 
If either, why cannot he be referred to our commis- 
sioners and minister, under letters from the treasury 
stating the offer, the desirableness that such a con- 
tract could be formed under adequate guards for its 
performance, and leaving it to them to judge of the 
adequateness of the guards which shall be proposed? 
It appears to me very material that they should be 
satisfied with the arrangement, and essential that 
there should be good security and known resources 
for the execution of it. 

Else no loss on shipping commodities, or other- 
wise, for the short time it can last, will counterpoise 
the risk of disappointment and censure of reliance on 
an incompetent character. 

I will barely observe on one point of the latter part 

io6 Alexander Hamilton 

of your letter, namely, the payment of interest under 
the direction of the commissioners of the sinking 
fund. I have not the act by me, and can only speak 
from memory; but I am persuaded it does not re- 
quire it. I am sure it will be highly inexpedient to 
place any extra clogs on that operation, and I do not 
perceive why the manner of keeping the accounts 
may not obviate any embarrassment from a separate 
management of the two things. I will write again 
more particularly, on this as well as on other points. 
I am glad to know that there is a probability of a 
proper issue to the affair of the treaty. 


New York, June 26, 1795. 


I have direct information, in confidence, that the 
minister of France, by a letter received yesterday, 
has ordered a fast-sailing vessel for France to be pre- 
pared at this port. No doubt this has connection 
with the treaty with England. I presume, with the 
reserves that decorum requires, he is apprised of the 
contents of that treaty. This ought, at least, to go 
so far as to satisfy him that there is nothing in it 
inimical to his country, especially as I suppose it to 
have been adopted. It is well to guard our peace on 
all sides, as far as shall consist with dignity. 

Indeed, I am of opinion, on the whole, that all 
further mystery at present is unnecessary, and ought 
to be waived, for the satisfaction of the public mind. 
I do not think any scruples of diplomatic decorum 
of weight enough to stand in the way. 

Private Correspondence 107 

TO OLIVER WOLCOTT 

New York, June 30, 1795. 

Dear Sir: 

Doctor Livingston some time since left with me a 
bundle of vouchers relating to the questions between 
Phil. Livingston's estate and the public. There was, 
among other things, a little register or book with a 
marble cover, doubled up. I do not find it among 
my papers, and if m.y memory does not deceive me 
it was sent, on breaking up at Philadelphia, to one 
of the officers of the treasury. Mr. Jones may know 
some thing of it. It is interesting to the estate. Let 
a careful search be made, and when found let it be 
forwarded by a careful hand to me, 

P. S. — I find the non-publication of the treaty is 
working as I expected — that is, giving much scope 
to misrepresentation and misapprehension. The 
Senate, I am informed by several members, did not 
take any step towards publication, because they 
thought it the affair of the President to do as he 
thought fit.' 

TO ROBERT TROUP ' 

New York, July 25, 1795. 

My Dear Troup: 

Confiding in your integrity and friendship to me, I 
have made you executor of my will. My concerns 
are not very extensive and of course will not give 
you much trouble. Indeed, I might have dispensed 

^ Now first printed from the Wolcott papers in the possession of the 
Connecticut Historical Society. 

2 Robert Troup, of New York, a gallant officer in the war for inde- 
pendence. He was a successful lawyer, a United States district judge, 
and one of Hamilton's closest friends. 

io8 Alexander Hamilton 

with the ceremony of making a will as to what I may 
myself leave, had I not wished that my little prop- 
erty may be applied as readily and as fairly as may 
be to the benefit of my few creditors. For after a 
life of labor I leave my family to the benevolence of 
others, if my course shall happen to be terminated 
here. 

My property will appear on the list herewith 
marked A. 

My creditors are John Barker Church,' to whom 
I owe about five thousand pounds, as will appear by 
account marked B. 

The Office of Discount and Deposit, New York, 
who hold a note of mine for five hundred dollars en- 
dorsed by Nicholas Fish. The holders, unknown, of 
two drafts drawn upon me by my father, one for 
five hundred, the other for two hundred, dollars. 
Mr. Meade, to whom Ceracchi gave a bill on me for 
six hundred and odd dollars, which I told Mr. Lud- 
low it was my intention to pay. 

Mr. Sheaf, of Philadelphia, wine merchant, to 
whom I owe a balance of account not very con- 
siderable. Gaspard Joseph Armand Ducher, who 
has my bond in duplicate for ;£698 principal, being 
for money which he left in my hands when he went 
to France, having no better disposition of it. This, 
being a bond debt, will claim a preference, and from 
the nature of it I am glad of it. 

Arthur Noble, Esquire, who has my bond for the 
fourth part of the lands purchased of him in company 
with yourself, Lawrence, and Fish. The lands them- 

' His brother-in-law. 

Private Correspondence 109 

selves will be a fund for the payment of these bonds. 
I hope the poor fellow may be alive. He was a 
member of the convention. 

I have left in the hands of Col. Fish the obligations 
mentioned in the list of Cortland and of Wickham & 
Thompson, to secure him in this mere act of friend- 
ship from the possibility of loss, and to accelerate his 
reimbursement . 

I hesitated whether I would not also secure a 
preference to the drafts of my father, but these, as 
far as I am concerned, being a voluntary engagement, 
I doubted the justice of the measure, and I have 
done nothing. I regret it, lest they should return 
upon him and increase his distress. Though, as I 
am informed, a man of respectable connections in 
Scotland,' he became, as a merchant, bankrupt at 
an early day in the West Indies and is now in indi- 
gence. I have pressed him to come to me, but his 
great age and infirmity have deterred him from the 
change of climate. 

I hope w^hat I leave may prove equal to my debts. 
If it does not, I have the consolation of hoping that 
the loss will be permitted by himself to fall upon my 
brother-in-law, Mr. Church, whose friendship and 
generosity I do not doubt. 

I regret that his affairs as well as my own have 
suffered by my devotion to the public service. But 
I trust, upon the whole, that the few operations I 
have made for him will more than recompense him 
for my omissions, though they will not have been as 

^ When Hamilton speaks in this way of his father, it is not surprising 
that so much mystery should overhang his birth and parentage. 

no Alexander Hamilton 

profitable to him as they ought to have been, and 
as they would have been if I could have paid more 
attention. 

Purchases of lands have been made for Mr. Church, 
first, in Pennsylvania, in company with Tench Coxe, 
to whom I advanced ten thousand dollars ; second, in 
this City of New York, in company with J. Lawrence, 
to whom I have advanced the sums mentioned in the 
accotmt marked C, in bundle AA. Besides these ad- 
vances, I have put into his hands a draft of Fit- 
simmons upon Constable, accepted by the latter, for 
four thousand dollars, and a set of bills for five 
hundred pounds sterling, received from Robert Mor- 
ris, drawn by Harrison & Sherret upon the house 
of Cazenove & Co., London. These are all on the 
same account of the purchases. 

You will find, in the bundle marked AB, a smaller 
bundle marked D, which will explain the nature and 
state of the business with Mr. Coxe, by which also 
you will see that Mr. Anthony, who is a very good 
man, is my agent in that affair. 

You will also find in bundle AA a note of Mr. 
Morris for nine thousand five hundred dollars, on 
account of which the above bills are. This note was 
for money lent belonging to Mr. Church. Mr. Mor- 
ris will not dispute that it bears interest from the 
date. Indeed, the real sum was ten thousand dol- 
lars, but Mr. Morris after some time paid me five 
hundred. The interest ought to be calculated ac- 
cordingly. Mr. Morris can furnish the data. 

As this money was thus disposed of without being 
warranted by the spirit of Mr. Church's instructions, 

Private Correspondence iii 

I considered myself as responsible for it. And I 
trust that Mr. Morris will exert himself to pay the 
balance speedily, to be applied to the investments 
which Mr. Lawrence is making. 

I have received some large fees for which the 
parties could not have had equivalents: from Wil- 
liamson, one hundred pounds; from Constable, one 
hundred pounds ; from Macombe, one hundred 
pounds ; from Mr. Bayard, on behalf of Wilken and 
Jared Willink, one hundred pounds. It would be 
just, if there were means, that they should be repaid. 
But what can I direct who am, I fear, insolvent? 

God bless you, my friend. Be assured always of 
the attachment of, etc. 

P. S. — I remitted vSheaf, on my way through Jer- 
sey, an order on the Bank of the United States for a 
good part of his demand. This will appear by my 
bank account. 

In my leather trank, where the bundles above 
mentioned are, is also a bundle I. R. inscribed thus: 

To he forwarded to Oliver Wolcott, Jun., Esqr. 

I entreat that this may be early done by a careful 
hand. 

This trunk contains all my interesting papers.^ 

^This long and interesting letter is now first printed from the Hamil- 
ton papers in the State Department. It furnishes a striking commen- 
tary on the charges of corruption made against Hamilton by Jefferson 
and his tools, and on Madison's cold sneer that Hamilton retired from 
office alleging poverty as the cause. 

112 Alexander Hamilton 

TO OLIVER WOLCOTT 

New York, July 28, 1795. 

Dear Sir: 

We have some cause to suspect, though not enough 
to believe, that our Jacobins meditate serious mis- 
chief to certain individuals. It happens that the 
militia of this city, from the complexion of its officers 
in general, cannot be depended on, and it will be 
difficult for some time to organize a competent armed 
substitute. In this situation our eyes turn as a re- 
source in a sudden emergency, upon the military now 
in the forts, but these, we are told, are under march- 
ing orders. Pray converse confidentially with the 
Secretary of War, and engage him to suspend the 
march. Matters in eight or ten days will explain 
themselves. 

How are things truly in Philadelphia? I have 
good reason to believe that the President, before he 
left Philadelphia, had concluded to ratify the treaty 
according to the advice of the Senate. Has any 
thing finally been done, or are we where we were? 


New York, August 5, 1795. 


I have received yours of the 3d instant. You 
make no mention of having received one from me, 
enclosing another for the Attorney-General, in which 
I tell him that I will attend the cause which involves 
the question respecting direct taxes when notified of 
the time it will come on. 

Private Correspondence 113 

The silence of your letter makes me fear it may 
have miscarried. 

I do not wonder at what you tell me of the author 
of a certain piece.' That man is too cunning to be 
wise. I have been so much in the habit of seeing 
him mistaken, that I hold his opinion cheap.^ 


New York, August lo, 1795. 


I have received your letter by Saturday's post. 
The one you enquire about was received. 

1 incline very much to the opinion that this will 
be the proper course of conduct in reference to the 
order to seize our vessels with provisions — viz., to 
send to our agent the treaty ratified as advised by 
the Senate, with this instruction: that if the order 
for seizing provisions is in force when he receives it, 
he is to inform the British ministry that he has the 
treaty ratified, but that he is instructed not to ex- 
change the ratification till that order is rescinded, 
since the United States cannot ever give an implied 
sanction to the principle. At the same time a re- 
monstrance ought to go from this country, well 
considered and well digested, even to a wordy to be 
delivered against the principle of the order. 

My reasons for this opinion are summarily these: 

^ Note by Oliver Wolcott: "Tench Coxe, author of a piece signed 
Juriscola." Tench Coxe was commissioner of revenue, and, as has 
appeared above, had already made charges against and attempted to 
injure both Hamilton and Wolcott. 

2 Now first printed from the Wolcott papers, in the possession of the 
Connecticut Historical Society. 

VOL. X.— 8. 

114 Alexander Hamilton 

Firstly. — That in fact we are too much interested 
in the exemption of provisions from seizure to give 
even an implied sanction to the contrary pretensions. 

Secondly. — That the exchange of ratifications 
pending such an order would give color to an abusive 
construction of the eighteenth article of the treaty, 
as though it admitted of the seizure of provisions. 

Thirdly. — That this would give cause of umbrage 
to France, because it would be more than merely to 
refrain from resisting by force an innovation injurious 
to her, but it would be to give a sanction to it in the 
midst of a war. 

Fourthly. — It would be thus construed in our 
country, and would destroy confidence in the gov- 
ernment. 

Fifthly. — It would scarcely be reputable to a na- 
tion to conduct a treaty with a Power to heal past 
controversies, at the very moment of a new and 
existing violation of its rights. 

P. S. — Deliver the enclosed as soon as it gets 
to hand. If an order has existed, and has been 
rescinded, the remonstrance ought still to be pre- 
sented, after the exchange of ratifications, as a pro- 
test against the principle, etc. 

TO OLIVER WOLCOTT 

New York, Sept. 20, 1795. 

My Dear Sir: 

A slight indisposition prevented my meeting you 
at E. Town, which I should otherwise have done 
with great pleasure. 

Private Correspondence 115 

It is wished for a particular purpose to know who 
are the writers of Valerius, Hancock, Belisarius, AU^ 
ticus. If any thing about them is known in a manner 
that can be depended upon, I will thank you for it in 
confidence. 

The fever in this town has become serious. The 
alarm, however, exceeds the quantum of disease and 
danger. It is not ascertained that the fever is con- 
tagious. It is clearly traced to local causes, but it 
is sufficiently mortal. Bleeding is found fatal. Most 
of our physicians purge more or less, some with 
calomel, I fear more than does good; bark, wine, 
etc., plentifully used, and with good effect. They, 
however, all behave well, and shrink not from their 
duty. 

Show the last paragraph of this letter to Doctor 
Stevens, from whom, though I have written to him, 
I have not received a line since I came to New York.' 


New York, Oct. 3, 1795. 


I have received your letter of the , and thank 

you for the information. As to Randolph, I shall 
be surprised at nothing, but if the facts come out, 
his personal influence is at all events damned. No 
coloring will remove unfavorable impressions. To 
do mischief, he must work in the dark. 

What you say respecting your own department 

'Now first printed from the Wolcott papers, in the possession of the 
Connecticut Historical Society. 

ii6 Alexander Hamilton 

disquiets me, for I think we shall, for the present, 
weather all storms but those from real deficiencies 
in our public an-angements. Not knowing details, I 
can attempt to suggest nothing, except the general 
observation, that if the means heretofore provided, 
are seriously likely to prove inadequate. Congress 
ought to be explicitly told so, in order to a further 
provision. It was a maxim in my mind, that ex- 
ecutive arrangements should not fail for want of full 
disclosure to the Legislature. Then, if adequate 
provision be not made, the responsibility is theirs. 
The worst evil we can struggle with is inefficiency in 
the measures of government. 

If I remember right, it never appeared that 
Fauchet had any power to make a commercial 
treaty with us, and the late Attorney-General 
(Bradford) informed me that Adet had power only 
to treat, none to conclude. How are these things? I 
ask for special reasons.' 

What is the object of the dispatch-boat from 
France? Nothing menacing, I hope. 

' Col. Pickering writes Wolcott in reference to the above: 

" October 6, i795' 
"Dear Sir: — Mr. Taylor informs me that Mr. Fauchet never to his 
knowledge made even any overtures relative to a treaty of any kind. 
I have cast my eye over those of Mr. Adet, by which it appears, that 
he is authorized to digest with the American Government a new treaty 
of commerce and a new consular convention, but not to conclude any 
thing. Mr. Randolph agreed to meet him on this ground. If the 
articles digested should meet the approbation of the respective govern- 
ments, they might give full powers to constitute of these articles the 
proposed new treaties. 

"Sincerely yours, 

•• T. Pickering." 

Private Correspondence 117 

TO OLIVER WOLCOTT 

New York, Oct. 3, 1795. 

Dear Sir: 

I have received your letter of the 6th instant. 

I am of opinion that the commissioners to be ap- 
pointed under the seventh article are competent to 
grant relief, in all cases of captures and condemna- 
tions of our property, during the present war, and 
antecedent to the treaty, which were contrary to the 
laws of nations, and in which there is adequate evi- 
dence (of which they are to judge bona fide), that 
compensation could not, at the time of the treaty, 
for whatever reason, be actually obtained. I think 
their power competent to relief, after a decision, in 
the last resort; that is, by the Lords Commissioners 
of Appeals, and if the proper steps have been taken 
to ascertain that justice cannot be had, in the ordin- 
ary course of justice, before and without such decision. 

This opinion is founded upon the following reasons : 

Firstly. — The subject of complaint to be redressed 
is irregular or illegal captures or condemnations. The 
word "condemnations" is general. It is not re- 
stricted to condemnations in the inferior courts, or in 
the final Court of Appeals. It may then apply to 
either. Condemnation in the last resort may have 
been had prior to the treaty. There being no re- 
striction, they, like those in inferior tribunals, were 
equally within the terms of complaint. But could 
they be illegal? Yes, in controversies between na- 
tions, respecting the application of the rules of the 
laws of nations, decisions of the highest court of one 
of the parties, if contrary to those rules, are illegal. 

ii8 Alexander Hamilton 

In other words, they are contrary to that law, which 
is the standard of legality and illegality between na- 
tions; and, if manifestly so, are a cause of war. 
Moreover, this rule of legality or illegality, is recog- 
nized by the article itself, in that part which au- 
thorizes the commissioners to decide according to 
the merits of the several cases, to justice, equity, and 
the law of nations. 

Secondly. — The article contemplates that '* various 
circumstances'' may obstruct compensation in the 
ordinary course of justice. These terms would not be 
fully satisfied by tying the article down, as has been 
attempted, to cases of insolvency and absconding. 

Thirdly. — The article expressly declares, that when 
compensation cannot, ''for whatever reason,'' be had 
in the ordinary course of justice, it shall be made 
by the British Government upon the award of the 
commissioners. It is inadmissible to narrow down 
these very comprehensive terms to the two cases of 
insolvency or absconding. They are commensurate 
with every cause of irregularity or illegality, pro- 
nounced such by the laws of nations. The excep- 
tions of manifest delay, or negligence, or willful 
omission, confirm the extensive interpretation. 

Fourthly. — The commissioners are not restricted 
in the description of cases they are to take up; and 
they are to decide them according to their merits, to 
justice, equity, and the laws of nations. These terms 
are as latitudinary as they could be made. They 
seemed formed on purpose to overrule any technical 
difficulties, with regard to local tribunals, or positive 
rules of decision in those tribunals. 

Private Correspondence 119 

Fifthly. — The nature of the circumstance which 
led to the article, and which involved a controversy 
between the two nations, respecting the rules of the 
laws of nations, as well as the application of those 
rules. The natural presumption is that it was meant 
to refer this controversy, in all its latitude, to the 
extraordinary tribunal created ; to transfer the right 
of judgment of each nation, which, being exercised 
differently, might have ended in war, to that tribunal. 
Any thing less than this would be inadequate to the 
origin of the business, to the solemnity of the pro- 
vision, or to the views which, from the facts, must 
be conceived to have governed the parties. 

All this appears so clear to me that I confess I am 
confounded at an opinion which I have seen of 
Messrs. Lewis and Rawle. They seem to pare away 
the object of the articles to the two cases mentioned 
above, founding their opinion upon the maxim that 
the courts of the belligerent power are the com- 
petent tribunals to decide similar questions between 
that power and a neutral nation. 

This maxim is true, but how can it be deemed to 
apply to the instance of a controversy between two 
nations about the interpretation of the laws of na- 
tions, and about the decisions of courts founded upon 
an interpretation concerning which they disagreed? 
And this when an extraordinary tribunal has been 
constituted by the joint acts of the two parties, to 
decide their differences plainly as a substitute for a 
controversy by arms? Is not the constitution of 
such a tribunal by the two parties a manifest aban- 
donment of the pretension of one to administer 

I20 Alexander Hamilton 

justice definitely through its tribunals? How can it 
be presumed, after such a proceeding, that the neu- 
tral power meant to be concluded by the decisions of 
those tribunals ? Is not the reverse the obvious pre- 
sumption? Why else was it not left to the British 
Courts of Admiralty to liquidate the damages in 
the admitted cases of insolvency and absconding to 
be paid by the government? These circumstances 
could call for a substitute only in the person to pay, 
not in the person, or tribunal, which was to liquidate. 
There was no need, on the principle set up, for an ex- 
traordinary tribunal to liquidate and award damages. 

I confess that the opinion referred to appears to 
me destitute of color; contrary to the antecedent 
course of the transaction, contrary to the positive 
expressions of the article, and to what can reason- 
ably be presumed to be the intention of the parties. 
It fritters away to nothing a very solemn and im- 
portant act between two contending nations. 

The exception of the cases in which justice might 
be obtained, in the ordinary course, appears to me to 
decide nothing. It might be unobtainable in that 
course as well from the obstructions of positive regu- 
lations of the belligerent parties controlling the 
courts, and from false principles adopted by the 
courts, as from the inability or default of the captors. 
The commissioners, who are the court of the two na- 
tions, are to pronounce whether justice is unobtain- 
able in the ordinary course for any of these reasons. 
As the tribunals of both parties, they are necessarily 
superior to the tribunals of either. And they are the 
judges, in their own way, and upon their own grounds, 

Private Correspondence 121 

of the question whether and when justice can or 
cannot be obtained in the ordinary course. 

But they ought to exercise their discretion reason- 
ably— not to abuse it, otherwise they may release the 
party injured from the obligation to perform. 

Hence, though it is not necessary that every indi- 
vidual case of capture should be prosecuted to a 
decision in the last resort, it appears to me proper that, 
by such prosecution of some one case of the several 
classes of cases, it may be ascertained, by a final 
decision on the principle of each class, that redress 
cannot be obtained. Else the commissioners may 
object that there has been a neglect to procure for 
them satisfactory evidence that justice could not 
be had in the ordinary course. 

I would advise, then, that our agent be instructed 
to lay all the cases, with the evidence, before our 
counsel, and to desire them to make a selection of 
one of each class in which a defence can be made 
with probability of success, on some difference of 
principle; to have these cases prosecuted to an 
ultimate decision, and to leave all the rest pending, 
if possible, undecided in a course of appeal. This 
will give reasonable evidence to the commissioners, 
strengthened, in view of those appointed by the other 
party, by the character of our counsel, who, I learn, 
are every way men of respectability. 

The other points in your letter I shall pursue 
hereafter. 

P. S. — In a consultation on an insurance case be- 
tween our district attorney, Mr. Burr, B. Livingston, 

122 Alexander Hamilton 

and myself, the above points incidentally occurred, 
and I understood all these gentlemen as agreeing in 
the opinion I have stated. You are at liberty to 
communicate this to Mr. Pickering. 

TO WASHINGTON 

New York, Oct. i6, 1795. 

Sir: 

About a fortnight since arrived here Mr. Frestel, 

with G. W. Fayette, the son of the marquis. The 
former, who is in capacity of tutor to the latter, re- 
quested me to mention their arrival to you, and that 
they meant to retire to some place in the neighbor- 
ing country until they should receive some direction 
from you. Thus, at least, I understood him, and 
accordingly they are gone to a house between Hack- 
ensack and Ramapo, in the Jerseys, to which may be 
conveyed any letter you may confide to me for them. 
They are incog. 

Having been informed you were speedily ex- 
pected from Philadelphia, and being oppressed with 
occupation, I delayed writing till this time. 

Mr. Frestel, who appears a very sedate, discreet 
man, informs me that they left France with permis- 
sion, though not in their real characters, but in fact 
with the privity of some members of the Committee 
of Safety who were disposed to shut their eyes and 
facilitate their departure. 

The young Fayette also appears to me very ad- 
vantageously modest, of very good manners, and 
expressing himself with intelligence and propriety. 

Shall I trespass on your indulgence by hazarding a 

Private Correspondence 123 

sentiment upon the subject of this young gentleman? 
If I do, let it be ascribed to the double interest I take 
in the son of the marquis, and in whatever interests 
the good fame and satisfaction of him to whom I write. 

On mature reflection, and on sounding opinions as 
far as opportunity and the nature of the case have 
permxitted, I fully believe that the President need be 
under no embarrassment as to any good offices his 
heart may lead him to perform towards this young 
man. It will not, I am persuaded, displease those 
in possession of the power of the country from which 
he comes, and in ours it will be singularly and 
generally grateful. I am even convinced that the 
personal and political enemies of the President 
would be gratified, should his ideas of the policy of 
the case restrain him from that conduct which his 
friendship to the m.arquis and his feelings otherwise 
would dictate. The youth of this person, joined to 
the standing of his father, make the way easy. 

I even venture to think it possible that the time 
is not very remote when the marquis will again re- 
cover the confidence and esteem of his country, when 
perhaps the men in power may be glad to glorify 
themselves and their cause with his alliance. This, 
however, is supposition, merely to be indulged as a 
reflection, not to be counted upon as a fact. 

There is another subject upon which I will hazard 
a few words. It is that of Mr. Randolph. I have 
seen the intercepted letter, which, I presume, led to 
his resignation. I read it with regret, but without 
much surprise, for I never had any confidence in Mr. 
Randolph, and I thought there were very suspicious 

124 Alexander Hamilton 

appearances about him on the occasion to which the 
letter particularly refers. 

I perceive that, rendered desperate, he meditates 
as much mischief as he can. The letter he calls for, 
I presume, is that above alluded to. His object is, 
if he obtains it, to prejudice others; if any part is 
kept back, to derive advantage to his cause from the 
idea that there may be some thing reserved which 
would tend to his exculpation, and to produce the 
suspicion that there is some thing which you are in- 
terested to keep from the light. 

Though, from the state of public prejudices, I 
shall probably for one be a sufferer by the publica- 
tion; yet, upon the whole, I incline to the opinion 
that it is most advisable the whole should come be- 
fore the public. I acknowledge that I do not ex- 
press this opinion without hesitation, and therefore 
it will deserve, as it will no doubt engage, your ma- 
ture reflection; but such is the present bias of my 
judgment. I am the more inclined to the opinion, 
as I presume that the subject being in part before the 
public, the whole letter will finally come out through 
the quarter by which it was written, and then it would 
have additional weight to produce ill impressions. 

With great respect and affectionate attachment, I 
have the honor to be, etc. 


New York, Oct. 26, 1795. 


I have noticed a piece in the Aurora, under the 
fijL' signature of the '' Calm Observer," which I think re- 

Private Correspondence 125 

quires explanation, and I mean to give one with my 
name.' I have written to Mr. Wolcott for material 
from the books of the treasury. 

Should you think it proper to meet the vile in- 
sinuation in the close of it, by furnishing for one 
year the account of expenditure of the salary, I will 
with pleasure add what may be proper on that point. 
If there be any such account signed by Mr. Lear, it 
may be useful. 

I wrote to you some days since, directed to you 
at Philadelphia, chiefly on the subject of young La 
Fayette. I mention it merely that you may have 
knowledge that there is such a letter, in case it has 
not yet come to hand. 

I touched in it upon a certain intercepted letter. 
The more I have reflected, the more I am of opinion 
that it is advisable the whole should speedily appear. 

TO OLIVER WOLCOTT 


Dear Sir: 

I have observed in the Aurora, a piece under the 
signature of "A Calm Observer," which I think 
merits attention. It is my design to reply to it, 
with my name, but for this I wish to be furnished, as 
soon as possible, with the account of the President, 
and of the appropriations for him, as it stands in the 
Secretary's office, the Comptroller's, and the account 
rendered to Congress, and also the account of ap- 
propriations for this object. Of one point I am 

I This reply was didy published. See above, "The Explanation," 
vol. viii., p. 122. 

126 Alexander Hamilton 

sure — that we never exceeded the appropriations y 
though we may have anticipated the service. Add 
any remarks you may judge useful. The sooner the 
better. 


New York, Oct. 27, 1795. 


I wish the statements requested in my letter 
of yesterday may contain each particular payment, 
not aggregates for periods. It runs in my mind that 
once, there being no appropriation, I procured an 
informal advance for the President from the bank. 
If this is so, let me know the time and particulars. If 
the account has been wound up to an exact adjust- 
ment, since the period noticed by the ''Calm Ob- 
server," it may be useful to carry it down to that 
period. 

I should like to have a note of other instances of 
advances on account of salaries. 


New York, Oct. 30, 1795. 


I wrote you yesterday for a statement of the 
advances and appropriations for the Department of 
State. 

I am very anxious that Fauchefs whole letter 
should appear just as it is. Strange whispers are 
in circulation of a nature foreign to truth, and im- 

Private Correspondence 127 

plicating honest men with rascals. Is it to come 
out ? Can 't you send me a copy ? I will observe any 
condition you annex. 

The secret journals, and other files of the Depart- 
ment of State, will disclose the following facts: 

That during the war a commission to negotiate a 
treaty of commerce with Great Britain, was given 
to Mr. Adams, and afterwards revoked. 

That our commissioners for making peace were in- 
structed to take no step whatever, without a previous 
consultation with the French ministry, though there 
was at that time reason to believe that France 
wished us to make peace, or truce, with Great Brit- 
ain, without an acknowledgment of our indepen- 
dence, that she favored a sacrifice to Spain of our 
pretensions to the navigation of the Mississippi, and 
the relinquishment of a participation in the fisheries. 

It will appear that instructions were actually given 
to Mr. Jay to yield the navigation of the Mississippi 
to Spain, in consideration of an acknowledgment 
of our independence ; that Mr. Jay made a proposal 
accordingly, but clogged with some condition or 
qualification to bring it back to Congress before 
a final conclusion, and expostulated with Congress 
against the measure. 

It wHll appear that this was effected by a Southern 
party, who would also have excluded the fisheries 
from being an ultimatum, in which they were op- 
posed by the North, who equally contended for Mis- 
sissippi and fisheries. 

It will appear that Chancellor Livingston, as 
Secretary of State, reported a censure on our 

128 Alexander Hamilton 

commissioners for breaking their instructions in the 
negotiations for peace. 

It will appear that shortly after the arrival in this 
country of the preliminary articles, I made a motion 
in Congress to renew the commission to negotiate a 
treaty of commerce with Great Britain, that a com- 
mittee was appointed to prepare one, with instruc- 
tions, of which Mr. Madison was one, and that the 
committee never reported. 

Thus stand the facts in my memory. 

It is very desirable, now that a free access to the 
files of the department can give the evidence, to 
examine them accurately; noting times, places, cir- 
cumstances, actors, etc. I want this very much for 
a public use, in my opinion essential. 

It would also be useful to have a copy of Mr. Jef- 
ferson's letter to Congress concerning the transfer of 
the French debt to private money-lenders, on which 
the report of the Board of Treasury is founded. 

Nov. 1 2th. This letter, by accident, has lain in 
my desk since it was written. I send it still. B ache's 
paper of the eleventh has a Valerius, which I think 
gives an opportunity of oversetting him. The lead- 
ing ideas may be : 

Firstly. — He discloses the object of the party to 
place Mr. Jefferson in contrast with the President. 

Secondly. — He discloses the further object — an in- 
timate and close alliance with France — to subject us 
to the vortex of European politics, and attributes it 
to Mr. Jefferson. 

Thirdly. — He misrepresents totally Mr. Jefferson's 
returning from France. 

Private Correspondence 129 

A solid answer to this paper, with facts, would do 
great good. 

TO WASHINGTON 

New York, Nov. 5, 1795. 

Sir: 

I received on the second instant your two letters 
of the 29th of October with the enclosures. An an- 
swer has been delayed to ascertain the disposition of 
Mr. King, who, through the summer, has resided in 
the country, and is only occasionally in town. I am 
now able to inform you he would not accept. Cir- 
cumstances of the moment conspire with the dis- 
gust which a virtuous and independent mind feels 
at placing itself en hut to the foul and venomous 
shafts of calumny which are continually shot by an 
odious confederacy against virtue, to give Mr. King 
a decided disinclination to the office. 

I wish, sir, I could present to you any useftil ideas 
as a substitute; but the embarrassment is extreme 
as to the Secretary of State. An Attorney-General, 
I believe, may easily be fixed upon by a satisfactory 
choice. Either Mr. Dexter or Mr. Gore would an- 
swer. They are both men of undoubted probity. 
Mr. Dexter has most natural talent, and is strong 
in his particular profession. Mr. Gore, I believe, is 
equally considered in his profession, and has more 
various information. No good man doubts Mr. 
Gore's purity, but he has made money by agencies 
for British houses in the recovery of debts, etc., and 
by operations in the funds, which a certain party 

VOL. X.— 9. 

I30 Alexander Hamilton 

object to him. I believe Mr. Dexter is free from 
every thing of this kind. Mr. King thinks Gore 
on the whole preferable. I hesitate between them. 
Either will, I think be a good appointment. 

But for a Secretary of State, I know not what to 
say. Smith, though not of fiill size, is very respect- 
able for talent, and has pretty various information. I 
think he has more real talent than the last incumbent 
of the office. But there are strong objections to his 
appointment. I fear he is of an uncomfortable tem- 
per. He is popular with no description of men, 
from a certain hardness of character; and he, more 
than most other men, is considered as tinctured with 
prejudices towards the British. In this particular 
his ground is somewhat peculiar. It may suit party 
views to say much of other men, but more in this 
respect is believed with regard to Smith. I speak 
merely as to bias and prejudice. There are things, 
and important things, for which I would recommend 
Smith — thinking well of his abilities, information, 
industry, and integrity; but, at the present junc- 
ture, I believe his appointment to the office in ques- 
tion would be unadvisable. 

Besides, it is very important that he should not 
now be removed from the House of Representatives. 

I have conferred with Mr. King with respect to 
Mr. Potts. We both think well of his principles and 
consider him as a man of good sense. But he is of a 
cast of character ill-suited to such an appointment, 
and is not extensive either as to talents or information. 
It is also a serious question whether the Senate at 
this time ought to be weakened. 

Private Correspondence 131 

Mr. Innis, I fear, is too absolutely lazy for Secre- 
tary of State. The objection would weigh less as 
Attorney-General. 

The following characters, in the narrowness of the 
probable circle as to willingness, have occurred to me. 
Judge Pendleton, of Georgia; Mr. Desaussure (late 
Director of the Mint), of South Carolina; Governor 
Lee, or Mr. Lee, late Collector of Alexandria, of Vir- 
ginia ; McHenry, of Maryland — / mean the Doctor. 

Judge Pendleton writes well, is of respectable 
abilities, and a gentleman-like, smooth man. If I 
were sure of his political views, I should be much 
disposed to adopt his appointment under the cir- 
cumstances, but I fear he has been somewhat tainted 
with the prejudices of Mr. Jefferson and Mr. Madison, 
and I have afflicting suspicions concerning these 
men. Desaussure, I believe, has considerable tal- 
ents, is of gentleman-like manners, good views, and 
only wants sufficient standing to put him upon a 
footing with any attainable man. 

Governor Lee' has several things for him and 
several against him. He ought to have a good 
secretary under him. His brother I only know 
enough of to think him worth considering. 

McHenry you know. He would give no strength 
to the administration, but he would not disgrace 
the office. His views are good. Perhaps his health, 
etc., would prevent his accepting. 

I do not know Judge Bee. I have barely thought 
of him. 

In fact, a first-rate character is not attainable. A 

' "Light-Horse Harry," of Virginia. 

132 Alexander Hamilton 

second-rate must be taken with good dispositions and 
barely decent qualifications. I wish I could throw 
more light. 'T is a sad omen for the government. 

By the fifteenth I will carefully attend to the other 
parts of your letters. I regret that bad health and 
a pressure of avocations will permit nothing earlier. 

TO WASHINGTON 

New York, Nov. 19, 1795. 

Sir: 

Your letters of the i6th and i8th instant, with 
the enclosures, are received. 

An extraordinary pressure of professional busi- 
ness has delayed my reply on the subject of young 
La Fayette, in which another cause co-operated. I 
wished, without unveiling the motives incidentally, 
to sound the impressions of other persons of judg- 
ment, who, I know, had been apprised of his being 
in the country. 

The bias of my inclination has been that you 
should proceed as your letter of yesterday proposes, 
and I cannot say it is changed, though it is weak- 
ened. For I find that in other minds, and judicious 
ones, a doubt is entertained, whether at the actual 
crisis it would be prudent to give publicity to your 
protection of him. It seems to be feared that the 
factious might use it as a weapon to represent you 
as a favorer of the anti-revolutionists of France; 
and it is inferred that it would be inexpedient to 
furnish at this moment any aliment to their slanders. 

These ideas have enough of foundation and im- 

Private Correspondence 133 

portance to make me question my own impressions, 
which, from natural disposition, are in similar cases 
much to be distrusted. 

I shall therefore do nothing more at present than 
write to La Fayette and his preceptor to come to 
New York, and I shall forbear any definite com- 
munication to them till I hear further from you, 
after you have reflected on the information I now 
give. 

Should 3^ou on reconsideration conclude on yield- 
ing to the doubt as a matter of greater caution, 
perhaps it will be then left for you to write to La Fay- 
ette a letter, affectionate as your feelings will natur- 
ally lead you to make it, announcing your resolution 
to be to him a parent and friend, but mentioning 
that very peculiar circumstances of the moment im- 
pose on you the necessity of deferring the gratifica- 
tion of your wishes for a personal interview, desiring 
him at the same time to concert with me a plan of 
disposing of himself satisfactorily and advantage- 
ously in the meantime. I shall with pleasure 
execute any commands you may give me on the 
subject. The papers respecting this matter are 
herewith returned. I shall without delay attend to 
all the others. 

TO PICKERING 

New York, Nov. 20, 1795. 

My Dear Sir: 

I duly received your letter of the 17 th, which 
needed no apology as it will always give me pleasure 

134 Alexander Hamilton 

to comply with any wish of yours connected with the 
public service, or your personal satisfaction. 

Good men, in the idea of your appointment to the 
office of Secretary of State, will find many consola- 
tions for your removal from one in which your use- 
' fulness was well understood. 

I wish it was easy to replace you in the depart- 
ment you will leave. But this is a most difficult 
point. 

I consider it as absolutely necessary that the 
person shall come from some State south of Penn- 
sylvania. All the great offices in the hands of men 
from Pennsylvania northward, would do the lord 
knows what mischief. I speak as to public opinion. 
Hence I forbear any remarks on characters from that 
quarter. 

Of those South, notwithstanding there are real and 
weighty objections, I incline on the whole to Lee,^ 

Of the others whom you present (and none others 
have occurred to me), whose qualifications are 
known to me, I believe I should prefer Howard,^ 

Yet I speak with hesitation, for I am afraid he is 
not enough a man of sense or business. But he is 
of perfect worth, is respectable in the community, 
and has reputation as a soldier. 

There are others who would stand better as to 
talents, but temper or fairness of character is wanted. 
I do not know enough of Winden. 

Since writing the above, Judge Pendleton, of 

^ Henry Lee, of Virginia. 

* John Eagar Howard, a soldier of the Revolution, and Governor of 
Maryland. The Secretaryship of War was offered to him, and he 
declined. 

Private Correspondence 135 

Georgia, has occurred to me. He was a military 
man, Aide to General Greene, and esteemed by him. 
He is certainly a man of handsome abilities. I have, 
however, within a few days, heard that he had some 
agency in the purchase of the Georgia lands. If he 
has had any interested concern in this transaction, 
it would be an immense objection. Otherwise, if 
he would accept, all things considered, I should 
prefer him. He is tinctured with Jeffersonian poli- 
tics, but I should be mistaken if, among good men 
and better informed, he did not go right. 

I have received the French copy of a certain paper, 
and thank you for it. The translation you men- { ^-k- 
tion has not yet come to hand. I will with pleasure 
revise, if requisite, and correct it. I even wish for 
the opportunity; for, as you say, it much concerns 
me, and it is also very important to the public, and 
there are many nice turns of expression, which, to 
be rendered perfectly, demand a very critical know- 
ledge of the language.' 

TO RUFUS KING 

December 14, 1795. 

My Dear Sir: 

An extraordinary press of occupation has delayed 
an answer to your letter on the subject of Mr. R.^ 
Though it may come too late, I comply with your 
request as soon as I can. 

* Now first printed from the Pickering papers, in the possession of 
the Massachusetts Historical Society. 

3 John Rutledge, of South Carolina, nominated by Washington for 
Chief- Justice of the United States, and rejected by the Senate on ac- 
count of his habits and consequent mental condition. 

136 Alexander Hamilton 

The subject is truly a perplexing one; my mind 
has several times fluctuated. If there was nothing 
in the case but his imprudent sally upon a certain 
occasion, I should think the reasons for letting him 
pass would outweigh those for opposing his passage. 
But if it be really true that he is sottish, or that his 
mind is otherwise deranged, or that he has exposed 
himself by improper conduct in pecuniary transac- 
tions, the bias of my judgment would be to nega- 
tive. And as to the fact, I would satisfy myself by 
careful inquiry of persons of character who may have 
had an opportunity of knowing. 

It is now, and, in certain probable events, will still 
more be of infinite consequence that our judiciary 
should be well composed. Reflection upon this in 
its various aspects weighs heavily upon my mind 
against Mr. R. upon the accounts I have received of 
him, and balances very weighty considerations the 
other way. 

P. S. — From what a Mr. Wadsworth, lately in 
Philadelphia tells me of a conversation between 
Burr, Baldwin, and Gallatin, it would seem that the 
two last gentlemen have made up their minds to 
consider the treaty, if ratified by Great Britain, 
as conclusive upon the House of Representatives. I 
thought it well this should be known to you, if not 
before understood from any other quarter. 

Private Correspondence 137 

TO WASHINGTON 

New York, Dec. 24, 1795. 

Sir: 

I have received your letter of the . 

Young La Fayette is now with me. I had before 
made an offer of money in your name, and have re- 
peated it; but the answer is, that they are not as yet 
in want, and will have recourse when needed. 

Young La Fayette appears melancholy, and has 
grown thin. A letter lately received from his 
mother, which speaks of some thing which she wishes 
him to mention to you (as I learn from his preceptor), 
has quickened his sensibility and increased his re- 
gret. If I am satisfied that the present state of things 
is likely to occasion a durable gloom, endangering 
the health, and in some sort the mind of the young 
man, I shall conclude, on the strength of former per- 
mission, to send him to you for a short visit; the 
rather, as upon repeated reflection, I am not able to 
convince myself that there is any real inconvenience 
in the step, and as there are certainly delicate oppo- 
site sides. But it will be my endeavor to make him 
content to remain away. 

I have read with care Mr. Randolph's pamphlet. It 
does not surprise me. I consider it as amounting to a 
confession of guilt ; and I am persuaded this will be 
the universal opinion. His attempts against you are 
viewed by all whom I have seen, as base. They will 
certainly fail of their aim, and will do good, rather than 
harm, to the public cause and to yourself. It appears 
to me that, by you, no notice can be, or ought to be, 
taken of the publication. It contains its own antidote. 

138 Alexander Hamilton 

I perceive that Mr. Fauchet, and with him Mr. 
Randolph, have imputed to me the having asked 
to accompany you on the Western expedition. 

The true course of the fact was as follows: You 
had mentioned, and that early in the affair, as a 
question for consideration, the propriety and ex- 
pediency of your going out with the militia. But 
no opinion had been given to you, and you had not 
announced any determination on the point when my 
letter to you, of the 19th of September, was written. 
That letter does not ask to accompany you, but to be 
permitted to go on the expedition. A short time 
after it was sent, you mentioned to me that you had 
concluded to go as far as Carlisle in the first in- 
stance, and to take your ulterior determination ac- 
cording to circumstances, and proposed to me to 
accompany you. 

My request was independent of your going or not 
going. Its objects were — ist. That mentioned in 
my letter. 2d. An anxious desire that, by being 
present, I might have in my power, in a case very 
interesting to my department, as well as the govern- 
ment generally, to promote, in the event of your not 
going on the expedition, a course of conduct the best 
calculated to obviate impediments, and secure its 
object. I had serious fears of treachery in Governor 
Mifflin, and I thought that even Lee might miss the 
policy of the case in some particulars, etc., etc. 

These were the considerations that determined 
me, and not the little cunning policy by which Mr. 
Fauchet supposes me to have been governed. 

I greatly miscalculate if a strong and general cur- 

Private Correspondence 139 

rent does not now set in favor of the government on \ 
the question of the treaty. 

TO TIMOTHY PICKERING 

New York, Dec. 26, 1795. 

Dear Sir: 

Mr. Cutting has given to me a perusal of his papers, 
respecting his agency in reheving our seamen from 
British impress. He wished my opinion profession- 
ally respecting the vahdity of his claim, which I de- 
clined to give, because it would contradict certain 
maxims I have prescribed to myself with regard 
to public questions pending while I was part of the 
administration . 

But there are reasons which induce me to convey 
to you privately my view of the subject. 

It appears to me clearly established that Mr. Cut- 
ting rendered a very meritorious and an important 
service to the United States. Its value is not to be 
estimated merely by the number of persons re- 
lieved, but by the influence of the exertion upon 
other cases — indeed, upon our trade generally with 
the English ports at the juncture. It is also a ser- 
vice very interesting to the feelings of all our citi- 
zens— and there was certainly much good zeal and 
address displayed upon the occasion. It sufficiently 
appears, too, that the nature of the case must have 
involved considerable expense, and in ways which 
frequently would not admit of after authentication. 

Under these circumstances I feel a strong impres- 
sion that it is of the policy, as well as of the justice 

I40 Alexander Hamilton 

of the government, to go lengths in giving satisfac- 
tion to Mr. Cutting. 'T is a case which calls for 
liberality, not scrupulous or prying investigation. 
Mr. Cutting's own testimony from necessity ought to 
be received as to expenditures. This observation, to 
be sure, has reasonable limits. But still the case 
demands that the testimony should be received with 
influential effect. 

Mr. Dorhman is an example of similar compensa- 
tion in circumstances not unlike. Our own citizen 
has not an inferior claim. 

What has been hitherto done for Mr. Cutting ap- 
pears to be manifestly inadequate. If it could be 
supposed that there was risk of doing too much, it is 
of the reputation of the government that the error 
should be on that side. Care ought to be taken that 
a zealous citizen, who has rendered real service, 
should not be out of pocket, and out of reputation, 
too, by his bargain. I include a reasonable com- 
pensation for service, as well as reimbursement of 
expenses. 

These ideas will, I am sure, be received as they are 
intended. 

TO WASHINGTON 

December, 1795. 

Sir: 

I have the pleasure to send you enclosed two let- 
ters— one from young Lafayette, the other from his 
preceptor. They appear reconciled to some further 
delay. 

I take the liberty to enclose a copy of a letter to 

Private Correspondence 141 

the Secretary of State respecting Mr. Cutting. I do 
not know upon the whole what sort of a man Mr. 
Cutting is; but as to the particular subject of his 
claim, I really think it deserves an indulgent consid- 
eration, and that it is expedient and right to favor it 
to a liberal extent. Some reflections have made me 
think it advisable to place the matter under your 
eye. Neither the Secretary of State nor Mr. Cutting 
will be informed of this. 

I wrote you a few lines two or three days ago in 
answer to your letter concerning Mr. Randolph's 
pamphlet. 

TO RUFUS KING 

January, 1796. 

My Dear Sir: 

If the newspapers tell truth, it would appear that 
Massachusetts has anticipated New York. But it is 
intended by our friends in the Legislature to give 
some pointed discountenance to the propositions. 
It was expected that it would have been done to-day, 
but by the divergings of some men who seek popu- 
larity with both sides, they have gotten into an 
unnecessary debate upon the proposition in detail, 
which will lose time; but in the result a handsome 
majority will do right. 

Lawrence is hurt, and as far as I see, not without 
some reason, from particular circumstances, at being 
left out of the direction of the bank. It will be balm 
to his feelings to be put into the direction of the 
office here, and I believe it will be an improve- 
ment of the direction to do it. I wish you would 

142 Alexander Hamilton 

endeavor to bring it about. Speak to Bayard of our 
city and to Wharton of Philadelphia. This is a sug- 
gestion of my own, for Lawrence rather rides a high 
horse upon the occasion. Yours truly. 

TO WASHINGTON 

Jan. 19, 1796. 

Sir: 

The bearer of this letter is Doctor Bollman," whom 
you have heard of as having made an attempt for 
the relief of the Marquis La Fayette, which very 
nearly succeeded. The circumstances of this affair, 
as stated by Doctor Bollman and Mr. Huger,^ son of 
B. Huger, of South Carolina, deceased, who assisted, 
do real credit to the prudence, management, and 
enterprise of the doctor, and show that he is a man 
of sense and energy. 

He appears to have been induced to think that 
he attempted a service which would strongly recom- 
mend him to the favor of this country, in which idea 
I have reason to believe that Mr. Pinckney, among 
others, encouraged him, and, as a consequence of it, 
he hopes for some civil employment under our gov- 
ernment. His expectations of what he may begin 
with are not high, it being principally his object to 

' Eric Bollman, M.D., a Hanoverian by birth, concerned, as here 
stated, in the effort to liberate La Fayette. Banished for this, he came 
to the United States, and was a friend of Burr, and mixed up in his 
conspiracy, after which he returned to Europe. 

' Francis Kinloch Huger, whose father. Col. Benj. Huger, was killed 
in the war, at Charleston, in 1780. He returned after the affair at 
Olmutz and entered the army. He died in 1855, aged 81. 

Private Correspondence 143 

obtain some present provision in a way which may 
lead him, if he discovers talents, to some thing bet- 
ter. He appears to be a man of education, speaks 
several languages, converses sensibly, is of polite 
manners, and, I dare say, has the materials of future 
advancement. 

I have not left him unapprised of the difficulties in 
his way, but he concludes to go to Philadelphia to 
ascertain what is, or is not possible, relying at least 
on a kind reception from you. 

He brought me letters from Mr. and Mrs. Church, 
which speak handsomely of him. I believe they had 
a chief agency in promoting his undertaking. 

P. S. — The doctor is a German. 


New York, Feb. 25, 1796. 


The evening I had last the pleasure of seeing you, 
you asked my opinion whether any and what meas- 
ures might be taken with the Senate with reference 
to the treaty with Great Britain, in the event of its 
not arriving before the adjournment of the Legis- 
lature. 

I mentioned as a hasty thought, that I feared it 
would be impossible to detain them long in expecta- 
tion of a treaty not arrived, but that it might be 
advisable, immediately after the adjournment, to 
notify another meeting, as little distant as might be 
compatible with reasonable time of notice. 

144 Alexander Hamilton 

On reflection this opinion appears to me not to be 
well founded as to the last point. I fear the first 
part will be found true, and that the body would not 
upon casualty remain many days together after the 
expiration of the session. 

In place of the course which I at first mentioned 
I submit the following: 

'' That the Secretary of State write a letter to each 
member present and absent, announcing the expec- 
tation of the treaty, and that, when arrived, the 
Senate will be convened by a proclamation for a time 
not exceeding six weeks." 

The letter of the Secretary of State to be sent by 
land, and by water also, to the most remote mem- 
bers, and when the proclamation for convening the 
Senate issues, the same be done, upon special ex- 
presses for the land conveyance, and having ready 
some swift-sailing vessel for the water conveyance. 

With these precautions, I think six weeks' notice 
will be enough. 

The President cannot specially convene the Sen- 
ate without announcing that an extraordinary occa- 
sion exists. He had, when I left Philadelphia, no 
such advice of the treaty as would warrant the as- 
sertion, and even if he had, until it arrives there is 
a possibility of a miscarriage, which might prevent 
his having it ready to lay before the Senate at the 
time of meeting, if they should be convened upon 
contingency. These reflections have led to the 
change of opinion. 

Private Correspondence 145 

TO OLIVER WOLCOTT 

March, 1796. 

Dear Sir: 

Enclosed are tv^o letters which I will thank you 
to send on. I have just seen Livingston's motion 
concerning instructions,' etc. My first impression 
is that the propriety of a compliance with the call, 
if made, is extremely doubtful. But much careful 
thought on the subject is requisite. 

P. S. — I send you also a letter from Mrs. Church to 
Mr. Beaumete, which I will thank you to send to Mr. 
Talleyrand.'' 

TO WASHINGTON 

New York, March 7, 1796. 

Sir: 

I found young La Fayette here, and delivered him 

your letter, which much relieved him. I fancy you 
will see him on the first day of April. 

Mr. Livingston's motion in the House of Repre- 
sentatives concerning the production of papers, has 
attracted much attention. The opinion here of those 
who think, is that if the motion succeeds, it ought 
not to be complied with. Besides, that in a matter 
of such a nature the production of the papers cannot 
fail to start new and unpleasant game. It will be 
fatal to the negotiating power of the government if 

1 This was the demand for papers relating to the Jay treaty which 
caused so much discussion, and with which Washington finally decHned 
to comply. 

2 Reprinted from Administrations of Washington and Adams, i., 310. 

VOL. X.— 10. 

146 Alexander Hamilton 

it is to be a matter of course for a call of either House 
of Congress to bring forth all the communications, 
however confidential. 

It seems to me that some thing like the following 
answer by the President will be advisable : 

"A right in the House of Representatives to de- 
mand and have, as a matter of course, and without 
specification of any object, all communications re- 
specting negotiations with a foreign power, cannot 
be admitted without danger of much inconvenience. 
A discretion in the executive department how far and 
when to comply in such cases is essential to the due 
conduct of foreign negotiations and is essential to 
preserve the limits between the legislative and 
executive departments. The present call is alto- 
gether indefinite, and without any declared purpose. 
The Executive has no basis on which to judge of the 
propriety of a compliance with it, and cannot, there- 
fore, without forming a very dangerous precedent, 
comply. 

*' It does not occur that the view of the papers 
asked for can be relative to any purpose of the com- 
petency of the House of Representatives but that 
of an impeachment. In every case of a foreign 
treaty, the grounds for an impeachment must pri- 
marily be deduced from the nature of the instrument 
itself, and from nothing extrinsic. If at any time a 
treaty should present such grounds, and it shall have 
been so pronounced by the House of Representatives 
and a further inquiry shall be necessary to ascertain 
the culpable person, there being then a declared 
and ascertained object, the President would attend 

Private Correspondence 147 

with due respect to any application for necessary 
information." 

This is but a hasty and crude outline of what has 
struck me as an eligible course. For, while a too 
easy compliance will be mischievous, a too per- 
emptory and unqualified refusal might be liable to 
just criticism. 

TO WILLIAM SMITH' 

March lo, 1796. 

Dear Sir: 

I observe Madison brings the power of the House 
of Representatives in the case of the treaty into 
question. Is the agency of the House of Representa- 
tives on the subject deliberative or executive? On the 
sophism that the Legislature, and each branch of it, 
is essentially deliberative, and consequently must have 
discretion, will he, I presume, maintain the freedom 
of the House to concur or not. 

But the sophism is easily refuted. The Legisla- 
ture, and each branch of it, is deliberative, but with 
various restrictions; not with unlimited discretion. 
All the injunctions and restrictions of the Constitu- 
tion, for instance, abridge its deliberative faculty, 
and leave it quoad hoc, merely executive. Thus the 
constitution enjoins that there shall be a fixed allow- 
ance for the judges, which shall not be diminished. 
The Legislature cannot, therefore, deliberate whether 
they will make a permanent provision, and when the 
allowance is fixed, they cannot deliberate whether 
they will appropriate and pay the money. So far 

' William Smith, Member of Congress from South Carolina. 

148 Alexander Hamilton 

their deliberative faculty is abridged. The mode of 
raising and appropriating the money only remains 
matter of deliberation. 

So, likewise, the constitution says that the Presi- 
dent and Senate shall make treaties, and that these 
treaties shall be supreme laws. It is a contradiction 
to call a thing a law which is not binding. It fol- 
lows that by constitutional injunction the House of 
Representatives quoad the stipulations of treaties, 
as in the case cited, respecting the judges, are not 
deliberative, but merely executive, except as to the 
means of executing. 

Any other doctrine would vest the Legislature and 
each House with unlimited discretion, and destroy 
the very idea of a constitution limiting its discretion. 
The constitution would at once vanish. 

Besides, the legal power to refuse the execution of 
a law is a power to repeal it. Thus, the House of 
Representatives must, as to treaties, concentre in 
itself the whole legislative power, and undertake, 
without the Senate, to repeal a law. For the law is 
complete by the action of the President and Senate. 

Again. A treaty, which is a contract between 
nation and nation, abridges even the legislative dis- 
cretion of the whole Legislature by the moral obliga- 
tion of keeping its faith ; a fortiori, that of one branch. 
In theory, there is no method by which the obliga- 
tions of a treaty can be annulled but by mutual 
consent of the contracting parties, by ill-faith in one 
of them, or by a revolution of government, which is 
of a nature so to change the condition of parties as 
to render the treaty inapplicable. 

Private Correspondence 149 

TO RUFUS KING 

New York, March i6, 1796. 

My Dear Sir: 

I thank you for your letter of the . My 

opinion on the resolution when it first appeared was 
that the President should answer in substance as 
follows, viz.: 

'' That it could not be admitted as a right of course 
in the House of Representatives to call for and have 
papers in the Executive department, especially those 
relating to foreign negotiations, which frequently 
embrace confidential matters. That, under all the 
circumstances, upon so indefinite a call, without any 
declared specific object, he did not think it proper 
nor consistent with what he owed to a due separation 
of the respective powers to comply with the call. 
That if, in the course of the proceedings of the 
House, a question of their competency should arise, 
for which any of the papers in question might be 
necessary, an application made on that groimd 
would be considered with proper respect," etc. 

But after what has taken place in the discussion, if 
it can with propriety be got in as to form, I think a 
stand ought to be made by the President against the 
usurpation. The following propositions comprise an 
obvious ground. 

I. — The Constitution empowers the President, ^ ,!^f^ 
with the Senate, to make treaties. 

II. — A treaty is a perfected compact between two 
nations, obligatory on both. 

III. — That cannot be a perfect contract or treaty 
to the validity of which the concurrence of any other 

hiC^f 

150 Alexander Hamilton 

power in the State is constitutionally necessary. 
Again : 

IV. — The Constitution says a treaty is a law. 

V. — A law is an obligatory rule of action pre- 
scribed by the competent authority. But — 

VI. — That cannot be such a rule of action, or law, 
to the validity of which the assent of any other 
person is requisite. Again : 

VII. — The object of the legislative power is to pre- 
scribe a rule of action for our own nation, which 
includes foreigners coming among us. 

VIII. — The object of the treaty power is, by 
agreement, to settle a rule of action between two 
nations, binding on both. 

IX. — These objects are essentially different and, 
in a constitutional sense, cannot interfere. 

X. — The treaty power binding the will of the 
nation, must, within its constitutional limits, be 
paramount to the legislative power, which is that 
will; or, at least, the last law being a treaty must 
repeal an antecedent contrary law. And, 

XL — If the legislative power is competent to re- 
peal this law by a subsequent law, this must be the 
whole legislative power, by a solemn act in the forms 
of the Constitution, not one branch of the legislative 
power by disobeying the law. 

XII. — The foregoing construction reconciles the 
two powers, and assigns them distinguishable spheres 
of action; while 

XIII. — The other construction, that claiming that 
a right of assent is a sanction for the House of 
Representatives, destroys the treaty, making power- 

Private Correspondence 151 

less and negative two propositions in the Constitu- 
tion, to wit: I. That the President, with the Senate, 
is competent to make treaties. 2. That a treaty is 
a law. 

On these grounds, with the President's name a 
bulwark not to be shaken is erected. The propo- 
sitions, in my opinion, amount to irresistible demon- 
stration. 

TO WASHINGTON 

New York, March 24, 1796. 

Sir: 

I had the honor to receive yesterday your letter of 
the 2 2d. The course you suggest has some obvious 
advantages, and merits careful consideration. I am 
not, however, without fear that there are things in 
the instructions to Mr. Jay — which good policy, con- 
sidering the matter externally as well as internally ^ 
would render it inexpedient to communicate. This 
I shall ascertain to-day. A middle course is under 
consideration — that of not communicating the papers 
to the House, but of declaring that the Secretary of 
State is directed to permit them to be read by the 
members individually. But this is liable to a great 
part of the objections which militate against a full 
public disclosure. I throw it out, however, here, 
that you may be thinking of it, if it has not before 
occurred. In the course of this day, I shall endeavor 
to concentre my ideas, and prepare some thing, the 
premises of which may be in any event proper, 
admitting of the conclusion being modified and 
adapted to your eventual determination. 

152 Alexander Hamilton 


March 26, 1796. 


I perceive by the newspaper that the resolution has 
been carried. I have not been idle as far as my 
situation would permit, but it will not be in my 
power, as I had hoped, to send you what I am pre- 
paring by this day's post; the next will carry it. 
It does not, however, appear necessary that the 
Executive should be in a hurry. 

The final result, in my mind, for reasons I shall 
submit in my next, is that the papers ought all to 
be refused. I am persuaded that the communication 
of the instructions in particular would do harm to the 
President and to the government. 


March 28, 1796. 


I am mortified at not being able to send you 
by this post a certain draft. But the opinion that 
reasons ought to be given, and pretty fairly, has 
extended it to considerable length and a desire to 
make it accurate as to idea and expression keeps it 
still upon the anvil. But it is so far prepared that 
I can assure it by to-morrow's post. Delay is always 
unpleasant. But the case is delicate and important 
enough to justify it. 

I mentioned as my opinion, that the instructions to 
Mr. Jay, if published, would do harm. The truth, 
unfortunately, is that it is in general a crude mass, 
which will do no credit to the administration. This 

Private Correspondence 153 

was my impression of it at the time, but the deHcacy 
of attempting too much reformation in the work of 
another head of department, the hurry of the mo- 
ment, and a great confidence in the person to be sent, 
prevented my attempting that reformation. 

There are several particular points in it which 
would have a very ill effect to be published. 

I. — There is a part which seems to admit the idea 
that an adjustment might be made respecting the 
spoliations which should leave that matter finally to 
the ordinary course of the British courts. This is 
obscurely and ambiguously expressed, but the least 
color for such a construction would give occasion for 
infinite clamor. 

II. — The negotiator is expressly instructed to ac- 
cede to the entire abolition of alienism as to inheri- 
tances of land. You have seen what clamor has been 
made about the moderate modification of this idea 
in the treaty, and can thence judge what a load 
would fall on this part of the instructions. 

III. — He is instructed to enter into an article 
against the employment of privateers in war. This 
is manifestly against the policy of a cotmtry which 
has no navy in a treaty with a country which has a 
large navy. For it is chiefly by privateers that we 
could annoy the trade of Great Britain. Some would 
consider this as a philosophic whim; others as an 
intentional sacrifice of the interests of this coimtry 
to Great Britain. 

IV. — There are several parts which hold up the dis- 
reputable and disorganizing idea of not being able 
to restrain our own citizens. 

154 Alexander Hamilton 

V. — There are parts the publication of which, 
though proper to our own agent, would be a viola- 
tion of decorum towards Great Britain, after an 
amicable termination of the affair, and offensive be- 
cause contrary to the rules of friendly and respectful 
procedure. 

VI. — The instructions have too little point (in the 
spirit of the framer, who was in the habit of saying 
much and saying little), and would be censured as 
altogether deficient in firmness and spirit. 

On the whole, I have no doubt that the publication 
of these instructions would do harm to the Executive, 
and to the character and interest of the government. 

The draft will be so prepared as to admit of this 
conclusion. 

If the President concludes to send papers, they 
ought only to be the commissions y and Mr. Jay's 
correspondence, saying that these are all that it ap- 
pears to him for the public interest to send. 

But he may be then prepared for as much clamor 
as if he had sent none. It would be said that what 
was done showed that the principle had not been the 
obstacle — and that the instructions were withheld 
because they would not bea.r the light. Or, at most, 
only that part of the instructions should go which 
begins at these words, ''4. This enumeration pre- 
sents, generally, the objects which it is desirable to 
comprise in a commercial treaty," etc., to the end of 
the instructions. 

But after the fullest reflection I have been able to 
give the subject (though I perceive serious degrees of 
inconveniencies in the course), I entertain a final 

Private Correspondence 155 

opinion that it will be best, after the usurpation 
attempted by the House of Representatives, to send 
none, and to resist in totality. 

TO WASHINGTON 

March 29, 1796. 

Dear Sir: 

I wish the enclosed ' could have been sent in a more 
perfect state. But it was impossible. I hope, how- 
ever, it can be made out and may be useful. It 
required some time to say all that was proper in a 
more condensed form. In considering the course to 
be pursued by the President, it may be well he should 
be reminded, that the same description of men who 
call for the papers have heretofore maintained, that 
they were not bound by any communication in con- 
fidence, but were free afterwards to do as they 
pleased with papers sent themi.'' 


New York, April 2, 1796. 

Sir: 

The express is this morning gone off with your 
letter to young La Fayette. I foresaw when in 
Philadelphia a certain machination on the subject. 

I rejoice at the decision you have come to in regard 
to the papers. Whatever may happen, it is right 
in itself, will elevate the character of the President, 

1 Draft of an answer to the request of the House of Representatives 
for papers. See above, vol. viii., p. i6i. 

2 Reprinted from the History of the Republic, vi., 377. 

156 Alexander Hamilton 

and inspire confidence abroad. The contrary woiild 
have encouraged a spirit of usurpation, the bounds 
of which could not be foreseen. 

If there is time, I should like to have back the 
paper lately sent to correct, prune, guard, and 
strengthen — I have no copy. But of the expediency 
of this the circumstances on the spot will decide. 
There is great fitness in the message to the House. I 
see only one point the least vulnerable, the too direct 
notice of the debate in the House — which may be 
attacked as contrary to parliamentary usage. I hear 

the criticism here among the L s.' But this 

cannot be very material. 

TO RUFUS KING 

April 2, 1796. 

Thank you for yours of yesterday. I have no copy 
of the paper sent: the greatest part went in the 
original draft, though considerably reformed accord- 
ing to joint ideas, and somewhat strengthened by 
new thoughts. A letter I have received tells me 
that it came to hand after the ground which was 
acted upon had been formally considered and taken 
in council, and that it is referred for future use in the 
event of an expected criticism of the message. 

I have asked for it conditionally, to prune, correct, 
etc. If I get it you shall have a copy. But you 
must take care that there is no crossing of paths. 

' Livingstons. 

Private Correspondence 157 

TO WASHINGTON 

New York, April 9, 1796. 


It gives me great pleastire to have the opporttinity 
of announcing to you one whom I know to be in- 
teresting to you as a bearer (f this — Mr. Motier La 
Fayette. I allow myself to ii'iare, by anticipation, 
the satisfaction which the meeting will afford to 
all parties — the more, as I am persuaded, that time 
will confirm the favorable representation I have 
made of the person, and justify the interest you take 
in him. 

I have pleasure, also, in presenting to you Mr. 
Frestel, who accompanies him, and who more and 
more convinces me that he is entirely worthy of the 
charge reposed in him, and every way entitled to 
esteem. 


New York, April 15, 1796. 

My Dear Sir: 

A letter by yesterday's post from our friend Ames,' 
informed me that the majority (fifty-seven concur- 
ring) had resolved in a private meeting to refuse 
appropriation for the treaty. A most important 
crisis ensues. Great evils may result, unless good 
men play their card well and with promptitude and 
decision. For we must seize and carry along with us 
the public opinion, and loss of time may be loss of 
every thing. 

* Fisher Ames, of Massachusetts. 

158 Alexander Hamilton 

ji.^^ 

/ ^ \^ \ To me our true plan appears to be the following (I 
• 0>^ ' pre-suppose that a certain commtmication has been 

\^ made) : 

I St. The President ought, immediately after the 
House has taken the ground of refusal, to send them 
a solemn protest. This protest ought to contain 
reasons in detail against the claim of the House in 
point of constitutional right, and ought to suggest 
summarily, but with solemnity and energy, the 
danger to the interest and peace of the country from 
the measures of the House, the certainty of a deep 
wound to our character with foreign nations, and 
essential destruction of their confidence in the gov- 
ernment, concluding with an intimation that in such 
a state of things he must experience extreme em- 
barrassment in proceeding in any pending or future 
negotiations which the affairs of the United States 
may require, inasmuch as he cannot look for due 
confidence from others, nor give them the requisite 
expectation that stipulations will be fulfilled on our 
part. 
/^ A copy of this protest to be sent to the Senate 
for their information. The Senate, by resolutions to 
express strongly their approbation of his principles, 
to assure him of their firm support, and to advise him 
to proceed in the execution of the treaty on his part 
in the confidence that he will derive from the virtue 
•^and good sense of the people, constitutionally exerted, 
eventual and effectual support, and may still be the 
instrument of preserving the Constitution, the peace, 
and the honor of the nation. / 

Then the merchants to meet in the city, and 

Private Correspondence 159 

second by their resolutions the measures of the 
President and Senate, further addressing their fellow- 
citizens to co-operate with them. Petitions after- 
wards to be handed throughout the United States. 

The Senate to hold fast, and consent to no ad- 
journment till the expiration of the term of service 
of the present House, unless provision made. 

The President to cause a confidential communi- 
cation to be made to the British minister, stating 
candidly what has happened, his regrets, his adher- 
ence nevertheless to the treaty, his resolution to 
persist in the execution, as far as depends on the 
Executive, and his hope that the faith of the coun- 
try will be eventually preserved. 

I prefer that measures should begin with a protest 
of the President, as it will be in itself proper, and 
there will be more chance of success if the contest 
appears to be with him and the Senate auxiliaries 
than in the reverse. 

But in all this business, celerity, decision, and an 
imposing attitude are indispensable. The glory of 
the President, the safety of the Constitution — the 
greatest interests — depend upon it. Nothing will be 
wanting here.. I do not write to the President on 
the subject. 

An idea has come from Cooper of an intention in 
our friends in the House of Representatives to resist 
the execution of the other treaties — the Spanish and 
Algerine — unless coupled with the British. But this 
will be altogether wrong and impolitic. The mis- 
conduct of the other party cannot justify in us an 
imitation of their principles. 'T is best, I think, that 

i6o Alexander Hamilton 

the first course should be given to the other treaties. 
Or at most, if a feint of opposition is deemed advis- 
able, it ought to be left to the Senate by postpone- 
ment, etc. But even this is very delicate and very 
questionable. 

Let us be right, because to do right is intrinsically 
proper, and I verily believe it is the best means of 
securing final success. Let our adversaries have the 
whole glory of sacrificing the interests of the nation. 

P. S. — If the treaty is not executed, the President 
will be called upon, by regard to his character and 
the public good, to keep his post till another House 
of Representatives has pronounced. 

TO RUFUS KING 

New York, April i8, 1796. 

Dear Sir: 

I thank you for your letter received to-day. Our 
I merchants here are not less alarmed than those of 
''(Philadelphia, and will do all they can. All the in- 
surance people meet to-day. The merchants and 
traders will meet to-morrow or the next day. A 
petition will.be prepared and circulated among the 
other citizens. 

I regret that a certain communication was not 
|^^,\ made. Indeed, I think that the Executive will be 
hereafter blamed for keeping back the fact in so 
critical a posture of things. 

Private Correspondence i6i 


April 20, 1796. 


Yesterday's post brought me a letter from you, 
which gave me pleasure. The papers will apprise 
you of the proceedings of the merchants and traders 
here on yesterday. There is among them, also, 
'' w;^exampled unanimity," and, as far as I can 
judge, the current is in our favor throughout the 
city. Persons to-day are going through the different 
wards. 

P. S. — Our friends in the House will do well to gain 
time. 

TO OLIVER WOLCOTT 

New York, April 20, 1796. 


I have received your letter of the eighteenth in- 
stant. The money paid me for you shall be placed 
to your credit in the office of discoimt and deposit, 
as you desire. 

The British ministry are as great fools or as great ' , 

rascals as our Jacobins, else our commerce would not ^^^'}L 
continue to be distressed as it is by their cruisers; 
nor would the Executive be embarrassed as it now 
n is by the new proposition. \ 

Not knowing the precise form of that proposition, 
I cannot have an opinion what is right on the part 
of the Executive. But, if I understand it, it ought to 
be sufficient for the Executive to declare that the 
article in the treaty with the Indians can never 

VOL. X.— H. 

[^^ 

162 Alexander Hamilton 

operate, nor will be permitted to operate, in contra- 
vention with the treaty of Great Britain. It relates 
to a right reserved for our benefit, which we can and 
will waive; and, being in a treaty of subsequent 
date, it naturally gives way to another of prior date, 
with which it is consistent. The Executive ought to 
be careful about admitting the propriety of a new 
condition, though it ought to be ready to give all due 
satisfaction. It should not even shun a new ex- 
planatory article, if reasonable in itself, but should 
agree to it upon the strength of its own reasonable- 
ness, not as a new condition foreign to the treaty. 
This affair requires great caution; but, as I said, I 
do not know enough to give advice worth much. 

Yet the government must take care not to appear 
pusillanimous. I hope a very serious remonstrance 
has long since gone against the wanton impressment 
of our seamen. It will be an error to be too tame 
with this overbearing Cabinet. 

Our city is in motion against the plan of the 
majority in the House of Representatives with regard 
to the treaty. The current appears to be strong 
with us. The papers will tell you the measures in 
contemplation. 

But I was sorry to learn that a proper qualified 
communication was made to the House of Repre- 
sentatives of the late communication from the 
British agent. The Executive may hereafter be 
blamed for withholding so important a fact; yet, not 
knowing the whole affair, I cannot judge well on this 
point more than on the other. 

Private Correspondence 163 

TO RUFUS KING 

April 23, 1796. 

Dear Sir: 

I have received your two letters, and shall this day 
attend to the one which requires it. I see, however, 
no objection to it as it stands, and I do not now per- 
ceive how the further object you aim at could be 
accomplished in the manner you seem to desire. 

I have written to Ames this day concerning the 
course of things in our city. He will communicate to 
you, as I have not time to repeat. We are decidedly 
well. But it is intended to-day to continue the 
petition in circulation, and to-morrow it will be sent. 
I have thought it advisable to publish an extract 
from your letter without naming you. 


May 4, 1796. 


Since my last I have received two or three letters 
from you. The late turn of the treaty question makes 
us all very happy. I hope no future embarrassment 
will arise. 

I am entirely of opinion that, Patrick Henry de- 
clining, Mr. Pinckney ^ ought to be our man. It is 
even an idea of which I am fond in various lights. 
Indeed, on latter reflection, I rather wish to be rid of 
Patrick Henry, that we may be at full liberty to take 
up Pinckney. 

I Thomas Pinckney, of South Carolina. He was Minister to Eng- 
land, and had just concluded a treaty with Spain, securing the free 
navigation of the Mississippi. 

164 Alexander Hamilton 

In the event of Pinckney's return to this country, I 
am of opinion, all circumstances considered, it is 
expedient you should replace him. I hope no great 
question will in a short period agitate our councils, 
and I am sure you will do much good on the scene in 
question. I have called on Jay, but happened not 
to find him disengaged. I shall quickly see him, and 
shall, with great pleasure, do every thing requisite 
on my part. 

We believe, confidently, our election in the city 
has succeeded ; the other party, however, also claims 
success. Our Senator ticket seems admitted on both 
sides to have prevailed, and all accounts assure us of 
great success throughout the State. The vile affair 
of whipping Burke and McCredy made our election, 
in the view of the common people, a question be- 
tween the rich and the poor. You will easily con- 
ceive how much this must have embarrassed and 
jeoparded. 

TO TIMOTHY PICKERING 

May 10, 1796. 

Dear Sir: 

Inclosed is a letter which I will thank you to hand 
to its destination. 

While I have my pen in my hand, give me leave to 
mention a particular subject to you. Mr. Pinckney, 
it is said, desires to return to the United States. In 
this case a successor will be wanted. If we had 
power to make a man for the purpose, we could not 
imagine a fitter than Mr. King.' He is tired of the 

I Rufus King, who was appointed and accepted. 

Private Correspondence 165 

Senate, and I fear will resign at all events. I pre- 
stime he would accept the mission to England. Can 
there be a doubt that it will be wise to offer it to 
him?^ 

TO WASHINGTON 

New York, May 20, 1796. 

Sir: 

A belief that the occasion to which they may be 
applicable is not likely to occur, whatever may have 
been once intended, or pretended in terrorem, has 
delayed the following observations in compliance 
with your desire, and which are now the result of 
conferences with the gentlemen you named. 

The precise form of any proposition ox demand 

' Now first printed from the Pickering papers in possession of the 
Massachusetts Historical Society. 

2 "Copied from Writings of Washington. Whether it is an extract 
from, or the entire letter, is unknown to the editor." (Note by J. C. 
Hamilton.) The paper referred to is the "Farewell Address." 

New York, May lo, 1796. 


When last in Philadelphia you mentioned to me -vv^/*^ 
your wish that I should re-dress a certain paper which 
you had prepared. As it is important that a thing 
of this kind should be done with great care, and 
much at leisure, touched and re-touched, I submit a 
wish that as soon as you have given it the body you 
mean it to have, it may be sent to me. ' 

1 66 Alexander Hamilton 

which may be made to or of the government, must so 
materially influence the course proper to be pursued 
with regard to such proposition or demand, that it is 
very difficult to judge by anticipation what would 
be fit and right. The suggestions which can be sub- 
mitted must therefore be very general and liable to 
much modification, according to circumstances. 

It wotild seem in almost any case advisable to put 
forward a calm exhibition of the views by which our 
government has been influenced in relation to the 
present war of Europe, — making prominent the great 
interest we have in peace, in our present infant state; 
the limitedness of our capacity for external effort; 
the much greater injury we should have suffered than 
good we could have done to France, by taking an 
active part with her ; the probability that she would 
have derived more advantage from our neutrality 
than from our direct aid; the promptitude with 
which, while all the world was combined against her, 
we recognized the new order of things and the con- 
tinuance of our treaties, and before any other power 
had done so; the danger to which we exposed our- 
selves in so doing; the fidelity with which we have 
adhered to our treaties, notwithstanding formal vio- 
lations of certain parts of them on the other side; 
our readiness, to the utmost extent of our abilities, to 
discharge our debt without hesitation in the earliest 
period of the revolution, and latterly having facilitated 
an anticipated enjoyment of the balance; the zeal 
and confidence of our merchants, by which they are 
now creditors for very large sums to France; the 
patience with which we have seen infractions of our 

Private Correspondence 167 

rights ; the pecuHar nature of the war as it regarded 
the origin of our relations to France (quare ?) ; the 
declaration of the war by France against the mari- 
time powers ; her incapacity for maritime effort and 
to supply our deficiency in that particular so as to 
render a war not absolutely ruinous to us ; the early 
expectations given to us by her agents that we were 
not expected to become parties ; the exposed state of 
our commerce at this time with an immense property 
of our merchants afloat, relying on the neutral plan 
which they have imderstood our government to be 
pursuing, even with the concurrence of France, at 
least without its opposition; the extreme mischiefs 
to us of a sudden departure from the plan, and the 
little advantage to France from our aid; the merely 
peace views which influenced our treaty with Great 
Britain; the nature of that treaty involved no in- 
gredient of political connection reserving the obliga- 
tion of our prior treaties; the commercial articles 
terminating in two years after the present war; no- 
thing in it to change the nature of our relations with 
France. All this will, of course, require great caution 
and delicacy, so as not to compromise the dignity of 
the country or give umbrage elsewhere, and I think 
the observations ought to hold out the idea that, 
under all the circumstances of the case, the govern- 
ment of the coimtry thought itself at full liberty 
consistently with its treaties with France, to pursue 
a neutral plan. And they ought to hold up strongly 
our desire to maintain friendship with France; our 
regret that any circumstance of dissatisfaction 
should occur; our hope that justice and reason will 

1 68 Alexander Hamilton 

prevail, and preserve the good understanding, etc. 
The conclusion of this preliminary exposition will be 
according to the nature of the proposition. 

If it should claim a renunciation of the British 
treaty, the answer will naturally be that this sacrifice 
of the positive and recent engagements of the country 
is pregnant with consequences too humiliating and 
injurious to allow us to believe that the expectation 
can be persisted in by France, since it is to require a 
thing impossible, and to establish, as a price of the 
continuance of friendship with us, the sacrifice of 
our honor by an act of perfidy which would destroy 
the value of our friendship to any nation. That, 
besides, the Executive, if it were capable of comply- 
ing with a demand so fatal to us, is not competent to 
it, it being the province of Congress, by a declaration 
of war, or otherwise, in the proper cases, to annul the 
operation of treaties. 

If it should claim the abandonment of the articles 
of the present treaty respecting free ships, free goods, 
etc., the answer may be that our treaties with France 
are an entire work, parts of a whole ; that neverthe- 
less the Executive is disposed to enter into a new 
negotiation by a new treaty to modify them, so as 
may consist with a due regard to mutual interest 
and the circumstances of parties, and may even tend 
to strengthen the relations of friendship and good 
understanding between the two countries. 

If the guaranty of the West Indies should be 
claimed, the answer may be, ''that the decision of 
this question belongs to Congress, who, if it be de- 
sired, will be convened to deliberate upon it. " I pre- 

Private Correspondence 169 

sume and hope they will have adjourned — for to gain 
time is every thing. 

The foregoing marks the general course of our 
reflections. They are sketched hastily, because they 
can only be general ideas, and much will depend on 
minute circumstances. 

I observe what you say on the subject of a certain 
diplomatic mission. Permit me to offer with frank- 
ness the reflections which have struck my mind. 

The importance of our security, and commerce, 
and good understanding with Great Britain, renders 
it very important that a man able and not disagreeable 
to that government, should be there. The gentle- 
man in question, equally with any who could go, and 
better than any willing to go, answers this descrip- 
tion. The idea hinted in your letter will apply to 
every man fit for the mission, by his conspicuousness, 
talents, and dispositions. 'T is the stalking-horse of 
a certain party, and is made use of against every man 
who is not in their views and of sufficient consequence 
to attract their obloquy. If listened to, it will de- 
prive the government of the services of the most able 
and faithful agents. Is this expedient? What will 
be gained by it? Is it not evident that this party 
will pursue its hostility at all events as far as public 
opinion will permit? Does policy require any thing 
more than that they shall have no real cause to com- 
plain? Will it do, in deference to their caliimniating 
insinuations, to forbear employing the most compe- 
tent men, or to entrust the great business of the 
country to imskilful, unfaithful, or doubtful hands? I 
really feel a conviction that it will be very dangerous 

170 Alexander Hamilton 

to let party insinuations of this kind prove a serious 
obstacle to the employment of the best qualified 
characters. Mr. King is a remarkably well-informed 
man, a very judicious one, a man of address, a man 
of fortune and economy, whose situation affords just 
ground of confidence ; — a man of unimpeached prob- 
ity where he is best known, a firm friend to the gov- 
ernment, a supporter of the measures of the President 
— a man who cannot but feel that he has strong pre- 
tensions to confidence and trust. 

I might enlarge on these topics, but I have not 
leisure, neither can it be necessary. I have thrown 
out so much in the fulness of my heart, and too much 
in a hurry to fashion either the idea or the expression 
as it ought to be. The President, however, will, I 
doubt not, receive what I have said — as it is meant, 
as dictated by equal regard to the public interest and 
to the honorable course of his administration. 

TO OLIVER WOLCOTT 

May 30, 1796. 

Dear Sir: 

I perceive Congress are invading the Sinking Fund 
system. If this goes through, and is sanctioned by the 
President, the fabric of public credit is prostrate, and 
the country and the President are disgraced. Treas- 
ury bills, and every expedient, however costly, to 
meet exigencies, must be preferable, in the event, to 
such an overthrow of system. 

Private Correspondence 171 

TO JAMES McHENRY ' 

New York, June i, 1796. 

My Dear Mc: 

I am told the Executive Directory have com- 
plained of Mr. , our consul at . Perhaps 

the complaint may be ill-founded, but perhaps 
also he was indiscreet in giving color for it. Admit 
too that he is a good man, yet we must not quarrel 
with France for pins and needles. The public temper 
would not bear any iimbrage taken, where a trifling 
concession might have averted it. 'T is a case for 
temporizing, reserving our firmness for great and 

necessary occasions. Let Mr. be superseded 

with a kind letter to him. I do not write to Picker- 
ing, or the President, because I am not regularly 
possessed of the information, but I hope you will 
attend to the matter, even at the expense of being a 
little officious. 

TO WASHINGTON 

New York, Jirne i, 1796. 

Sir: 

Your letter of the 29th was delivered me by Mr. 
King yesterday afternoon. I thought I had acknow- 
ledged the receipt of the paper inquired for in a letter 
written speedily after it — or in one which transmitted 
you a draft of a certain letter by Mr. Jay. I hope this 
came to hand. 

I am almost afraid to appear officious in what I am 
going to say; but the matter presses so deeply on my 

' James McHenry, of Maryland, Secretary of War. 

172 Alexander Hamilton 

mind, that fearing you may not recollect the situa- 
tion of the thing, and that it may happen not to be 
brought fully under your eye, I cannot refrain from 
making the suggestion to you. It regards a bill 
which, I am told, has lately passed the two Houses 
of Congress, authorizing a sale of bank stock, for 
paying off a sum due to the bank. You will perceive 
by the 8th and 9th sections of the act entitled, *'An 
Act making further provision for the support of the 
public credit," and for the redemption of the public 
debt, passed the 3d of March, 1795, ^^^^ "tl^^ dividends 
of the bank stock are appropriated to the sinking 
fund, with all the force and solemnity of which the 
language is capable, and that to divert them in the 
manner proposed (and this too without any substi- 
tute in the act which so diverts) will be a formal, 
express, and unequivocal violation of the public 
faith, will subvert the system of the sinking fimd, 
and with it all the security which is meant to be 
given to the people for the redemption of the public 
debt, and, violating the sanctity of an appropriation 
for the public debt, will overturn at once the founda- 
tion of the public credit. These are obvious and un- 
deniable consequences ; and though I am aware that 
great embarrassments may ensue to the Treasury if 
the bill by the objection of the President is lost, 
and no substitute for it takes place towards the 
reimbursement of the bank; yet I am sure no 
consequences can ensue of equal moment from the 
rejection as from the principle of the bill going into 
execution. 

All the President's administration has effected for 

Private Correspondence 173 

establishing the credit of the country will be pros- 
trate at a single blow. He will readily make all 
necessary comments upon this position. It grieves 
my heart to see so much shocking levity in our 
representative body. 

TO OLIVER WOLCOTT 

New York, June 9, 1796. 

Dear Sir: 

I called at your house the morning of my depart- 
ure, but you were not then up. While I was in the 
city, we had a little conversation concerning an affair 
of an arrangement with Swan ' for effecting a remit- 
tance to Holland. I intended to resume it for two 
reasons : one, because it has been represented to the 
disadvantage of the conduct of the Treasury; an- 
other because Swan, who lodged at the same house 
with me, begged me to converse with you on the 
subject, and give my opinion both to you and him of 
what I thought of the matter. The latter I should 
of course have managed with due regard to all 
prudential considerations. 

But I wished chiefly to apprise you that it is in- 
dustriously circulated that Monroe and Skip with, as 

^ Colonel James Swan, of Boston. He had a most romantic and 
adventurous life, beginning as one of the Boston Tea-Party, and a 
soldier of the Revolution. In 1787, he went to Paris a bankrupt, where 
he speculated successfully, and whence he returned with a fort line in 
1795. He went back to Europe in 1798, engaged in still larger enter- 
prises, and failed. At the suit of a creditor he was thrown into Ste. 
Pelagic in 181 5, and remained there fifteen years, litigating constantly 
in French courts. He died in 1831. 

174 Alexander Hamilton 

agents for the Treasury y received Swan's money at 
Paris to remit to Holland, that they mismanaged the 
ftind, produced, besides, delay and loss, and that the 
Treasury now endeavors to turn the loss on Swan. 
If you have not been apprised of this, it is requisite 
you should be.' 


June IS, 1796. 


The post of to-day brought me a letter from you. 
From some recent information which I have ob- 
tained here, I have scarcely any doubt that the plan 
of the French is — 

Firstly, — To take all enemy property in our ships 
contrary to the treaty between the two countries. 

Secondly. — To seize and carry in all our vessels 
laden with provisions for any English port. 

Among this, all that they choose to think enemy 
property will be seized, and for the residue they wiU 
promise to pay. 

This state of things is extremely serious. The 
government must play a skilful card, or all is lost. 
No doubt an explanation has been asked of Mr. Adet. 
There is room enough for asking it, and the result, 
if explanatory, ought, in some convenient way, to be 
made known. 

Moreover, the government must immediately set 
in earnest about averting the storm. To this end, a 
person must be sent in place of Monroe. General 

' Now first printed from the Wolcott papers in the possession of the 
Connecticut Historical Society. 

Private Correspondence 175 

Pinckney, John Marshall, Mr. Desaussure, of South 
Carolina, young Washington, the lawyer, McHenry, 
Secretary at War, Judge Peters, occur as eligible in 
different degrees, either of them far preferable to 
Monroe. It may be understood that the appoint- 
ment is permanent or temporary, at the choice of the 
person sent. Under this idea, perhaps Pinckney 
may be prevailed upon, perhaps Marshall, it being 
well urged as a matter of great importance to the 
cotmtry. 

I mentioned to Colonel Pickering an idea, which 
has since dwelt powerfully on my mind. Mr. King 
ought not to be empowered to do any thing to 
prolong the treaty beyond the two years after the 
war. This will afford the government a strong 
argument. I earnestly hope this idea will prevail in 
the instructions. 

P. S, — After turning the thing over and over in 
my mind, I know of nothing better that you have in 
your power than to send McHenry. He is not yet 
obnoxious to the French, and has been understood 
formerly to have had some kindness towards their 
revolution. His present office would give a sort of 
importance to the mission. If he should incline to 
an absolute relinquishment, his mission might be 
temporary, and Colonel Pickering could carry on his 
office in his absence. He is at hand, and might de- 
part immediately, and I believe he would explain 
very well, and do no foolish thing. Though unusual, 
perhaps it might be expedient for the President to 
write, himself, a letter to the Executive Directory, 

176 Alexander Hamilton 

explaining the policy by which he has been governed, 
and assuring of the friendship. But this would 
merit great consideration. Our measures, however, 
should be prompt. 

Sometimes I think of sending Pinckney, who is 
in England; but various uncertainties and possible 
delays deter one from this plan. 

Remember always, as a primary motive of action, 
that the favorable opinion of our country is to be 
secured. 

A frigate or two to serve as convoys would not be 
amiss. If the English had been wise, they would 
neither have harassed our trade themselves, nor suf- 
fered their trade with us to be harassed. They 
would see this a happy moment for conciliating us 
by a clever little squadron in our ports and on our 
coast. 

A hint might not perhaps do harm. 

TO OLIVER WOLCOTT 

June 16, 1796. 

Dear Sir: 
) It appears to me material, under our present pro- 
spects, to complete three frigates without delay. 
They may be useful with reference to the Algerines. 
They may be useful to convoy our vessels out of the 
reach of picaroon privateers hovering on our coast. 
I know you want money; but could not the mer- 
chants, by secret movements, be put in motion to 
make you a loan? I think some thing of this kind 
may be done here, and I should presume at Phila- 
delphia, etc. The sole ostensible object may be the 

Private Correspondence 177 

Algerines, but the second object may circulate in 
whispers. If you conclude on any thing, I will 
second you. 

Perhaps no bad form of the thing may be to place 
in the hands of your agents for building, Treasury 
bills from one hundred to one thousand dollars, pay- 
able in a year with interest ; and to let it be known 
among the merchants that they are lodged exclu- 
sively to facilitate the equipment of the ships. But 
a more direct operation may be attempted, and I 
should hope with success, for the sum you may 
want for the frigates. 

TO WASHINGTON 

Jime, 1796. 

Sir: 

I have received information this morning of a na- 
ture which, I think, you ought to receive without 
delay. A Mr. Le Guen,' a Frenchman — a client of 
mine, and in whom I have inspired confidence, and 
who is apparently a discreet and decent man — called 
on me this morning to consult me on the expediency 
of his becoming naturalized, in order that certain 
events between France and the United States might 
not prejudice him in a suit which I am directed to 
bring for him for a value of 160,000 dollars. I asked 

^ Louis Le Guen brought suit to recover money for goods sold by his 
factors, a Jewish house in New York. The first verdict was for the 
factors and was set aside. The verdict on the new trial was for 
Le Guen for $120,000, and this was affirmed in the Court of Errors 
(February, 1800) after a great argument by Hamilton. The case was 
a famous one. Gouvemeur Morris appeared for the factors and Burr 
was associated with Hamilton. 

VOL. X.— 12. 

178 Alexander Hamilton 

him what the events to which he alluded were. He 
made me the following reply under the strictest in- 
junctions of confidence : '* I have seen a letter from St. 
Thomas to Mr. Labagarde of this city, informing him 
that a plan was adopted to seize all American vessels 
carrying to any English port provisions of any kind, 
to conduct them into some French port ; if found to 
be British property, to condemn them; if American, 
to take them on the accountability of the government ; 
adding that he must not thence infer that it was the 
intention to make war upon the United States, but 
it was with a view to retaliate the conduct of Great 
Britain, to keep supplies from her, and to obtain 
them for themselves, and was also bottomed on 
some political motives not necessary to be explained. " 
"That it was also in contemplation when Admiral 
Richery arrived, if the ships could be spared, to send 
five sail of the line to this country." Fearing, he 
said, that this might produce a rupture between the 
two countries, he had called to consult me on the 
subject, etc. 

I asked his permission to make the communica- 
tion to you. He gave me leave to do it, but with 
the absolute condition that the knowledge of names 
was on no account to go beyond you and myself. I 
must therefore request, sir, that this condition be 
exactly observed. He has promised me further in- 
formation. 

I believe the information, as well because the 
source of it under all the circumstances engages my 
confidence, as because the thing appears in itself 
probable. France wants supplies, and she has not 

Private Correspondence 179 

the means of paying, and our merchants have done 
crediting. 

It becomes very material that the real situation 
should as soon as possible be ascertained, and that 
the merchants should know on what they have to 
depend. They expect that the government will ask 
an explanation of Mr. Adet, and that in some proper 
way the result will be made known. 

It seems to become more and more urgent that the 
United States should have some faithful organ near 
the French government to explain their real views 
and ascertain those of the French. It is all important 
that the people should be satisfied that the govern- 
ment has made every exertion to avert a rupture, and 
as early as possible. 

TO OLIVER WOLCOTT 

June 26, 1796. 

Dear Sir: 

I learn from a gentleman of character, that a prize, 
brought into Boston by a French privateer, is about 
to be sold. This being in direct breach of our treaty 
with Great Britain, how does it happen? Though 
no particular law passed, the treaty being the law of 
the land, our custom-houses can, and ought to, pre- 
vent the entry and sale of prizes, upon Executive in- 
struction. If any thing is wanting to this end, for 
God's sake, my dear sir, let it be done, and let us not 
be disgraced. 
R ^/ Considering what is going on, and may go on, in 
the West Indies, it appears to me essential that the 

i8o Alexander Hamilton 

President should be empowered to lay embargoes in 
the interval between the present and the next ses- 
sion of Congress. 

TO WASHINGTON 

Jtily s, 1796. 


I was in due time favored with your letter of the 
26th June, and consulted the gentleman you named 
on the subject of it. We are both of opinion there is 
no power in the President to appoint an envoy ex- 
traordinary, without the concurrence of the Senate, 
and that the information in question is not a suffi- 
cient ground for extraordinary convening the Senate. 
If, however, the President from his information col- 
lectively be convinced that a dangerous state of 
things exists between us and France, and that an 
envoy extraordinary to avert the danger is a neces- 
sary measure, I believe this would, in the sense of the 
Constitution, warrant the calling of the Senate for the 
purpose. But this measure may be questionable in 
point of expediency, as giving a stronger appearance 
of danger than facts warrant. If further depreda- 
tions on our commerce take place, if new revivals of 
the principle of the last capture should appear, it 
may alter the case. But without some thing more 
the measure would scarcely seem advisable. Mr. 
Jay and myself, though somewhat out of your ques- 
tion, talked of the expediency of removing Monroe, 
and though we perceive there are weighty reasons 
against it, we think those for it preponderate, if a 
proper man can be found. But here we feel, both 

Private Correspondence i8i 

immense embarrassment, for he ought to be at the 
same time a friend to the government and understood 
to be not unfriendly to the French Revolution. 
General Pinckney is the only man we can think of 
who fully satisfies the idea, and unfortunately every 
past experiment forbids the hope that he would ac- 
cept, though but for a short time. But if a character 
of tolerable fitness can be thought of, it would seem 
expedient to send him. At any rate, it is to be 
feared, if under the symptoms of discontent which 
have appeared on the part of the French govern- 
ment, no actual and full explanation takes place, it 
will bring serious censure upon the Executive. It 
will be said that it did not display as much zeal to 
avoid misunderstanding with France as with Great 
Britain; that discontents were left to rankle; that 
if the agent of the government in France was negli- 
gent or unfaithful, some other mode ought to have 
been found. 

As to your resignation, sir, it is not to be regretted 
that the declaration of your intention should be sus- 
pended as long as possible, and suffer me to add that 
you should really hold the thing undecided to the 
last moment. I do not think it is in the power of 
party to throw any slur upon the lateness of your 
declaration. And you have an obvious justification 
in the state of things. If a storm gathers, how can 
you retreat? This is a most serious question. The 
proper period now for your declaration seems to be 
two months before the time for the meeting of the 
electors. This will be sufficient. The parties will 
in the meantime electioneer conditionally, that is to 

1 82 Alexander Hamilton 

say, if you decline; for a serious opposition to you 
will, I think, hardly be risked. I have completed the 
first draft (his own draft) of a certain paper, and 
shall shortly transcribe, correct, and forward it. I 
will then also prepare and send forward, without 
delay, the original paper (Washington's draft), cor- 
rected upon the general plan of it, so that you may 
have both before you for a choice in full time, and 
for alteration if necessary.^ 

TO OLIVER WOLCOTT 

Jtdy 7, 1796. 

Dear Sir: 

I have had some conversation with some influen- 
tial members of the Bank of New York, who are dis- 
posed to do all that shall be found possible. But I 
wish to know without exaggeration the least sum 
that will be a material relief to you, and when and 
how the payments will be desired.^ 

TO ELIAS BOUDINOT 

July 7, 1796. 

My Dear Sir: 

You will oblige me by letting me have an extract 
from that part of your mortgage law in New Jei;sey 
which regulates the mode of cancelling mortgages; 
also an extract from the registering book of the 
usual manner in which entries for cancelling were 
made about the years 1771, 1772, and 1773, and by 

' Reprinted from the History of the Republic, ii., 468, 522. 
2 Now first printed from the Wolcott papers in the possession of the 
Connecticut Historical Society. 

Private Correspondence 183 

inforraing me whether these entries have been ad- 
judged conclusive — though the order or certificate 
of the mortgage is not to be found, the mortgage 
money not paid, and the fact should appear that the 
entry was a fraudulent act of the registering officer. 

Excuse the trouble I give you, and use me freely 
in a like case. 

How are your election prospects? Do not let the 
discontent with Dayton ' hazard the main point. 'T 
is better by a coalition with him to secure that, though 
you make some sacrifice of opinion, than to produce 
a dangerous schism. 

Our affairs are critical, and we must be dispassion- 
ate and v/ise. 

TO OLIVER WOLCOTT 

July IS, 1796. 

Dear Sir: 

The application for a loan from the Bank of New 
York, though powerfully supported by some of the 
leading directors, labors, owing to the jealousy and 
narrowness of certain ones, who see in it a plan to 
increase the active capital of the Branch Bank, and 
put them in its power. Unluckily, the President 
suddenly went off to Rhode Island with his wife and 
some sick children. I pursue the affair, and I hope 
still to accomplish it. 

There will be no difficulty in obtaining a postpone- 
ment of the existing loan. But this I tell them will 
not be sufficient.'' 

^ Jonathan Dayton, of New Jersey, 

2 Now first printed from the Wolcott papers in the possession of the 
Connecticut Historical Society. 

184 Alexander Hamilton 

TO TIMOTHY PICKERING 

July 21, 1796. 


I communicated your letter to Mr. Jay, and now 
give you our joint sense. 

Considering the nature of the transaction and 
what must necessarily have been presumed to be 
the intent, and that the authority is on a public sub- 
ject, and between two nations, we think that a de- 
cision by two out of three commissioners must be 
sufficient. 

We know nothing but an immediate personal in- 
terest in property which may be affected by the 
decision, that can be a conclusive objection to the 
person nominated — but this interest must be known, 
not suspected. The rest must be matter of nego- 
tiation. In point of property, neither government 
ought to name a person liable from local situation to 
the suspicion of particular interest or bias. But one 
cannot formally object to the nomination of the other 
on this general gro\md. 

Declarations like those ascribed to Mr. Barkely, 
if well authenticated and unequivocal, importing 
clearly that he thought himself at liberty to gain 
advantages, and bound not to act impartially, would 
justify the government in stopping, and represent- 
ing the matter to the British Government. But we 
ought to act with great caution not to give occasion 
to impute to us a spirit of procrastination or subter- 
fuge. 'T is so much more important that the dis- 
pute should be settled than how it is settled (at least 
according to my idea of the object) ; that we should 

Private Correspondence 185 

by no means seek for difficulties, but rather facilitate 
than impede.' 

TO OLIVER WOLCOTT 

July 28, 1796. 

Dear Sir: 

I have not lost sight of the negotiation with the 
bank, though it labors, and I have thought it best 
to let it lie by till the President returns. Mr. Mc- 
Cormick is violent against it, and plays on little 
jealousies and, what is still more efficacious, private 
interests, representing the consequent inability of 
the bank to accommodate the merchants, many of 
whom, from the tmfortunate issue of some recent 
speculations, are likely to want much aid,"" 


July 30, 1796. 


1 have written you a short line previous to the 
receipt of your letter of the 26th, to which, indeed, I 
can add nothing material. 

It will, as things stand, be imprudent to push the 
point of a further loan till the President arrives — 
for, though a majority of the directors are well dis- 
posed to the thing, they are afraid of Mr. McCor- 
mick's clamors and want the sanction of the President 
to control and counterbalance him. All, I am told, 

^ Now first printed from the Pickering papers in the possession of the 
Massachusetts Historical Society. 

2 Now first printed from the Wolcott papers in the possession of the 
Connecticut Historical Society. 

1 86 Alexander Hamilton 

that can now be relied upon, is a postponement of 
the payment of the 200,000 dollars heretofore lent, 
to which Mr. McCormick assents.^ 

TO WASHINGTON 

New York, July 30, 1796. 

Sir: 

I have the pleasure to send you herewith a certain 
draft which I have endeavored to make as perfect 
as my time and engagements would permit. It has 
been my object to render this act importantly and 
lastingly useful, and, avoiding all just cause of 
present exception, to embrace such reflections and 
sentiments as will wear well, progress in approbation 
with time, and redound to future reputation. How 
far I have succeeded, you will judge. I have begun 
the second part of the task — the digesting of the 
supplementary remarks to the first address, — which, 
in a fortnight, I hope also to send you; yet I con- 
fess the more I have considered the matter, the less 
eligible this plan has appeared to me. There seems 
to me to be a certain awkwardness in the thing, and 
it seems to imply that there is a doubt whether the 
assurance without the evidence would be believed. 
Besides that, I think that there are some ideas which 
will not wear well in the former address, and I do 
not see how any part can be omitted, if it is to be 
given as the thing formerly prepared. Nevertheless, 

^ Now first printed from the Wolcott papers in the possession of the 
Connecticut Historical Society. This letter, and those preceding on 
the same subject, give a curious idea of the conduct of the government 
and the scale of financial dealings in 1796 as compared with those of 
to-day. 

Private Correspondence 187 

when you have both before you, you can judge. If 
you should incline to take the draft now sent, and 
after perusing and noting any thing that you wish 
changed, will send it to me, I will, with pleasure, 
shape it as you desire. This may also put it in my 
power to improve the expression, and perhaps, in 
some instances, condense. I rejoice that certain 
clouds have not lately thickened, and that there is a 
prospect of a brighter horizon.* 

TO GREENLEAF ^ 


Dear Sir: 

I have carefully reflected upon the subject of your 
letter of the 27th instant. 

Though the data which it presents authorize an 
expectation of large pecuniary advantage, and 
though I discern nothing in the affair which an in- 
dividual differently circumstanced might not with 
propriety enter into, yet, in my peculiar situation, 
viewed in all its public, as well as personal relations, 
I think myself boimd to decline the overture. 

TO OLIVER WOLCOTT 

August 3, 1796. 


I have received your letter of the ist. I deplore 
the picture it gives, and henceforth wish to forget 

^ Reprinted from the History of the Republic, vi., 523. 

2 Greenleaf described himself as worth five millions, and in debt 
for twelve hundred thousand dollars. He offered, if Hamilton would 
help him, and lend him his name, to give a third of his property, and 
make him his partner in a banking-house. 

1 88 Alexander Hamilton 

there is a bank or a treasury in the United States, 
though I shall not forget my regard to individuals. 

I do not see one argument in any possible shape 
of the thing, for the sale of bank stock, or against 
that of the other stock, which does not apply vice 
versa, and I shall consider it as one of the most in- 
fatuated steps that ever was adopted. 

It will be known on Thursday whether any thing 
is to be expected here. 


August 5, 1796. 


The Bank of New York is willing to make the loan 
of 324,000 dollars to you (I mean the exact sum of 
about this amount, if you desire it, which one of the 
laws you mention authorizes to borrow), on these 
terms: to advance all but 200,000 dollars when you 
please to advance the 200,000 dollars, by way of re- 
loan, when that sum, payable in October, becomes 
due. The term of credit to be, in each case, six 
months from the time of the advance. The interest, 
six per cent., with a deposit of stock (6 per cent.) at 
par, so placed as to permit the sale of it at the market 
price, if there be a failure of reimbursement at the 
stipulated periods. The treasury, upon honor, to 
draw immediately upon the bank as the money is 
wanted for expenditure, not to transfer it before- 
hand. On this point, sincerity and delicacy will be 
expected. 

It was mentioned, too, as desirable, though not 

Private Correspondence 189 

made a condition, that it should be understood that 
in case a real pressing emergency in the course of the 
winter should exist, the bank, on giving previous 
notice of the necessity to the Treasury might be at 
liberty to sell the stock at the then market price. 
The directors to be, upon honor, not to use this per- 
mission but in case of real necessity. Their honor, 
I know, may be entirely relied upon, and it may be 
well to gratify. 

The deposit of stock was suggested by myself, 
upon your first letter. It is an ingredient in the 
negotiation which the bank values. ' 

The bank wishes a speedy decision. 

TO WASHINGTON 

August 10, 1796. 

Sir: 

About a fortnight ago I sent you a certain draft. 
I now send you another on the plan of incorporation. 
Whichever you may prefer, if there be any part you 
wish to transfer from one to another, any part to be 
changed, or if there be any material idea in your 
own draft which has happened to be omitted, and 
which you wish introduced, in short, if there be any 
thing further in the matter in which I can be of any 
(service), I will, with great pleasure, obey your 
comxmands.'' 

1 Now first printed from the Wolcott papers in the possession of the 
Connecticut Historical Society. 

2 Reprinted from the History of the Republic, Vi., 523. This letter, 
and those which follow, all relate to the preparation of the farewell 
address which was published September 17, 1796. 

iQO Alexander Hamilton 


New York, Sept. 4, 1796. 


I have received your two late letters, the last but 
one transmitting me a certain draft. It will be cor- 
rected and altered with attention to your suggestions, 
and returned by Monday's or Tuesday's post. The 
idea of the University is one of those which, I think, 
will be properly reserved for your speech at the open- 
ing of the session. A general suggestion respecting 
education will very fitly come into the address.' 




I return the draft, corrected agreeably to your 
intimations. You will observe a short paragraph 
added respecting education. As to the establish- 
ment of a university, it is a point which, in connec- 
tion with the military schools, and some other things, 
I meant, agreeably to your desire, to suggest to you 
as parts of your speech at the opening of the session. 
There will several things come there much better 
than in a general address to the people, which like- 
wise would swell the address too much. Had I 
health enough, it was my intention to have written 
it over, in which case I would both have improved 
and abridged. But this is not the case. I seem 
now to have regularly a period of ill health every 
summer. I think it will be advisable simply to send 

' Reprinted from the History of the Republic, vi., 529. 

Private Correspondence 191 

the address by your secretary to Dunlap. It will, 
of course, find its way into all the other papers. 
Some person on the spot ought to be charged with a 
careful examination of the impression by the proof- 
sheet.' 


New York, Sept. 8, 1796. 


I have received your letter of the 6th by the bearer. 
The draft was sent forward by the post on Tuesday. 

I shall prepare a paragraph with respect to the 
University and some others for consideration re- 
specting other points which have occurred.^ 

TO PHINEAS BOND 

New York, Sept. 15, 1796. 


Two days since a letter was delivered to me with 
a declaration of the bearer that it came from Mr. 
Lyston.^ On opening the cover I found nothing ex- 
cept a letter from Captain Cochran (which, though 
not addressed, would appear to have been written 
to some public agent of Great Britain) and a de- 
claration of David Wilson and Thomas Marshall re- 
specting the ship Eliza. The superscription of the 
packet resembling your handwriting, I concluded 
that it might have come from you, and that by some 

' Reprinted from the History of the Republic, vi., 530. 
a Reprinted from the History of the Republic, vi., 531. 
3 The British minister. 

192 Alexander Hamilton 

mistake the letter you had written me had been 
omitted, and that on discovery of omission it would 
have been foi*warded by another opportunity. Find- 
ing after two days' waiting that the expectation has 
not been realized, I have determined to write to you 
on the subject. 

Mr. Charles Wilkes had previously applied to me 
concerning this affair, and had submitted to my 
consideration various papers. The result was that 
I discouraged a judicial prosecution. My reasons 
are these: 

Taking it to be true, as stated, that Captain Huffey 
brought from the shore within our territory persons 
who, by force, aided him to rescue the captured ves- 
sel, I am of opinion that this circumstance would give 
jurisdiction of the case to our courts on the applica- 
tion of the capturing party. 

But when on such application any of our courts 
should hold jurisdiction, it would in my judgment 
go into the merits and examine the validity of the 
capture. 

Here these facts occur: that the Eliza, being a 
transport vessel in the service of Great Britain, was 
captured by a French privateer fitted out of some 
port of France by Barney, an American citizen, in 
quality of armateur — Levelle, probably a French- 
man, captain by commission, and was afterwards 
condemned as prize by the sentence of a Court of 
Admiralty at Dunkirk; and, as far as the direct 
proof goes, purchased in virtue of that sentence by 
an American citizen. 

It is conjectured that two thirds of the vessel 

Private Correspondence 193 

may have belonged to a French house — Messrs. De 
Baques — because it appears that Huifey paid tv^o 
thirds of the purchase-money in a bill drawn by that 
house. But this is evidently a mere circumstance of 
suspicion, and wholly inconclusive. Why may not 
the De Baques have been factors or agents for 
Huffey? Why may not Huffey have purchased 
their draft towards the payment ? One or the other 
of the two latter suppositions would no doubt pre- 
vail with the court if there was no collateral proof to 
the contrary. 

It is also conjectured that the Eliza may have 
continued the property of Barney, but all the docu- 
ments now in the power of the captor speak a con- 
trary language. This suspicion, then, however just 
it may be in fact, cannot be supported. 

The question then is, would the equipment of the 
privateer by Barney be sufficient to invalidate the 
purchase by a neutral citizen under the sentence of 
a court of the capturing power? 

No opinion of any theoretic writer, nor, as I be- 
lieve, any usage of any nation, nor the decisions of 
courts of admiralty, will authorize, in my judgment, 
an affirmative answer to that question. 

If Mr. Barney comes within the 21st article of our 
treaty with Great Britain, it would make him liable, 
if taken by Great Britain, to be punished as a pirate. 
But it will be observed that the stipulation would 
not oblige the United States to treat him as such. 
And the article being confined to personal punish- 
ment, may be supposed not to contemplate the con- 
fiscation of property captured by such a person. 

VOL. X.— 13. 

194 Alexander Hamilton 

But it would be to go an unheard-of length to pro- 
nounce null the prize made under such circumstances 
by a vessel fitted out of the ports of the belligerent 
power, and regularly commissioned, and after a sen- 
tence of condemnation. 

Therefore, and as the property in question is of 
little value, and as smart damages would be likely to 
attend a failure of the prosecution, I advised against 
it, as I now still do. 

Yet, if Captain Cochran, or any person acting on 
his behalf, shall desire the experiment to he made, how- 
ever unpromising in my view, I shall esteem it a 
professional duty, and due to justice to a foreign 
power, to put the affair in a course of judicial in- 
vestigation. 

TO TIMOTHY PICKERING 

New York, Sept. 21, 1796. 

Dear Sir: 

Some time since Mr. McCormick spoke to me about 
the case of his kinsman, Mr. Pitcaim, whom Mr. 
Monroe had prevented from exercising the functions 
of consul. I can, in justice, inform you that this 
gentleman is well considered in our city, and that his 
political principles have been understood to be very 
friendly to the French Revolution ; nor have we any 
doubts that his sentiments towards our own govern- 
ment are altogether American, so that in truth there 
can be no shadow of political objection to him as to 
the office for which he was intended.^ 

^ Now first printed from the Pickering papers in the possession of the 
Massachusetts Historical Society. 

Private Correspondence 195 

TO 

1796. 

Our excellent President, as you have seen, has 
declined a re-election. 'T is all-important to our 
country that his successor shall be a safe man. But 
it is far less important who of many men that may 
be named shall be the person, than that it shall not 
be Jefferson. We have every thing to fear if this 
man comes in, and from what I believe to be an 
accurate view of our political map I conclude that 
he has too good a chance of success, and that good 
calculation, prudence, and exertion were never more 
necessary to the Federal cause than at this very 
critical juncture. All personal and partial con- 
siderations must be discarded, and every thing must 
give way to the great object of excluding Jefferson. 
It appears to be a common opinion (and I think it a 
judicious one), that Mr. Adams and Mr. Pinckney 
(late minister to England) are to be supported on 
our side for President and Vice-President. New 
York will be unanimous for both. I hope New Eng- 
land will be so too. Yet I have some apprehensions 
on this point, lest the fear that he may outrun Mr. 
Adams should withhold votes from Pinckney. Should 
this happen, it will be, in my opinion, a most unfor- 
tunate policy. It will be to take one only instead 
of two chances against Mr. Jefferson, and, well 
weighed, there can be no doubt that the exclusion 
of Mr. Jefferson is far more important than any 
difference between Mr. Adams and Mr. Pinckney. 
At foot, is my calculation of chances between Adams 
and Jefferson. 'T is too precarious. Pinckney has 

196 Alexander Hamilton 

the chance of some votes southward and westward, 
which Adams has not. This will render our pros- 
pect in the main point, the exclusion of Jefferson, 
far better. 

Relying on the strength of your mind, I have not 
scrupled to let you see the state of mine. I never 
was more firm in an opinion than in the one I now 
express, yet in acting upon it there must be much 
caution and reserve.' 

TO OLIVER WOLCOTT 

Albany, Oct. 27, 1796. 

Dear Sir: 

Your letter of the 1 7 th instant found me at Albany, 
attending the Supreme Court. I have no copy of the 
treaty with Great Britain at hand, but I am well 
satisfied, from memory, that the true interpretation 
of the treaty, enforcing, in this respect, the true rule 
of neutrality, forbids our permitting the sale of a 
prize, taken and brought in by a French national ship 
equally as if by a privateer, and that the prize vessel 
herself, with her cargo, ought to depart our ports. I 
hasten to give you my opinion thus far. I reserve 
to consider more at leisure what exceptions absolute 
necessity may justify. But this is clear: thr.t as far 
as it may admit any, the exceptions must be measured 
and restricted by the necessity, and as soon as pos- 
sible you must return into the path of the treaty. 

Thus, if the prize vessel was absolutely insiifficient 
to proceed to sea, her cargo ought to be sent out of 

^ Reprinted from the History of the Republic, vi., 538. 

Private Correspondence 197 

the country in another vessel, and care ought to be 
taken that it does not go out under false colors. Our 
own officers, no doubt, must inspect and ascertain any 
case of necessity which may be suggested. 

Pray, my good friend, let there be no evasions. 


November i, 1796. 


I wrote you a line from Albany, expressing an 
opinion from memory that our treaty with Great 
Britain prohibited the sale of prizes made by French 
national ships. Being just returned to town, I have 
looked into the article which related to the point, and 
I jear that opinion was wrong. In a day or two I 
will write to you more particularly. 

Adefs late communication demands a very careful 
and well-managed answer. 


November 3, 1796. 


I have more carefully examined our treaty with 
Great Britain and I return to the opinion given you 
from Albany. My hesitation yesterday arose from 
the terms of the twenty-fourth article, which were con- 
fined to privateers, a word that has an appropriate 
sense, meaning ships of private persons commis- 
sioned to cruise. But the following article contains 
the equivalent one to that with France, upon 

igS Alexander Hamilton 

which we refused all bringing in and sale of prizes by 
her enemies. The words are, "no refuge,'* etc., the 
major including the minor. And though France, by 
our treaty with her, may bring in prizes, yet the 
treaty gives her no right to sell. The clause in ques- 
tion, in the English treaty, cannot take away the 
right she before had to bring in her prizes ; but as she 
had not a positive right to sell, it will oblige her to 
depart with them : in other words, it will preclude her 
from whatever she has not a positive right to. This 
also is Mr. Jay's opinion, and it is certainly agreeable 
to the whole spirit of the treaty. 

TO WASHINGTON 

November 4, 1796. 

Sir: 

I have lately been honored with two letters from 
you, one from Mount Vernon, the other from Phila- 
delphia, which came to hand yesterday. I imme- 
diately sent the last to Mr. Jay, and conferred with 
him last night. We settled our opinion on one 
point, viz.: that whether Mr. Adet acted with or 
without instruction from his government in publish- 
ing his commimi cation, he committed a disrespect 
towards our government, which ought not to pass 
unnoticed, and would most properly be noticed to 
him as the representative or agent. That the man- 
ner of noticing it, in the first instance, at least, ought 
to be negative; that is, by the personal conduct of 
the President towards the Minister. That the true 
rule on this point would be to receive the Minister 

Private Correspondence 199 

at your levees with a dignified reserve, holding an 
exact medium between an offensive coldness and cor- 
diality. The point is a nice one to be hit, but no one 
will know better how to do it than the President. 

Self-respect and the necessity of discouraging fur- 
ther insult, requires that sensibility should be mani- 
fested; on the other hand, the importance of not 
widening a breach, which may end in rupture, de- 
mands great measure and caution in the mode. 

Mr. Jay and myself are both agreed also, that no 
im^mediate publication of the reply which may be 
given ought to be made, for this would be like join- 
ing in an appeal to the public — would countenance 
and imitate the irregularity, and would not be digni- 
fied; nor is it necessary for any present purpose of 
the government. Mr. Jay inclined to think that the 
reply ought to go through Mr. Pinckney to the Di- 
rectory, with only a short note to Adet, acknowledg- 
ing the reception of his paper and informing him that 
this mode will be taken. I am not yet satisfied that 
this course will be best. We are both to consider 
further, and confer. You will shortly be informed 
of the result. 

But whatever be the mode adopted, it is certain 
that the reply will be one of the most delicate papers 
that has proceeded from our government, in which 
it will require much care and nicety to steer between 
sufficient and too muck justification, between self- 
respect and provocation of further insult or injury; 
and that will at the same time save a great political 
interest which this step of the French Government 
opens to us. Did I not know how guarded you will 

200 Alexander Hamilton 

yourself be, I should be afraid of Mr. Pickering's 
warmth. We must, if possible, avoid a rupture with 
France, who, if not effectually checked, will, in the 
insolence of power, become no less troublesome to 
us than to the rest of the world. 

I dedicate Sunday to the execution of your com- 
mands in preparing certain heads. You will speedily 
hear again from me. 


November 5, 1796. 


Yesterday, after the departure of the post, I re- 
ceived your letter of the 3d. I have since seen the 
answer to Adet. I perceive in it nothing intrinsically 
exceptionable, but some thing in the manner a little 
epigrammatical and sharp. I make this remark 
freely, because the card now to be played is perhaps 
the most delicate that has occurred in our adminis- 
tration, and nations, like individuals, sometimes get 
into squabbles from the manner more than the mat- 
ter that passes between them. It is all-important 
to us — first, if possible, to avoid rupture with France; 
secondly, if that cannot be, to evince to the people 
that there has been an unequivocal disposition to 
avoid it. Our discussions, therefore, ought to be 
calnij smooth, inclined to be argumentative; when 
remonstrance and complaint are unavoidable, carry- 
ing upon the face of them a reluctance and regret^ 
mingling a steady assertion of our rights and ad- 
herence to principle with the language of modera- 
tion, and, as long as it can be done, of friendship. 

Private Correspondence 201 

I am the more particular in these observations, 
because I know that Mr. Pickering, who is a very 
worthy man, has nevertheless some thing warm and 
^ angular in his temper, and will require much a vigil- 
ant, moderating eye. 

I last evening saw Doctor Bailey, our health 
officer, who tells me that the French Consul here, in 
conversation with an assistant of the doctors, who is 
a refugee from St. Domingo, expressed a desire to 
make arrangements for the sick of a French fleet 
expected shortly to arrive at this port. I thought 
this circumstance worth communication. 

TO OLIVER WOLCOTT 

November 9, 1796. 

Dear Sir: 

I received yesterday your letter of the 6th, and 
immediately wrote some additional letters to the 
eastward, enforcing what I had before written. 
Pennsylvania does not surprise me. 

I have reconsidered the opinion given to you on 
the third, and see no reason to change it. The 
reasoning which leads me to the conclusion, has not 
been sufficiently explained, I will therefore be more 
particular. 

The articles in our treaty with France, which re- 
spect the subject, are the seventeenth and twenty- 
second. 

The seventeenth consists of two parts. 

First. — It grants asylum in our ports for French 
ships of war and privateers, with their prizes; and 

202 Alexander Hamilton 

with liberty to carry them freely thence to their own 
ports. 

Secondly. — It prohibits the giving refuge, in our 
ports, to such as shall have made prize of the subjects ^ 
or property, of the French. It grants no right to sell 
prizes in our ports, neither does the letter of the 
article prohibit prizes, made of the French, from 
coming into our ports. It only prohibits the in- 
strument of making the prizes. But the construc- 
tion justly adopted by the President was, that the 
prohibition, in its true spirit, excluded the bringing 
in of prizes, whether coming with, or without, the 
capturing vessels. 'T is upon this part of the treaty, 
alone, that prizes made by national vessels of Great 
Britain, were excluded from our ports. For, — 

The twenty-second article with France is wholly 
confined to privateers; prohibiting those of other 
nations to fit or to sell their prizes in our ports. 

This article, had it stood alone, would have left us 
as free to admit British national ships, with their 
prizes, into our ports, as our twenty-fourth article 
with Great Britain leaves us free to admit French 
national ships, with their prizes. For these articles 
are the exact equivalents of each other. So that, as 
before remarked, the prohibition of the coming in, 
or sale in, our ports, of prizes made upon the French 
by British national ships, was derived, by construction 
and implication, from the seventeenth article of our 
treaty with France. 

It follows, that this article was considered as 
competent to prevent the coming in and sale of 
prizes. 

Private Correspondence 203 

If so, the same, or equivalent, terms in the British 
treaty, must be competent to the same thing. 

Now the twenty-fifth article of our treaty with 
Great Britain has equivalent terms. We there read, 
that '' no shelter or refuge shall be given in their ports 
to such as have made a prize upon the subjects, or 
citizens, of either of the contracting parties; but if 
forced, by stress of weather or the danger of the sea, 
to enter therein, particular care shall be taken to 
hasten their departure; and to cause them to retire 
as soon as possible. " This prohibition includes here, 
as in the seventeenth article of our treaty with 
France, a prohibition to sell prizes in our ports ; not 
the prizes of privateers only, but prizes generally. 

But France, it is answered, had a prior right, by 
the seventeenth article of our treaty with her, "to 
come and bring prizes into our ports." 

True, she had this right, and must have it still, 
notwithstanding the twenty-fifth article of our treaty 
with Great Britain: but she had no prior right, by 
treaty, to sell prizes in our ports ; and consequently, 
as the twenty-fifth article of our treaty with Great 
Britain excludes, as the minor of a major, the selling 
of prizes in our ports, the exclusion, so far, is in force, 
because it contravenes no prior right of France. As 
far as the treaty with France gives a right, incon- 
sistent with the above twenty-fifth article, that right 
forms an exception ; but the exception must be only 
co-extensive with the right. The conclusion is that 
France retains the right of asylum, but is excluded 
from the right of selling. This gives effect to the 
twenty-fifth article with Great Britain, so far as 

204 Alexander Hamilton 

the treaty-right of France does not require an ex- 
ception. 

And this construction ought to be favored, be- 
cause it best comports with the rule of neutrality. 

It will also best agree with the President's former 
decisions. He peimitted France to sell prizes; not 
because treaty gave her a right, but because he did 
not see clearly any law of the country, or of nations, 
that forbids it. But consistency does not require 
that this permission shall continue, if there be any 
thing in the treaty with Great Britain against it. 
Consistency, however, does require that the same 
latitude of construction should be given to the 
twenty-fifth article of our treaty with Great Britain, 
as was before given to the seventeenth article of our 
treaty with France. The same latitude will, as I ap- 
prehend, exclude the sale of prizes, by France, in the 
case in question. 

I regret extremely the publication of the reply to 
Adet, otherwise than through the channel of Con- 
gress. The sooner the Executive gets out of the 
newspapers the better. What may now be in its 
power, will depend on circumstances which are to 
occur. 

TO WASHINGTON 

New York, Nov. io, 1796. 

Sir: 

I have been employed in making, and have ac- 
tually completed a rough draft on the following 
heads: ''National University; Military Academy; 

Private Correspondence 205 

Board of Agriculture; establishment of such manu- 
factories on public account as are relative to the 
equipment of army and navy, to the extent of the 
public demand for supply, and excluding all the 
branches already well established in the country; 
the gradual and successive creation of a navy; 
compensations to public officers; reinforcement of 
provision for public debt." I send you this enumer- 
ation, that you may see the objects which I shall 
prepare for. But I must beg your patience till the 
beginning of the next week for the transmission of 
the draft, as I am a good deal pressed for time. 

The Legislature having appointed Mr. Lawrence 
district judge, a successor will of course be to be pro- 
vided. A conviction of his competency, a high 
opinion of his worth, and a long-established personal 
friendship, induce me to take the liberty of pre- 
cipitating a recommendation to you of Mr. Troup, 
the present clerk of the District and Circuit Court 
(the attorney of the district being known to be dis- 
inclined to the office). Mr. Troup is a lawyer, pro- 
fessionally very respectable, so that his practice is 
inferior in productiveness to no other ; but he has by 
the most unexceptionable means acquired a property 
sufficient to make it reasonable in him to withdraw 
from practice, upon a salary such as that of the dis- 
trict judge, and latterly his health has somewhat 
suffered from a long course of excessive application. 
His moral character is without an imputation of any 
sort; indeed, no man in the State is better esteemed 
than this gentleman; so that, I believe the appoint- 
ment would be considered as altogether fit. I trust, 

2o6 Alexander Hamilton 

however, that in expressing myself thus strongly, it 
will not occasion to you a moment's embarrassment, 
if any candidate more agreeable to you shall occur. 


November ii, 1796. 


My anxiety for such a course of things as will most 
promise a continuance of peace to the country, and 
in the contrary event a full justification of the 
President, has kept my mind dwelling on the late 
reply to Mr. Adet; and, though it is a thing that 
cannot be undone, yet, if my ideas are correct, the 
communication of them may not be wholly useless 
for the future. The more I have considered the 
paper, the less I like it. 

I think it is to be regretted that answers were not 
given to the preceding communications of Mr. Adet. 
For silence commonly carries with it the appearance 
of hauteur and contempt. And even if the paper to 
be answered is offensive, 't is better and less hazard- 
ous to harmony to say so, with calmness and modera- 
tion, than to say nothing. Silence is only then to be 
adopted when things have come to such a state with 
a minister, that it is the intention to break with him. 
And even in this case, if there is still a disposition 
to maintain harmony with his government, a reply 
ought to go through our own organ to it, so as to dis- 
tinguish between the minister and the government. 

The reason given for not having answered the in- 
quiry respecting the impressment of our seamen is 

Private Correspondence 207 

too broad. When two nations have relations to 
each other, and one is at war, the other at peace, if 
the one at peace suffers Uberties to be taken with it 
by the enemy of the one at war, which turns to the 
detriment of the latter, it is a fair subject of inquiry 
and discussion. The questions may be asked: How 
does this happen? What measures are taken to 
prevent a repetition or continuance ? There is always 
possibility of connivance, and this possibility gives 
a right to inquire, and imposes an obligation to enter 
into friendly explanation. 'T is not a matter of in- 
difference to our friend, what conduct of its enemy 
we permit towards ourselves. Much indeed in all 
these cases depends on the manner of the inquiry; 
but I am satisfied the principle is as I state it, and 
the ground assumed by Mr. Pickering, in the latitude 
of the expression, untenable. 

These opinions are not confined to me. Though 
most people like the air of what is called spirit in 
Mr. Pickering's letter, yet some of the best friends 
of the cause whisper cautiously remarks similar to 
the above. 

It is a question now well worth considering, 
whether, if a handsome opportunity of rectifying 
should not occur with Mr. Adet, it may not be ex- 
pedient, specially to instruct Mr. Pinckney, to make 
the explanations, putting our backwardness here to 
the score of the manner of the inquiry, and qualify- 
ing the generality of our principle — ^without giving up 
our right of judging of the measure of our compliance 
in similar cases. 

I know you will so well appreciate the motives to 

2o8 Alexander Hamilton 

these observations, that I run no risk in being thought 
officious, and I therefore freely transmit them, being 
always, etc. 

TO WASHINGTON 

New York, Nov. 19, 1796. 

Sir: 

I duly received your letter of the 12th instant. 
My avocations have not permitted me sooner to 
comply with your desire. I have looked over the 
papers, and suggested alterations and corrections; 
and I have also numbered the paragraphs, I., II., 
III., etc., in the order in which it appears to me 
eligible they should stand in the speech. 

I thought, upon full reflection, you coiild not 
avoid an allusion to your retreat, in order to express 
your sense of the support of Congress, but that the 
simplest manner of doing it was to be preferred. A 
paragraph is offered accordingly. 

I believe the commencement of a navy ought to 

/^' be contemplated. Our fiscal concerns, if Congress 

- ' please, can easily be rendered efficient; if not, 't is 

their fault, and ought not to prevent any suggestion 

which the interest of the country may require. 

The paragraph in your letter respecting our 
Mediterranean commerce may well be incorporated 
in this part of the communication. 

You will observe a paragraph I have framed con- 
templates a full future communication of our situa- 
tion with France. At present it seems to me that 
this will be effected in the following mode: 

Let a full reply to Mr. Adet's last communication 

Private Correspondence 209 

be made, containing a particular review of our con- 
duct and motives from the commencement of the 
Revolution. Let this be sent to Mr. Pinckney, to 
be imparted to the Directory; and let a copy of it, 
with a short auxiliary statement of facts, if neces- 
sary, be sent to the House of Representatives. As 
Mr. Adet has suspended his functions, I presume no 
reply can be made to him ; but, not having seen his 
paper, I cannot judge. 

The crisis is immensely important to the glory of 
the President, and to the honor and interest of the 
country. 

It is all-important that the reply to Adet's last 
communication, to whomsoever made, should be 
managed with the utmost possible prudence and 
skill, so that it may be a solid justification — an in- 
offensive remonstrance — the expression of a dignified 
seriousness — reluctant to quarrel, but resolved not 
to be humbled. The subject excites the greatest 
anxiety. 

TO OLIVER WOLCOTT 

November 22, 1796. 

Dear Sir: 

I thank you for your note sending me Adet's letter. 
The present is, in my opinion, as critical a situation 
as our government has been in, requiring all its pru- 
dence, all its wisdom, all its moderation, all its 
firmness. 

Though the thing is now passed, I do not think it 
useless to say to you that I was not well pleased with 
the Secretary of State's answer to Adet's note 

VOL. X. — 14. 

2IO Alexander Hamilton 

communicating the order respecting neutral vessels. 
There was some thing of hardness and epigrammatic 
sharpness in it. Neither did I think the position 
true that France had no right to inquire respecting 
the affair of seamen. I am of opinion that whenever 
a neutral power suffers liberties to be taken with it 
by a belligerent one, which turns to the detriment of 
the other party, as the acquiring strength by impressing 
our seamen, there is a good ground of inquiry, de- 
manding candid explanation. 

My opinion is, that our communication should be 
calm, reasoning, and serious, showing steady resolu- 
tion more than feeling, having force in the idea rather 
than in the expression. 

I am very anxious that our government should do 
right on the present occasion. 

My ideas are these : 

As Adet has declared his functions suspended, the 
reply ought not to be to him, but through Mr. Pinck- 
ney to the Directory. 

It ought to contain a review of our conduct from 
the beginning, noticing our first and full acknow- 
ledgment of the Republic, and the danger we ran by 
it. Also the dangers we incurred by other large in- 
terpretations of the treaty in favor of France, ad- 
verting to the sale of prizes. 

It should meet all the suggestions of the Minister, 
correct his misstatements of facts, and meet, argu- 
ment atively, his principles. Where arguments al- 
ready used are repeated, it ought to be in a new 
language, or by quotations in the body of the reply, 
not by reference to other communications annexed, 

Private Correspondence 211 

or otherwise, which embarrass the reading and 
attention. 

It should review calmly the conduct of France 
and her agents, pointing out fully and clearly the 
violations of our rights, and the spirit which was 
manifested, but in terms the most cautious and in- 
offensive. 

It should advert to the policy of moderation 
towards the enemies of France, which our situation 
and that of France, especially as to maritime power, 
imposed upon us. 

It should briefly recapitulate the means of obtain- 
ing redress from Great Britain employed by our 
government, and the effects they have produced. 

It should explain why the government could not 
adopt more expeditious modes; why the Executive 
could not control the Judiciary, and should show 
that, in effect, the opposite party, as well as France, 
suffered the inconveniences of delay. 

It should make prominent the consequences upon 
the peace and friendship of governments, if all acci- 
dental infractions from, situation, from the negli- 
gences, etc., of particular officers, are to be imputed 
with severity to the government itself, and should 
apply the remark to the case of the injuries we have 
suffered, in different ways, from the officers and 
agents of France. 

It should make prominent two ideas: the situa- 
tion in which we were with Great Britain prior to 
the last treaty, so as to show that, by the laws of 
nations, as admitted to us and declared to France 
and the world, prior to that treaty, all the things 

212 Alexander Hamilton 

complained of as resulting from that treaty pre- 
viously existed. And it should dwell on the ex- 
ception, in that treaty, of prior treaties. 

It should point out strongly the idea that the in- 
convenience at particular junctures of particular stip- 
ulations is no reason for one party superseding them, 
but should intimate that the President is willing to 
review the relations between the two countries, and, 
by a new treaty, if the same shall be approved by 
the Senate, to readjust the terms of those relations. 

The article in the treaty with France respecting an 
admission of the same privileges which are granted 
to other powers should be examined. This plainly 
means where there is any concession of a positive 
privilege which the United States were free to re- 
fuse, not where there is a mere recognition of the 
principles of the laws of nations. 

It should be made prominent that the United 
States have always wished, and still wish, to culti- 
vate the most amicable relations, and are still dis- 
posed to evince this disposition by every method in 
their power ; that in what they said they mean only 
to show that they have acted in sincerity and good 
faith, and have rather received than given cause to 
complain; that they have been disposed to make a 
candid construction of circumstances which might 
seem inconsistent with a friendly conduct in France, 
and claim a similar candor in the estimate of their 
situation and conduct. 

There should be an animadversion upon the unfit- 
ness of looking beyond the government to the citizens. 

And there should be these ideas, properly couched : 

Private Correspondence 213 

that the United States cannot admit that a just 
cause of resentment has been given; that they ap- 
peal from the misapprehension which dictated this 
sentiment to the justice and magnanimity of France, 
for a retraction of it, and for meeting them freely in 
the complete restoration of a friendly intercourse; 
that France will not deliberately expect that they 
could make a sacrifice of self-respect, since she must 
be sensible that a free people ought, in every event, 
to cherish it as a sacred duty, and to encounter with 
firmness every danger and calamity which an at- 
tempt to make them forget it, or degrade them from 
their independent character, may involve. 

This would be the general complexion of the reply 
which I would give. The manner should be ex- 
tremely cautious, smooth, even friendly, but yet 
solemn and dignified. 
'^ . The alliance, in its future operation, must be 
against our interest. The door to escape from it is 
opened. Though we ought to maintain with good 
faith our engagements, if the conduct of the other 
party releases us, we should not refuse the release, 
so far as we may accept without compromitting our 
peace. This idea is very important. 

TO OLIVER WOLCOTT 

December 6, 1796. 

Dear Sir: 

The president of the Bank of New York called upon 
me yesterday and manifested considerable anxiety 
about the state of the bank. It seems the course 
of things lately and their large accommodations to 

214 Alexander Hamilton 

the Government have produced a balance against 
them in favor of the office of discount at this place, 
which has lately called for 100,000 dollars in specie 
and it is apprehended may speedily call for more. 

The president mentioned this situation generally, 
with only this view, to show that the bank would 
probably be under the necessity of selling the stock 
pledged with them, if the government should not be 
punctual. It was at the same time declared that 
nothing but necessity would lead to any measure in- 
convenient to the government, yet it was thought 
advisable to admonish of the probable necessity. 

A director two or three days since also mentioned 
to me that there was a sum of about 26,000 dollars of 
interest due to the bank, of which an account had 
been rendered, but which was not paid, adding that 
in the present situation every little would help. Ob- 
servations like these are of course confidential. But 
the situation requires, and it will make it good 
policy that, if in your power, you should come to the 
aid of the Bank of New York. It would be wise, if 
possible, to anticipate a particular payment. It will 
be also useful to arrest for a time too free calls from 
the office. 

Friendly attention and good offices on your part 
will inspire confidence and embolden the bank to 
assist in future emergencies, and it is very much the 
policy of the Treasury not to be exclusively de- 
pendent on one institution. 

P. S. — Let me hear from you on this subject. 
What is doing with Adet ? 

Private Correspondence 215 

TO RUFUS KING 

New York, Dec. i6, 1796. 

I have received, my dear sir, your several letters 
of the 25th of August, loth and nth of September. 
You know my sentiments towards you too well to 
ascribe my delay in answering them to any other 
cause than the imperiousness of avocations with 
which I could not dispense. 

' Public opinion, taking the country at large, has 
continued since you left us to travel on a right di- 
rection, and, I trust, will not easily deviate from it.^ 
You will have seen before this reaches you Mr. 
Adet's communciations. We conjecture, as to the 
timing of them, that they were intended to influence 
the election of president by the apprehension of war 
with France. We suppose also they are designed in 
the same way to give support to the partisans of 
France, and that they have for eventual object the 
placing things in just such a state as will leave 
France at liberty to slide easily either into a renewal 
of cordiality or an actual or virtual war with the 
United States. If the war of Europe continues, the 
efforts of France will be likely to be levelled as a 
primary object against the commerce and credit of 
Great Britain; and to injure these, she may think it 
advisable to make war upon our trade, — ^forgetting 
perhaps that the consequence may be to turn it 
more entirely into the channels of Great Britain. 
These reflections will be obvious to you. I only 
make them to apprise you of the view which is taken 
of the subject here. Thus far appearances do not 

2i6 Alexander Hamilton 

indicate that the purpose of influencing the country 
has been obtained. I think, in the main, the effect 
has been to impress the necessity of adhering more 
firmly to the government. 

You need not be told that every exertion not de- 
grading to us will be made to preserve peace with 
France. Many of the opposite party, however they 
may be pleased with appearances of ill-humor in 
France, will not wish to go to the length of war. 
And we shall endeavor to avoid it in pursuance of 
our general plan of preserving peace with all the 
world. Yet you may depend that we shall not sub- 
mit to be dictated to, or to be forced into a departure 
from our plan of neutrality, tmless to repel an attack 
upon us. 

Our anxiety has been extreme on the subject of 
the election for president. If we may trust our in- 
formation, which we have every reason to trust, it is 
now decided that neither Jefferson nor Burr can be 
president. It must be either Adams or Pinckney — 
the first most probably. By the throwing away of 
votes in New England, lest Pinckney should outrun 
Adams, it is not unlikely that Jefferson will be vice- 
president. The event will not a little mortify Burr. 
Virginia has given him only one vote. 

It was expected of course that the Senate's answer 
to the President would be flattering to him. But 
the speech in the House of Representatives has been 
better than was expected. An address, which I 
have not seen, but stated by our friends to be a 
very good one, has passed the House with only 
twelve dissenting, consisting of the most fiery spirits. 

Private Correspondence 217 

The address is not only generally complimentary to 
the President, but includes, it is said, an explicit 
approbation of his administration, which caused the 
division. Edward Livingston is in the minority. 

After giving you these consolatory accounts, I am 
now to dash the cup a little by telling you that Liv- 
ingston is in all probability re-elected in this city. 
The principal cause has been an unacceptable can- 
didate on our part — James Watson. There were 
four gentlemen who would certainly have succeeded, 
but none of them would accept. In Watson we 
could not unite opinions. He was more disagreeable 
than I had supposed to a large body of our friends, 
and yet, after the declining of the persons alluded to, 
we could not do otherwise than support him ; for he 
had gotten a strong hold upon most of the leading 
mechanics who act with us. 

But in the State at large we shall better our re- 
presentation, and I hope for a majority in the House 
of Representatives. As an omen of this there are 
several new members in Congress from different 
States who hitherto vote with our friends. 

The favorable change in the conduct of Great 
Britain towards us strengthens the hands of the 
friends of order and peace. It is much to be de- 
sired that a treatment in all respects unexception- 
able from that quarter should obviate all pretext to 
inflame the public mind. 

We are laboring hard to establish in this country 
principles more and more national and free from all tr '^^ 

foreign ingredients, so that we may be neither ' ^% 
'' Greeks nor Trojans," but truly Americans. 

^■■ 

'.-. '^^<f 

2i8 Alexander Hamilton 

TO OLIVER WOLCOTT 

New York, Dec. 21, 1796. 

Dear Sir: 

I did not understand by your letter of the 1 7th of 
November whether you meant or not to authorize 
the immediate commencement of the sale of stock. 
If you think this measure will become indispensable, 
it may be well to anticipate the execution; though, 
indeed, sales of stock are at this juncture nearly im- 
practicable. Yet I imagine it will be agreeable to the 
bank to have permission to anticipate. 

A very prudent letter has lately been written by 
the president of the Bank of the United States to 
the Office of Discount here, among other things ad- 
vising a reduction of the balance due from the Bank 
of New York to 100,000 dollars. This letter, which 
in my opinion leaves, as it ought to do, to the di- 
rectors of the office here, discretion to execute the 
idea with due regard to circumstances, has, however, 
been construed by them in too peremptory a light; 
and accordingly they have drawn from the Bank of 
New York pretty rapidly 150,000 dollars, which 
begets an apprehension that subsequent calls may 
be equally rapid, and, exciting fear and jealousy, is 
likely to produce too sudden a retrenchment of the 
business of the Bank of New York. And as the 
office, being confined, as they suppose, to discount- 
ing twice their capital, cannot, by increased accom- 
modations, fill the void, there is danger of stagnating 
and convulsing the business of the city so as to give 
a shock to credit. The directors here are sensible of 
the danger, but several of them take the intimation 

Private Correspondence 219 

from Philadelphia in too strict a sense, and cannot 
resolve to alleviate the apprehensions of the Bank of 
New York. 

Though the Bank of New York has reduced and is 
reducing its discounts, there are circumstances of 
the moment which continue to incline the balance in 
favor of the office, but it is easy to see, taking in the 
payments of the government in February, that there 
will be a natural change, and consequently it is every 
way imprudent to force them. 

If the last loan of the Bank of New York to gov- 
ernment had no other use than that which you hint, 
this still was very important. And it is interesting 
all round that a disposition should exist to repeat 
similar accommodations. But you easily see how 
cautious and disaffected spirits are armed against it 
when they can say, ''We told you that you would 
embarrass yourself by your loan to government," 
and in truth if this had not been made the Bank of 
New York would now stand on high ground. 

Pray interpose with Mr. Willing to obtain an ex- 
planatory letter leaving more clearly the time and 
manner of accomplishing the reduction of the present 
balance to their discretion. 

I will say nothing more of an anticipated payment, 
but if this were practicable to the extent of 50,000 
or 100,000 dollars it would be consolatory to the direc- 
tors and leave the residue more to your convenience. 

Don't derive from this letter any source of alarm. 
Every thing is sound with both banks here. I know 
the state of both. But there is danger that fear and 
jealousy in the directors of the Bank of New York 

220 Alexander Hamilton 

may produce evil which it is unnecessary to hazard. 
I wish to see your report on direct taxes. 

I shall send you, the first opportunity, the volume 
of "Reports of Courts." 

P. S. — Mr. Caleb Brewster is a candidate for the 
office of first mate in the revenue cutter here. I re- 
member he rendered very meritorious services in 
the war, and I am told has been bred a seaman. In 
these respects he has a good claim. His character 
otherwise is not known to me. But if it affords no 
objection, I think he will be an eligible man. 

It is said Walker is to resign. In this case Jonathan 
Burrall wishes to succeed. There cannot, you know, 
be a more fit man, and he will be entirely acceptable 
here.' 

TO THEO. FOSTER, ESQ.^ 

Philadelphia, i Sept., 1791. 

Dear Sir: 

I have had the pleasure of receiving your two 
letters of the 23rd July & 4th of August. You con- 
cluded rightly that it could require no apology for 
entering into the detail with which you have favored 
me. On a subject so interesting to your State, your 
desire to communicate information was indulged 

^ Now first printed from the Wolcott papers, in the possession of the 
Connecticut Historical Society, 

2 This letter of Hamilton's to Theo. Foster is now (1904) for the 
first time printed. The publishers are indebted to the courtesy of 
Mr. G. H. Crawford and to the Hamilton Club, of Brooklyn, for per- 
mission to use the letter in this set. Theo. Foster was United States 
Senator from Rhode Island in 1790. 

Private Correspondence 221 

with peculiar propriety, & on any subject I shall 
always esteem myself obliged by your sentiments. 
Thoroughly impressed with the hardship of a de- 
cision against the certificates which had been sur- 
rendered to the State by their Proprietors, I did not 
come to it without a serious struggle between my 
Judgment & my Wishes ; but after mature delibera- 
tion I sav/ no way of allowing those Certificates to be 
received on the proposed loan which would not in- 
volve inextricable embarrassment. All the States 
have called in large portions of their respective Debts. 
There is good reason to believe, that on a close in- 
vestigation Rhode Island might not be found to be 
the only State in which they had been so called in for 
a very inadequate consideration. And tho' it might 
be urged to distinguish the case, that Rhode Island 
alone compelled the surrender, on pain of forfeiture, 
it might be answered that in sound equity, there is 
no very material distinction between obliging Per- 
sons to surrender their property for less than its 
value, under the penalty of confiscation and laying 
them under a necessity of doing the same thing, 
from the total and deliberate neglect of a better pro- 
vision. Be this as it may, I saw no safe rule, that 
would be admitted to be such by even the candid 
part of those, whose interest it might be to dispute it, 
by which I could pronounce that Certificates sur- 
rendered and cancelled by the Mutual Acts of the 
Creditor and Debtor should be permitted to receive 
and acquire validity in respect to one State and not 
in respect to another. And without such rule, all 
the extinguished portions of the Debts of all the 

2 22 Alexander Hamilton 

States might, if they should think proper to make it 
so, acquire a capacity of being subscribed towards 
the assumption. Where this would lead it is not 
necessary to say. The two Carolinas have actually 
passed laws for subscribing the portions of their 
respective Debts which have been extinguished by 
them — the only answer I can give is that a Bond 
surrendered as discharged constitutes no Debt and 
that in every such case, there is no Debt to be 
assumed. 

I cannot allow an after act of a State to create a 
Debt within the meaning of the funding Act, which 
it cannot be admitted to have contemplated as then 
in existence. It may be asked, How then shall 
the Certificates which remained in the hands of 
Individuals, but which were forfeited by the law of 
the State, be admitted upon the Loan, any more than 
those which were surrendered? This is a question 
not wholly free from difficulty; but if I had found 
no distinction satisfactory to my own mind, I should 
have been obliged to reject the whole. Such a dis- 
tinction, however, was in my opinion to be found. 
Upon principle, it is a general rule, that the dissolu- 
tion of a contract by one party without the con- 
currence of the other, is void. 

The Creditors who did not concur may claim the 
benefit of that rule and it is to be supposed that it 
was the intention of Congress, they should have it. 
It may be said to be a legal presumption that Con- 
gress, at the time of passing the funding Act, was 
acquainted with the laws of Rhode Island respecting 
the Certificates. And in point of fact the generality 

Private Correspondence 223 

of them were so at least in substance. They must, 
therefore, have been apprised, that if the forfeiture 
annexed in those laws to the not bringing in the 
certificates for payment was to prevail, there was no 
debt of the State of Rhode Island to be assumed. 
By assuming a Sum of 200,000 Dollars, a sum by the 
way nearly corresponding with the amount of the 
outstanding Certificates, the clear inference is that 
they meant to consider those Certificates as in force, 
and the forfeiture as far as regarded the assumption, 
as inoperative. But it is not a reasonable presump- 
tion, that they could have intended to comprise the 
surrendered Certificates, which could not even be 
repossessed by the individual proprietors without 
a subsequent act of the State. 

I have made some suggestions in this letter, which 
I should perhaps have omitted if I had considered it 
as strictly official, and therefore request that it may 
be received as a private and in some sort a confi- 
dential communication. 

I cannot lose the opportunity of expressing to you 
that I feel myself truly and very much indebted to 
the Senators of Rhode Island for the very flattering 
manner in which they have made mention of the 
Secretary of the Treasury in their late commimication 
to the State. 

The measure of their approbation certainly ex- 
ceeds that of his services or pretentions. 

With respectful consideration and real regard, I 
have the honor to be 

Dear Sir 

Your obedient Servant. 

2 24 Alexander Hamilton 

TO OLIVER WOLCOTT 

December 23, 179(5. 

My Dear Sir: 

I wrote to you two days ago on the subject of 
obtaining an instruction from the Bank of the 
United States to the direction of the office here to 
prevent a speedy repetition of these calls on the 
Bank of New York. This bank has so large a pro- 
portion of its whole capital in the power of the office 
that, if it be not tranquillized on the subject of 
demands from that quarter, it will be driven to such 
violent operations as cannot fail to convulse credit, 
and, among other evils, prevent the collection of the 
revenues. The danger is urgent, and a prompt ex- 
planation is essential. 

The situation of the Bank of New York is, no 
doubt, materially owing to the prolongation of the 
old and the new loan to government. Its capital is 
900,000 dollars; its discount, 1,600,000. Here is 
certainly no imprudence. 

Many of the merchants here are anxious for an 
accommodation for the duties similar to that which 
I upon certain trying occasions made. I know not 
what is possible on your part." 

TO WILLIAM SMITH 

1797. 


I received your letter of the . Though I do 

not like in some respects the answer of the House to 
the speech, yet I frankly own that I had no objection 

^ Now first printed from the Wolcott papers, in the possession of the 
Connecticut Historical Society. 

Private Correspondence 225 ^0 

Sf 
to see it softened down. For I think there is no use 

in hard words — and in pubHc proceedings would 

almost always unite the suaviter in modo with the 

for titer in re. 

But I must regret that there is no prospect of the 
fortiter in re. I perceive clearly that your measures 
will wear upon the whole the aspect of resentment, 
without means or energy sufficient to repel injury. 
Our country will be first ruined, and then we shall 
begin to think of defending ourselves. 

I will not enter much into detail, but I will observe 
that instead of three frigates of thirty- two, I would 
prefer an increase of the number of cutters. Surely 
twenty of these cannot embarrass the most squeam- 
ish, and less than this number will be useless. 

But from all I can see you will have no revenue. 
Overdriven theory everywhere palsies the operations 
of our government, and renders all rational practice 
impossible. 

My ideas of revenue wovild be : 
A tax on buildings ..... $1,000,000 
Stamp tax, including perfumeries — a per- 
centage on policies of insurance — on 
collateral successions to real and per- 
sonal estate — on hats — say . . . 500,000 
5 cents for the worst, 10 for the middling, 

and 20 for the best saddle-horses . 250,000 

Salt, so as to make the whole 25 per cent. 250,000 

$2,000,000 

I have explained my ideas of the house tax to 
Wolcott and Sedgwick. 

It is to take certam criteria of different buildings, 

VOL X. — 15. 

226 Alexander Hamilton 

and annex to them ratios, not rates. (What I gave 
to Sedgwick as rates may serve as ratios.) Then 
apportion the tax among the States, and distribute 
the quota of each among the individuals according 
to ratios. The aggregate of the ratios will represent 
the quota of the State — then, as that aggregate is to 
be the sum of the quota, so will be the sum of the 
ratios of each building to the tax to be paid by each 
individual. 

I am told an objection will arise from the negro 
houses in the South. Surely there is no impractica- 
bility in annexing ratios to them which will be pro- 
portional to their taxable value. This plan will 
avoid the worst of all inconveniences — arbitrary 
valuations ; and will avoid the embarrassment for the 
present of a land tax; will be also consistent with 
expedition. I entertain no doubt it can be adjusted 
so as to be free from any material objection. The 
smallness of the tax will render any material in- 
equality impossible. You cannot compute fewer 
than six hundred thousand houses, which, at an 
average, would be about a dollar and a half a house. 
The proportions of the better houses on the proposed 
plan would make the tax fall light on the inferior and 
country houses, which is desirable for recommending 
the first essay; nor would any house I am persuaded 
have to pay ten dollars. What room for serious 
objection ? You then lay a foimdation for an annual 
million on real property, which will become a per- 
manent accession to your revenue ; whereas you will 
feel an endless embarrassment about agreeing upon 
any tax on lands. 
Private Correspondence 227 

TO 

You seem to be of opinion to defer to a future 
period the commencement of direct taxation. 1 
acknowledge I am inclined to lay hold of it now. The 
leaders (Findley, Gallatin, Madison, Nicholas) of the 
opposite party favor it now perhaps with no good 
design. But it will be well to take them while in the 
humor, and make them share the responsibility. 
This will be the more easy, as they are inclined to 
take the lead. Our external affairs are so situated, 
that it seems to me indispensable to open new springs 
of revenue, and press forward our little naval pre- 
paration, and be ready for augmenting it. 

I have been reading the report of the Secretary of 
the Treasury on this subject. I think it does him 
credit. The general principles and objects are cer- 
tainly good ; nor am I sure that any thing better can 
be done. I remember that I once promised you to 
put in writing my ideas on the subject. I intended 
to have done it, and commimicated them to the 
Secretary. My hurry and press of business pre- 
vented me, but I concluded lately to devote an 
evening to a rude sketch and to send it to you. You 
may show it to the Secretary and confer. If, in the 
course of the thing, it can be useful to the general end 
we all have in view, it will give me pleasure. If not, 
there will have been but little time misspent. Of 
cotirse, no use will be made of it in contradiction to 
the views of the Treasury department. 

As to the part which relates to land, I do not feel 

2 28 Alexander Hamilton 

any strong preference of my plan to that in report; 
for this, in my opinion, ought to be considered only 
as an auxiliary, and not as the pith of the tax. But 
I have a strong preference of my plan of a house tax 
to that in the report. These are my reasons: It is 
more comprehensive, embracing all houses, and will 
be proportionally more productive. It is more cer- 
tain, avoiding the evasions and partialities to which 
valuations will forever be liable, and I think is for 
that reason likely to be at least as equal. I entertain 
no doubt that the rules of rates, adapted as they are 
to characterize circumstances, will in fact be more 
favorable to equality than appraisements. I think 
the idea of taxing only houses of above a certain 
annual value will be dissatisfactory. The com- 
parison of the proprietors of houses immediately 
above with those immediately below the line will 
beget discontent, and the errors of valuation will 
increase it. I think there will be a great advantage 
in throwing the weight of the tax on houses, as well 
because lands are more difficult to manage, as be- 
cause it will fall in a manner less dissatisfactory. I 
would not bear hard in this way. I would add, as 
aid, the taxes contemplated last session on stamps, 
collateral successions — new modifications of some 
articles of imports, and, let me add, saddle-horses. 
The idea of taxing slaves generally will not work 
well. If confined to all menial servants for luxury, 
as coachmen, footmen, cooks, etc., it would be 
eligible.' 

^ Reprinted from the History of the Republic, vi., 592. 

Private Correspondence 229 

TO WASHINGTON 

New York, Jan. 19, 1797. 

Sir: 

Mrs. De Neuville, widow of Mr. De Neuville,' 
formerly of Holland, lately passed through this city. 
On her way she called upon me, and announced her 
intention to make application to Congress, on the 
ground of the political services rendered the United 
States by her husband as, in fact, a principal cause 
of his pecuniary misfortunes, and expressed a wish 
that I would lay the case under your eye. I told her 
that your situation did not permit you to take an 
agency in similar matters depending before Congress, 
and that you were very delicate on such subjects. 
She replied that you might, perhaps, indirectly pro- 
mote her cause, and that from a letter from you to 
her husband, she was encouraged to think you would 
be disposed to befriend her. I yielded at last to 
female importunity, and promised to mention the 
matter. I do not know what the case admits of, but 
from papers which she showed me, it would seem 
that she has pretensions on the kindness of this 
country. 

Our merchants here are becoming very uneasy on 
the subject of the French captures and seizures. 
They are certainly very perplexing and alarming, 
and present an evil of a magnitude to be intolerable, 

^ John De Neuville, of the Dutch banking-house of John De Neuville 
& Sons. He was an active, agreeable, speculative man, who had more 
or less to do with our financial efforts during the war. He made 
propositions to Franklin, which were dismissed as extravagant, and 
John Adams, with many misgivings and viltiniate disapproval, had 
some dealings with him. 

230 Alexander Hamilton 

if not shortly remedied. My anxiety to preserve 
peace with France is known to you, and it must be 
the wish of every prudent man that no honorable 
expedient for avoiding a rupture be omitted. Yet 
there are bounds to all things. This country cannot 
see its trade an absolute prey to France without re- 
sistance. We seem to be where we were with Great 
Britain when Mr. Jay was sent there, and I cannot 
discern but that the spirit of the policy, then pur- 
sued with regard to England, will be the proper one 
now in respect to France — viz. : a solemn and final 
appeal to the justice and interest of France, and if 
this will not do, measures of self-defence. Any thing 
is better than absolute humiliation. France has 
already gone much further than Great Britain ever 
did. 

I give vent to my impressions on this subject, 
though I am persuaded yotir own reflections cannot 
materially vary. 

TO WILLIAM SMITH 

January 19, 1797. 

My Dear Sir: 

Mrs. De Neuville, widow of Mr. De Neuville,' 
formerly of Holland, is on her way to Philadelphia to 
solicit the kindness of Congress in virtue of services 
rendered the American cause by her husband. You 
probably know their history, as South Carolina was 
particularly concerned. From what I have heard, it 
seems to me her pretensions, on the score of her 

* See above to Washington, January 19, 1797. 

Private Correspondence 231 

husband, to the kindness of this country, are strong; 
as a distressed and amiable woman, she has a claim 
to everybody's kindness. 

What are you about in Congress? Our affairs 
seem to be at a very critical point with France. We 
seem to be brought to the same point with her as we ^ ^ 

were with Great Britain when Mr. Jay was sent 
there. One last effort of negotiation to produce f i'^^ ,. 
accommodation and redress, or measures of self- 
defence. Have you any thoughts of an embargo? 
There may be erelong a necessity for it. Are you in 
earnest about the additional revenue? this is very 
necessary. 

TO THEODORE SEDGWICK 

January 20, 1797. 

Dear Sir: 

I received your late letter in due time. You seem 
to be of opinion to defer to a future period the com- 
mencement of direct taxation. I acknowledge I am 
inclined to lay gently hold of it now. Leaders of the 
opposite party favor it now, perhaps, with no good 
design. But it will be well to take them while in 
the humor, and make them share the responsibility. 
This will be the more easy as they are inclined to 
take the lead. Our external affairs are so situated, 
that it seems to me indispensable to open new springs 
of revenue, and press forward our little naval pre- 
paration, and be ready for augmenting it. But, on 
the whole, I have always leaned to the opinion that 
half a million from direct taxes was not enough to 
begin with, nor should I have proposed more. 

i\ 

•7 

232 Alexander Hamilton 

What are we to do with regard to our good allies ? 
Are we to leave our commerce a free prey to them? 
I hope not. It seems to me we are even beyond the 
point at which we were with Great Britain when Mr. 
\\ J^y "^^s ^^^^ thither, and that some thing like a 
similar plan ought to be pursued — that is, we ought 
to make a final effort to accommodate, and then re- 
sort to measures of defence. I believe erelong an 
embargo on our own vessels will be advisable — to last 
till the conduct of France changes, or till it is ascer- 
tained it will not change. In the last event, the fol- 
lowing system may be adopted: to grant special 
letters of marque, with authority to repel aggressors 
and capture assailants; to equip our frigates ; to arm 
a number of sloops-oj-war of existing vessels to con- 
voy our merchantmen. This may be a middle term 
of general hostility, though it may slide into the 
latter. Yet, in this case, it may be well to let 
France make the progress. But at all events we 
must protect our commerce and save our honor. 

As to the balance business, the agitation has been 
every way unfortunate. There is not an individual 
in the State of New York who is not profoundly 
convinced that the settlement was wholly artificial^ 
and as it regarded the rule of quoting, manifestly 
unjust, and consequently, that there is no justice in 
paying it. I never saw but one mode of getting 
through the business, which is for Congress to call 
for a certain sum of each debtor State annually, say 
a fiftieth part, declaring that if not paid, each instal- 
ment shall bear interest from the time it becomes 
due, but till then the principal to carry no interest. 

Private Correspondence 233 

I believe the State for harmon^^'s sake would yield to 
such an arrangement. It may be said this will be 
onh^ a nominal payment. I answer, true, but an 
artificial balance ought only to be nominally paid. 
The conduct of some gentlemen in the late question 
has pained me much. It is inconsistent with a tacit 
pledge of faith. Every New Yorker who had any 
thing to do with our fiscal arrangements has been 
personally compromised. 

TO WASHINGTON 

January 22, 1797. 

Sir: 

The sitting of the court and an uncommon pressure 
of business have unavoidably delayed an answer to 
your last favor. I have read with attention Mr. 
Pickering's letter. It is, in the main, a substantial 
and satisfactory paper — will, in all probability, do 
considerable good in enlightening public opinion at 
home, and I do not know that it contains any thing 
which will do harm elsewhere. It wants, however, in 
various parts, that management of expression and 
suaviter in modo which a man more used to diplo- 
matic communications could have given it, and which 
would have been happy if united with its other 
merits. 

I have reflected as maturely as time has permitted 
on the idea of an extraordinary mission to France, and, 
notwithstanding the objections, I rather incline to it 
under some shape or other. As an imitation of what 
was done in the case of Great Britain, it will argue 
to the people equal solicitude. To France it will 

234 Alexander Hamilton 

have a similar aspect (for Pinckne}^ will be considered 
there as a mere substitute in ordinary course to Mr. 
Monroe), and will in some degree soothe her pride. 
The influence on party, if a man in whom the oppo- 
sition has confidence is sent, will be considerable in 
the event of non- success ; and it will be to France a 
bridge over which she may more easily retreat. 

The best form of the thing, in my view, is a com- 
mission including three persons, who may be called 
commissioners plenipotentiary and extraordinary. 
Two of these should be Mr. Madison and Mr. Pinck- 
ney ; a third may be taken from the Northern States, 
and I know of none better than Mr. Cabot, who, or 
any two of whom, may be empowered to act. 

Mr. Madison will have the confidence of the French 
and of the opposition. Mr. Pinckney will have some 
thing of the same advantage in an inferior degree. 
Mr. Cabot, without being able to prevent their doing 
what is right, will be a salutary check upon too much 
Gallicism, and his real commercial knowledge will 
supply their want of it. Besides that, he will enjoy 
the confidence of all the friends of the Administra- 
tion. His disposition to preserve peace is ardent and 
unqualified. 

This plan, too, I think, will consist with all reason- 
.1-^° ^b"^ able attention to Mr. Pinckney 's feelings. 
^ /^^"^ ^ Or (which, however, I think less eligible) Mr. 

Madison and Mr. Pinckney only may be joint com- 
missioners, without a third person. Mr. Cabot, if 
appointed without being consulted, will, I think, 
certainly go. If not, the other two may act without 
him. 

Private Correspondence 235 

The power to the commissioners will be to adjust 
amicably mutual compensations and the compen- 
sations which may be due by either party, and to 
revise and remodify the political and commercial 
relations of the two countries. 

In the exercise of their power they must be re- 
strained by precise instructions to do nothing in- 
consistent with our other existing treaties, or with 
the principles of construction of those with France 
adopted by our executive government, as declared in 
its public acts and communications ; and nothing to 
extend our political relations in respect to alliance, 
but to endeavor to get rid of the mutual guaranty in 
the treaty, or, if that shall be impracticable, to 
stipulate specific succors in lieu of it, as so many 14 
troops, so many ships, so much money, etc.; strictly 
confining the casus foederis to future defensive wars, 
after a general and complete pacification terminating 
the present war, and defining offensive war to be, 
where there is either a full declaration of war against 
the ally, or a first commission of actual hostility on 
the territory or property of the ally by invasion or 
capture. As to commerce, with the above restric- 
tions, there may be full discretion. These are 
merely inaccurate outlines. 

Unless Mr. Madison will go, there is scarcely 
another character that will afford advantage. 

Cogent motives of public utility must prevail over 
personal considerations. Mr. Pinckney may be told, 
in a private letter from you, that this is an unavoid- 
able concession to the pressure of public exigency and 
the state of internal parties. 

M^ 

236 Alexander Hamilton 

TO TIMOTHY PICKERING 

January 23, 1797. 

Dear Sir: 

I remember that very early in the day, and prior 
to any act of Great Britain, the French passed a 
decree violating, with regard to all the neutral 
powers, the principle of free ships, free goods, and I 
think making provisions liable to seizure. This de- 
cree was afterwards rescinded as to America — then 
again revived, and then again revoked. I want 
copies of these decrees for a particular purpose useful 
to the government, and presuming they must be on 
the files of your department, you will oblige me much 
by letting me have copies as speedily as may be 
convenient. 


New York, Feb. 6, 1797. 


I duly received your letter of the 23d of January, 
with its enclosure, for which I am much obliged to 
you. I have read it with great pleasure. It is a 
substantial, satisfactory paper; will do good in this 
country; and as to France, I presume events will 
govern there. 

Is it not proper to call upon the merchants to 
furnish your department with statements and proofs 
of the spoliations which we have suffered from the 
French, as was done when the English were in their 
mischievous career? 

I received your other letter with certain enclo- 
sures. 

Private Correspondence 237 


February lo, 1797. 


If I recollect right, Chancellor Livingston, while 
Secretary of Foreign Affairs, reported a censure upon 
our commissioners who made the peace with Great 
Britain, for not obeying their instructions with regard 
to France. Will you favor me in confidence with 
the real state of this business? I was at the time 
a member of Congress. It was immediately on the 
arrival of the provisional articles. 

I hope, my dear sir, effectual measures axe taking 
to bring us to some issue with France to ascertain 
whether her present plan is to be persisted in or 
abandoned. For, surely, our commerce ought not 
to be thus an undefended prey. 

TO rufus king 

February 15, 1797. 

My Dear Sir: 

Give me leave to recall to your recollection and 
acquaintance Mr. De Galon the bearer of this, who, 
as he informs me, goes to Europe on private business. 
I need not observe that he is an interesting man, as 
you know all his titles to the attention which your 
situation permits you to afford. 

You must not think I forget you because I do not 
write (for this is only my third letter). I am over- 
whelmed in professional business, and have scarcely 
a moment for any thing else. 

238 Alexander Hamilton 

You will have learned the terrible depredations 
which the French have committed upon our trade 
in the West Indies, on the declared principle of in- 
tercepting our whole trade with the ports of her 
enemies. This conduct is making the impression 
which might be expected, though not with that 
electric rapidity which would have attended similar 
treatment from another power. The present session 
of Congress is likely to be very unproductive. That 
body is in the situation which we foresaw certain 
an^^'-executive maxims would bring them to. 

Mr. Adams is President, Mr. Jefferson is Vice- 
President. Our Jacobins say they are well pleased, 
and that the lion and the lamb are to lie down to- 
gether. Mr. Adams' personal friends talk a little in 
the same way. "Mr. Jefferson is not half so ill a 
man as we have been accustomed to think him. 
There is to be a united and a vigorous administra- 
tion." Skeptics like me quietly look forward to the 
event, willing to hope, but not prepared to believe. 
If Mr. Adams has vanity 't is plain a plot has been 
laid to take hold of it. We trust his real good sense 
and integrity will be a sufficient shield. 

TO OLIVER WOLCOTT 

New York, Feb. 17, 1797. 

I groan, my dear sir, at the disgraceful course of 
our affairs. I pity all those who are officially in the 
vortex. The behavior of Congress in the present 
crisis is a new political phenomenon. They must be 

Private Correspondence 239 

severely arraigned before the bar of the pubhc. How j 
unfortunate that our friends suffer themselves, by 
their passiveness, to be confounded in the guilt.' 

TO THEODORE SEDGWICK 

February 26, 1797. 


The present inimitable course of our public affairs 
proves me to be a very bad politician, so that I am 
afraid to suggest any idea that occurs to me. Yet I 
will give over my timidity and commimicate for 
your consideration a reverie which has struck me. 

It is a fact that the resentment of the French 
Government is very much levelled at the actual 
President. A change of the person (however un- 
desirable in other respects) may give a change to 
the passion, and may also furnish a bridge to retreat 
over. This is a great advantage to a new president, \ 
and the most ought to be made out of it. For it is 
much our interest to preserve peace, if we can with 
honor, and if we cannot, it will be very important to 
prove that no endeavor to do it has been omitted. 

Were I Mr. Adams, then, I believe I should begin , u 
my presidency by naming an extraordinary com- ' 
mission to the French repiiblic, and I think it woiild 
consist of three persons : Mr. Madison, Mr. Pinckney , 
and Mr. Cabot. I should pursue this course for 
several reasons, because I would have a man as in- 
fluential with the French as Mr. Madison, yet I 

I Reprinted from the Administrations of Washington and Adams, 
i-, p. 443- 

>'> 

240 Alexander Hamilton 

would not trust him alone, lest his Gallicism shotild 
work amiss, because I would not wound Mr. Pinck- 
ney, so recently sent in the same spirit; thirdly, I 
think Cabot would mix very useful ingredients in 
the cup. 

The commission should be charged to make ex- 
planations, to remonstrate, to ask indemnification, 
and they should be empowered to make a new treaty 
of commerce, not inconsistent with our other treat- 
ies, and perhaps to abrogate or remodify the treaty 
of alliance. 

That treaty can only be inconvenient to us in the 
future. The guaranty of our sovereignty and inde- 
pendence henceforth is nominal. The guaranty of 
the West India Islands of France, as we advance in 
strength, will be more and more real. In future, and 
in a truly defensive war, I think we shall be bound 
to comply efficaciously with our guaranty. Nor 
have I been able to see that it means less than obliga- 
tion to take part in such a war with our whole force. 
I have no idea of treaties which are not executed. 

Hence, I want to get rid of that treaty by mutual 
consent, or liquidate its meaning to a treaty of 
definite succor, in a clearly defensive war; so many 
men, so many ships, so much money, and to be fur- 
nished by one ally to the other. This, of course, 
must be so managed as to exclude unequivocally the 
present war in all its possible mutations. The idea 
of a definite duration would also be useful. 

Such objects are important enough for three. In 
executive matters, I am as little fond as most people 
of plurality, but I think it pedantry to admit no ex- 

Private Correspondence 241 

ceptions to any general rule, and I believe, under the 
present circumstances of the case, a commission 
would be advisable. I give my dream of it as it 
occurred; you will do with it what you please. 

The idea here given, to be useful ought to be exe- 
cuted at once. The Senate should not be permitted 
to disperse. 

TO JAMES McHENRY. 

March 22 (?), 1797. 

My Dear Friend: 

Take my ideas and weigh them of a proper course 
of conduct for our Administration in the present 
juncture. 

You have called Congress. 'T is well. 

When the Senate meets (which I should be glad to 
see anticipated), send a Commission Extraordinary 
to France. Let it consist of Jefferson or Madison y 
Pinckney, and a third very safe man, say, Cabot (or 

Jay). 

Proclaim a religious solemnity to take place at ^ ,^ 
the meeting of Congress. '-^^^"^ 

When Congress meet, get them to lay an embargo, 
with liberty to the Executive to grant license to de- 
part to vessels armed or sailing with convoys. 

Increase the revenues vigorously and provide 
naval forces for convoys. 

Purchase a number of vessels now built the most 
fit for sloops-of-war and cutters, and arm and com- 
mission them to serve as convoys. Grant qualified 
letters of marque to your merchantmen to arm, 

VOL. X. — 16. 

*7* 

242 Alexander Hamilton 

defend themselves, and capture those who attack, but 
not to cruise or attack. 

J! Form a provisional army of 25,000 men, to be en- 
' gaged eventually and have certain emoluments. 
Increase your cavalry and artillery in immediate 
service. 

Or do as much of all this as you can. Make a 
last effort for peace, but be prepared for the worst. 

The Emperor Paul is at best equivocal. A suc- 
cessor is apt to differ from a predecessor. He seems 
to be a reformer, too. Who can say into what scale 
his weight may be finally thrown ? 

If things shall so turn that Austria is driven to 
make peace and England left to contend alone, who 
can guarantee us that France may not sport in this 
country a proselyting army? 

Even to get rid of the troops if it fails may be no 
bad thing to the government of that country. There 
is a possible course of things which may subject 
us even to an internal invasion by France. Our 
calculations to be solid should contemplate this 
possibility. 

I know in your Administration there is a doubt 
about a Commission or Envoy Extraordinary. I am 
very sorry for it, because I am sure it is an expedi- 
ent measure. But perhaps France has said she will 
receive no minister till her grievances shall be 
redressed. 

'T is hardly possible this can refer to any but a 
minister who is to reside. A special extraordinary 
mission cannot be intended to be excluded, because 
it is at least necessary to know what measure of re- 

Private Correspondence 243 

dress will satisfy if any is due. But grant she will 
refuse to hear. 

Still, the great advantage results of showing in the 
most glaring light to our people, her unreasonable- 
ness, of disarming a party of the plea that all has 
not been done which might be done, and of refuting 
completely the charge that the actual administration 
desires war with France. 

But the enemies of the government desire the 
measure. 'T is the strongest reason for adopting it. 
This will meet them on their own ground and shut 
their mouths. 

But to answer the end, a man who will have their 
confidence must be sent — Jefferson or Madison. To 
do this and to be safe, others must be united — 
Jay, Pinckney, and Cabot. Hence the idea of a 
commission. 

I am really, my friend, anxious that this should be 
your plan. Depend on it, it will unite the double ad- 
vantage of silencing enemies and satisfying friends. 

I write you this letter on your fidelity. No mortal 
must see it or know its contents/ 

TO TIMOTHY PICKERING 

March 22, 1797. 

Dear Sir: 

It is now ascertained that Mr. Pinckney has been 
refused, and with circumstances of indignity. What 
is to be done ? The share I have had in the public 

^ Now first printed entire from the Hamilton papers in the State 
Department. A portion of this letter is given in the History of the 
Republic, vii., i8. 

\ 

244 Alexander Hamilton 

administration, added to my interest as a citizen, 
makes me extremely anxious that at this delicate 
crisis a course of conduct exactly proper may be 
adopted. I offer to your consideration, without 
what appears to me ceremony, such a course. 

First. — I would appoint a day of humiliation and 
prayer. In such a crisis this appears to me proper 
in itself, and it will be politically useful to impress 
our nation that there is a serious state of things — to 
strengthen religious ideas in a contest, which in its 
progress may require that our people may consider 
themselves as the defenders of their country against 
atheism, conquest, and anarchy. It is far from 
evident to me that the progress of the war may 
not call on us to defend our firesides and our 
altars. And any plan which does not look forward 
to this as possible, will, in my opinion, be a super- 
ficial one. 

Second. — I would call Congress together at as short 
a day as a majority of both houses can assemble. 

Third. — When assembled, I would appoint a com- 
mission extraordinary, to consist of Mr. Jefferson or 
Mr. Madison, together with Mr. Cabot and Mr. 
Pinckney. To be useful it is important that a man 
agreeable to the French should go. But neither 
Madison nor Jefferson otight to go alone. The three 
will give security. It will flatter the French pride. 
It will engage American confidence and recommend 
the people to what shall be eventually necessary. 
The commission should be instructed to explain ; to 
ask a rescinding of the order imder which we suffer, 
and reparation for the past — to remodify our treaties 

Pirvate Correspondence 245 

under proper guards. On the last idea I will trouble 
you hereafter. 

Fourth. — The Congress should be urged to take 
defensive measures, these to be an embargo, unless 
with convoy by special license. 

1. Additional revenue for additional expenses. 

2. The creation of a naval force — including the 
prompt purchase and equipment of sloops-of-war — 
this force to serve as convoys to our trade. 

3. Commissions to be granted to our merchant 
vessels, authorizing them to arm to defend them- 
selves; to capture when attacked, but not to cruise. 
The same instructions to our convoys. 

4. The organization of a provisional army of 
twenty-five thousand men, to be ready to serve if a 
war breaks out — in the meantime to receive certain 
compensations, but not full pa3^ The actual in- 
crease of our establishment in artillery and cavalry. 

The following considerations appear to me weighty. 
The Empress of Russia is dead. Successors are too 
apt to contradict predecessors. The new emperor 
may join Prussia. The emperor of Germany by this 
means or by the fortune of war may be compelled to 
make peace. England may be left alone. America 
may be a good outlet for troublesome armies which 
the government is at a loss to manage. The govern- 
ing passion of the rulers of France has been revenge. 
Their interest is not to be calculated upon. To 
punish us, to force us into a greater dependence, may 
be the plan of France. 

At any rate we shall best guarantee ourselves 
against calamity by preparing for the work. In this 

246 Alexander Hamilton 

/ time of general convulsion, in a state of things which 
threatens all civilization, 't is a great folly to wrap 
ourselves up in a cloak of security. 

The Executive before Congress meet ought to have 
a well-digested plan and to co-operate in getting it 
adopted. 

TO TIMOTHY PICKERING 

New York, March 29, 1797. 

Dear Sir: 

The post of yesterday brought me your letter of 
the day before. 

I regret that the idea of a commission extraor- 
dinary appears of doubtful propriety. For after 
very mature reflection I am entirely convinced of its 
expediency. I do not understand the passage you 
cite as excluding the reception of a special extra- 
ordinary minister, but of an extraordinary resident 
minister. It seems impossible that the Directory 
can mean to say that they will shut the door to all 
explanation, even as to the nature and measure of the 
redress of grievances which they require. They 
speak too hastily not to authorize a large interpreta- 
tion of what they say. 

But if I were certain they would not hear the com- 
mission, it would not prevent my having recourse 
to it. It would be my policy, if such a temper exists 
in them, to accumulate the proofs of it with a view 
to union at home. 

This union (I do not expect to proselyte all the 
leaders of faction) appears to me a predominant 

Private Correspondence 247 

consideration; and, with regard to France, more 
than ordinary pains are requisite to attain it. 

That the enemies of the government desire the 
measure, is a cogent reason with me for adopting it; 
because I would meet them on their own ground and 
disarm them of the argument that all has not been 
done which might have been done towards preserv- 
ing peace. 

The estimation of the merit of all our past measures 
depends on the final preservation of peace. This, 
besides the interest of the country in peace, is a very 
powerful reason for attempting every thing. The 
best friends of the government will expect it, and if 
this expedient be not adopted, it seems to me rup- 
ture will inevitably follow. 

There is an opinion industriously inculcated 
(which nobody better than myself knows to be 
false), that the actual administration are endeavor- 
ing to provoke a war. It is all important by the 
last possible sacrifice to confound this charge. I 
cannot but add that I have not only a strong wish, 
but an extreme anxiety, that the measure in question 
may be adopted. 

To attain the end of it, however, it is very ma- 
terial to engage in the errand a man who will have the 
full confidence of the adverse party, and who will be 
agreeable to France. 

This cannot be done without employing others 
with him.. Hence the idea of a commission, which 
to me appears capable of attaining every advantage 
and obviating every danger. 

I am also desirous of impressing the public mind 

I 

248 Alexander Hamilton 

strongly by a religious solemnity, to take place about 
the meeting of Congress. I also think the step in- 
trinsically proper. 

TO OLIVER WOLCOTT 

March 30, 1797. 

My Dear Sir: 

Every one who can properly appreciate the situa- 
tion of our affairs at this moment, in all the extent 
of possible circumstances, must be extremely anx- 
ious for such a course of conduct in our govern- 
ment, which will unite the utmost prudence with 
energy. It has been a considerable time my wish, 
that a commission extraordinary ' should be con- 
stituted to go to France, to explain, demand, nego- 
tiate, etc. I was particularly desirous that the first 
measure of the present president's administration 
should have been that. But it has not happened. 
I now continue to wish earnestly that the same 
measure may go into effect, and that the meeting of 
the Senate may be accelerated for that purpose. 
Without opening a new channel of negotiation, it 
seems to me the door to accommodation is shut, and 
rupture will follow, if not prevented by a general 
peace. Who, indeed, can be certain that a general 
pacification of Europe may not leave us alone to re- 
ceive the law from France ? Will it be wise to omit 
any thing to parry, if possible, these great risks? 

Perhaps the Directory have declared they will not 
receive a minister till their grievances shall have been 
redressed. 

^ Madison, Pinckney, and Cabot. ;^ ^ -5 <^_ 

Private Correspondence 249 

This can hardly mean more than that they will not 
receive a resident minister. It cannot mean that 
they will not hear an extraordinary messenger, who 
may even be sent to know what will satisfy. 

Suppose they do. It will still be well to convince 
the people that the government has done all in its 
power, and that the Directory are unreasonable. 

But the enemies of the government call for the 
measure. To me this is a very strong reason for 
pursuing it. It will meet them on their own ground, 
and disarm them of the plea that some thing has 
been omitted. 

I ought, my good friend, to apprise you, for you 
may leam it from no other, that a suspicion begins 
to dawn among the friends of the government, that 
the actual administration is not much averse to war 
with France. How very important to obviate this! 

The accounts just received offer a great danger, 
that the Emperor may be compelled to make peace. 
Paul of Russia is evidently lukewarm in the cause of 
the allies. From lukewarmness to enmity, when for- 
tunes take the other side, is but a step. 

If England is left to bear the burthen alone, who 
can say that France may not venture to sport an 
army to this country? It may get rid of trouble- 
some spirits. 

As in the case of England, so now, my opinion is, 
to exhaust the expedients of negotiation; and, at 
the same time, to prepare vigorously for the worst. 
This is sound policy. Any omission or deficiency 
either way, will be a great error. 

250 Alexander Hamilton 

TO TIMOTHY PICKERING 

April I, 1797. 


I have received your letter of the 30th, with the 
statement enclosed. I do not believe that its pub- 
lication would have any influence upon the question 
of a rupture with France, but yet, as it seems that 
those who surround the President are not agreed in 
the matter — as an opinion is industriously circulated 
that too much fuel has been added by the publica- 
tions of the government — as it is important to dis- 
arm a certain party of the weapons of calumny, — as 
it is in general best to avoid unofficial publications 
of official matter — as it may be even useful, for the 
sake of impression, to reserve the disclosure till 
the meeting of Congress, when the accumulation of 
insult may be the instrument of giving a strong im- 
pulse,— I rather advise the withholding of the state- 
ment. When Congress meet, it will be very useful 
to have a statement ready, as the abstract of the 
communication, to present to the people a summary 
view. 

Such, my dear sir, is the infatuation of a great 
part of our community, that it will be policy in our 
government to do a great deal too much to make the 
idea palpable that rupture was inevitable. Adieu. 

Yours truly, etc. 

If the statement is published, I would close with 
the words ''January last" in the last paragraph. 
The residue will make a good separate newspaper 
paragraph. Pray, who is the emigrant alluded to? 

l--' 

Private Correspondence 251 

TO OLIVER WOLCOTT 

April 5, 1797. 

Dear Sir: 

I have received your letter of March 31st. I hope 
nothing in my last was misunderstood. Could it be 
necessary, I would assure you that no one has a 
stronger conviction than myself of the purity of the 
motives which direct your public conduct, or of the 
good sense and judgment by which it is guided. If 
I have a fear (you will excuse my frankness), it is 
lest the strength of your feelings, the companions of 
energy of character, should prevent that pliancy to 
circumstances which is sometimes indispensable. I 
beg you only to watch yourself on this score, and the 
public will always find in you an able as well as a 
faithful servant. 

The situation of our country, my dear sir, is sin- 
gularly critical. The map of Europe is every way 
discouraging. There is too much reason to appre- 
hend that the Emperor of Germany, in danger from 
Russia and Prussia, perhaps from the Porte, as well 
as from France, may be compelled to yield to the 
views of the latter. England, standing alone, may 
be driven to a similar issue. It is certain that great 
consternation in court and coimtry attended the in- 
telligence of Bonaparte's last victories. Either to 
be in rupture with France, united with England 
alone, or singly, as is possible, would be a most im- 
welcome situation. Divided as we are, who can say 
what would be hazarded by it? 

In such a situation, it appeared to me we should 
rather err on the side of condescension than on the 

252 Alexander Hamilton 

opposite side. We ought to do every thing to avoid 
rupture, without unworthy sacrifices, and to keep in 
view, as a primary object, union at home. 

No measure can tend more to this than an extra- 
ordinary mission. And it is certain to fulfil the ends 
proposed. It ought to embrace a character in whom 
France and the opposition have full credit. What 
risk can attend Madison, if combined, as I propose, 
with Pinckney and Cabot, or such a man (two de- 
ciding) ? Depend on it, Pinckney is a man of honor, 
and loves his country. Cabot we both know. Be- 
sides, there ought to be certain leading instructions 
from which they may not deviate. 

I agree with you that we have nothing to retract; 
that we ought to risk every thing before we submit 
to any dishonorable terms. But we may remould 
our treaties. We may agree to put France on the 
same footing as Great Britain by our treaty with 
her. We may also liquidate, with a view to future 
wars, the import of the mutual guaranty in the 
treaty of alliance, substituting specific succors, and 
defining the casus fcederis. But this last may or 
may not be done, though with me it is a favorite 
object. 

Ingersol will not fulfil the object, but I would 
rather have him than do nothing. 

I am clearly of opinion with you that the President 
shall come forward to Congress in a manly tone, and 
that Congress shall adopt vigorous defensive meas- 
ures. Those you propose are proper, and some 
others on which I may write hereafter. 

If Madison is well coupled, I do not think his 

Private Correspondence 253 

intrigues can operate as you imagine. Should he 
advocate dishonorable concessions to France, the 
public opinion will not support. His colleagues, by 
address, and showing a disposition to do enough, may 
easily defeat his policy, and maintain the public con- 
fidence. Besides that, it is possible too much may 
be taken for granted with regard to Mr. Madison. 

TO WILLIAM SMITH 

New York, April 5, 1797. 

I have received, my dear sir, your letter of the 2d 
of April, (1797,) with your little work accompanying 
it, which I shall read with the interest I take in the 
author, the first leisure hour. I have cast my eye 
over it, and like very much the plan. 

Our affairs are indeed very critical. But I am 
sorry to find that I do not agree with several of my 
friends. I am clearly of opinion for an extraordinary 
mission, and as clearly that it should embrace Madi- 
son. I do not think we ought to construe the de- 
claration of the Directory against receiving a Minister 
Plenipotentiary, as an extraordinary mission pro hac 
vice. And if it does, it would be no reason with me 
against it. I would accumulate the proofs of French 
violence, and demonstrate to all our citizens that 
nothing possible has been omitted. That a certain 
party desires it is with me a strong reason for it — 
since I would disarm them of all plea that we 
have not made every possible effort for peace. The 
idea is a plausible one, that as we sent an Envoy 

254 Alexander Hamilton 

Extraordinary to Britain, so we ought to send one 
to France. And plausible ideas are always enough 
for the multitude. 

, These and other reasons (and principally to avoid 
rupture with a political monster, which seems des- 
tined soon to have no competitor but England) 
make me even anxious for an extraordinary mission. 

And to produce the desired effect, it seems to me 
essential that it shall embrace a distinguished char- 
acter agreeable to France, and having the confidence 
of the adverse party. Hence I think of Madison, 
but I think of him only as onCy because I would not 
trust him alone. I would unite with him Pinckney, 
and some strong man from the North, Jay, Cabot, 
• and two of the three should rule. We should then 
be safe. 

I need not tell you that I am disposed to make no 
sacrifices to France. I had rather perish myself and 
family than see the country disgraced. But I would 
try hard to avoid rupture, and if that cannot be, to 
unite the opinions of all good citizens of whatever 
political denomination. This is with me a mighty 

I will give you hereafter my ideas of what ought 
to be done when Congress meet. My plan ever is to 
\ combine energy with moderation. 

TO RUFUS KING 

April 8, 1797. 

I thank you, my dear sir, for your letter of the 6th 
of February. The intelligence that the Directory 

Private Correspondence 255 

have ordered away our minister is every way un- 
pleasant. It portends, too, a final rupture as the 
only alternative to an ignominious submission. 
Much public feeling has been excited; but the gov- 
ernment, I trust and believe, will continue prudent, 
and do every thing that honor permits towards ac- 
commodation. It is, however, to be feared that 
France, successful, will be too violent and imperious 
to meet us on any admissible ground. 

Congress are called together. I can give you no 
conjecture as to what will be done. Opinions are 
afloat. My idea is, another attempt to pacify by 
negotiation, vigorous preparation for war, and de- 
fensive measures with regard to our trade. But 
there never was a period of our affairs in which I 
could less foresee the state of things. 

I believe there is no danger of want of firmness in 
the Executive. If he is not ill-advised, he will not 
want prudence. I mean, that he is himself disposed 
to a prudently firm course. 

You know the mass of our Senate. That of our 
House of Representatives is not ascertained. A 
small majority on the right side is counted upon. 
In Virginia it is understood that Morgan comes in 
place of Rutherforth, and Evans in place of Page. 
The whole result of the Virginia election is not 
known. 

The conduct of France has been a very powerful 
medicine for the political disease of our country. I 
think the commimity improves in soimdness. 

256 Alexander Hamilton 

TO WILLIAM SMITH 

April 10, 1797. 

Dear Sir: 

Since my last to you I have perused with great 
satisfaction your little work on our governments. I 
like the execution no less than the plan. If my 
health and leisure should permit, I would make some 
notes; but you can not depend on it, as I am not 
only extremely occupied, but in feeble health. 

I send you my ideas of the course of conduct 
proper in our present situation. It is unpleasant to 
me to know that I have for some time differed 
materially from many of my friends on public sub- 
jects, and I particularly regret that, at the present 
critical juncture, there is in my apprehension much 
danger that sensibility will be an overmatch for 
policy. We seem now to feel and reason as the 
Jacobins did when Great Britain insulted and in- 
jured us, though certainly we have at least as much 
need of a temperate conduct now as we had then. I 
only say, God grant that the public interest may not 
be sacrificed at the shrine of irritation and mistaken 
pride. Farewell. 

TO OLIVER WOLCOTT 

New York, April 13, 1797. 

My Dear Sir: 

The post of to-day brought me a letter from you. 
I am just informed that an order is come to the 
custom-house not to clear out any vessels if armed, 
unless destined for the East Indies. Under the 
present circumstances, I very much doubt the ex- 

Private Correspondence 257 

pediency of this measure. The excesses of France 
justify passiveness in the government; and its in- 
abiHty to protect the merchants requires that it 
should leave them to protect themselves. Nor do 
I fear that it would tend to rupture with France, 
if such be not her determination otherwise. The 
legality of this prohibition cannot be defended; it 
must stand on its necessity. It would, I think, have 
been enough to require security that the vessel is 
not to be employed to cruise against any of the 
belligerent powers. Perhaps even now, where ves- 
sels have been armed previous to the receipt of the 
prohibition, it is safe and advisable to except them 
on the condition of such security. Think of this 
promptly. The general measure may be further 
considered at leisure. Nor am I prepared to say 
that, having been taken, it ought to be revoked. 

I will send you shortly some remarks in reply to 
questions you propose. 

TO HAMILTON 

Albany, State of New York, May 2, 1797. 


Some days since I received with great pleasure 
your letter of the loth of March. The mark it 
affords of your kind attention, and the particular 
account it gives me of so many relations in Scotland 
are extremely gratifying to me. You, no doubt, 
have understood that my father's affairs at a very 
early day went to wreck, so as to have rendered his 

VOL. X.— 17. 

258 Alexander Hamilton 

situation during the greatest part of his life far from 
eligible. This state of things occasioned a separa- 
tion between him and me, when I was very young, 
and threw me upon the bounty of my mother's rela- 
tives, some of whom were then wealthy, though by 
vicissitudes to which human affairs are so liable, they 
have been since much reduced and broken up. My- 
self, at about sixteen, came to this country. Having 
always had a strong propensity to literary pursuits, 
by a course of study and laborious exertion, I was 
able, by the age of nineteen, to qualify myself for the 
degree of Bachelor of Arts in the College of New 
York, and to lay the foundation by preparatory 
study for the future profession of the law. 

The American Revolution supervened. My prin- 
ciples led me to take part in it ; at nineteen, I entered 
into the American army as captain of artillery. 
Shortly after I became, by his invitation, aide-de- 
camp to General Washington, in which station I 
served till the commencement of that campaign 
which ended with the siege of York in Virginia, and 
the capture of Comwallis' army. The campaign I 
made at the head of a corps of light infantry, with 
which I was present at the siege of York, and en- 
gaged in some interesting operations. 

At the period of the peace with Great Britain I 
found myself a member of Congress, by appointment 
of the legislature of this State. 

After the peace, I settled in the city of New York, 
in the practice of the law, and was in a very lucrative 
course of practice, when the derangement of our pub- 
lic affairs, by the feebleness of the general confedera- 

Private Correspondence 259 

tion, drew me again reluctantly into public life. I 
became a member of the Convention which framed 
the present Constitution of the United States; and 
having taken part in this measure, I conceived my- 
self to be under an obligation to lend my aid towards 
putting the machine in some regular motion. Hence, 
I did not hesitate to accept the offer of President 
Washington to undertake the office of Secretary of 
the Treasury. 

In that office I met with many intrinsic difficulties, 
and many artificial ones, proceeding from passions, 
not very worthy, common to human nature, and 
which act with peculiar force in republics. The ob- 
ject, however, was effected of establishing public 
credit and introducing order in the finances. 

Public office in this country has few attractions. 
The pecimiary emolument is so inconsiderable as to 
amount to a sacrifice to any man who can employ his 
time with advantage in any liberal profession. The 
opportunity of doing good, from the jealousy of 
power and the spirit of faction, is too small in any 
station to warrant a long continuance of private 
sacrifices. The enterprises of party had so far suc- 
ceeded as materially to weaken the necessary influ- 
ence and energy of the executive authority, and so 
far diminish the power of doing good in that depart- 
ment, as greatly to take away the motives which a 
virtuous man might have for making sacrifices. The 
prospect was even bad for gratifying in future the 
love of fame, if that passion was to be the spring of 
action. 

The union of these motives, with the reflections of 

26o Alexander Hamilton 

prudence in relation to a growing family, determined 
me as soon as my plan had attained a certain ma- 
turity, to withdraw from office. This I did by a re- 
signation about two years since, when I resumed the 
profession of the law in the city of New York under 
every advantage I could desire. 

It is a pleasant reflection to me, that since the 
commencement of my connection with General 
Washington to the present time, I have possessed a 
flattering share of his confidence and friendship. 

Having given you a brief sketch of my political 
career, I proceed to some further family details. 

In the year 1780, I married the second daughter of 
General Schuyler, a gentleman of one of the best 
families of this country, of large fortune, and no less 
personal and political consequence. It is impossible 
to be happier than I am in a wife; and I have five 
children, four sons and a daughter, the eldest a son 
somewhat past fifteen, who all promise as well as 
their years permit, and yield me much satisfaction. 
Though I have been too much in public life to be 
wealthy, my situation is extremely comfortable, and 
leaves me nothing to wish for but a continuance of 
health. With this blessing, the profits of my pro- 
fession and other prospects authorize an expectation 
of such addition to my resources, as will render the 
eve of life easy and agreeable ; so far as may depend 
on this consideration. 

It is now several months since I have heard from 
my father, who continued at the island of St. Vin- 
cent. My anxiety at this silence would be greater 
than it is, were it not for the considerable interrup- 

Private Correspondence 261 

tion and precariousness of intercourse which is pro- 
duced by the war. 

I have strongly pressed the old gentleman to come 
and reside with me, which would afford him every 
enjoyment of which his advanced age is capable; 
but he has declined it on the ground that the advice 
of his physicians leads him to fear that the change of 
climate would be fatal to him. The next thing for 
me is, in proportion to my means, to endeavor to 
increase his comforts where he is. 

It will give me the greatest pleasure to receive 
your son Robert at my house in New York, and still 
more to be of use to him ; to which end, my recom- 
mendation and interest will not be wanting, and I 
hope not unavailing. It is my intention to embrace 
the opening which your letter affords me to extend 
my intercourse with my relations in your country, 
which will be a new source of satisfaction to me. 

TO TIMOTHY PICKERING 

May II, 1797. 

My Dear Sir: 

On my return here I found your letter of the 29th. 
The sitting of a court of chancery, and important 
business there, have unavoidably delayed a reply; 
now, it must be much more cursory than I could 
wish. 

As to the mission, in some shape or other, the more 
I have reflected upon it, the more has it appeared to 
me indispensable. To accomplish, with certainty, 

262 Alexander Hamilton 

a principal object of it — the silencing of Jacobin 
i criticism, and promoting union amxong ourselves, — 
it is very material to engage in it a person who will 
have the Jacobin confidence; else, if France should 
still refuse to receive, or if receiving, the mission 
should prove unsuccessful, it will be said that this 
was because a suitable agent was not employed. 
Hence, my mind was led to Jefferson or Madison; 
but, as it would be unsafe to trust either alone, the 
idea of associates occurs as an essential part of the 
plan. This, likewise, is an expedient for saving Mr. 
Pinckney's feelings. 

But will either of them go on this footing? If 
offered, and they refuse, they will put themselves in 
the wrong; for on so great an emergency, they can- 
not justifiably decline the service without a good 
reason; and it would not be a good reason for re- 
fusal, that there was to be a commission. The re- 
fusal, too, if it happened, would furnish a reply to 
Jacobin clamor. It was offered to your leaders, and 
they would not act. 

I confide in Pinckney's integrity and federal at- 
tachments; why, then, name a third? Because, 
first, two may disagree, and there may be inaction. 
Second, though I have the confidence I mention, I 
■. think Pinckney has had too much French leaning to 
consider him, in conjunction with Jefferson or Mad- 
ison, as perfectly safe. A third on whom perfect 
reliance could be placed would secure Pinckney 's co- 
operation. I do consider him, as in some sort, a 
middle character. 

As to the two gentlemen named (Jefferson and 

Private Correspondence 263 

Madison), it may be fairly observed to either of 
them that the combination of character is essential 
to combine the confidence of the country, and to 
render the result, whatever it may be, acceptable. 
It may also be observed that delicacy to Mr. Pinck- 
ney dictates this course — not to exclude him after 
what has happened. To Mr. Pinckney the state of 
parties here may also be pleaded. 

The French Directory may also be made to under- 
stand indirectly that the association has proceeded 
from a desire in the Executive to unite confidence 
in the mission and secure its success at home. 

I should not despair that in such a crisis men of 
opposite politics might agree. I verily believe that 
Jefferson, Pinckney, and King would agree. There 
might be a joint commission for action and a sepa- 
rate commission to Jefferson as envoy or ambassador 
extraordinary for representation. 

I miscalculate if Jefferson will not be anxious for 
peace. I only fear that alone he would give too 
much for it. 

If this plan is thought liable to too strong objec- 
tions, the next best thing is to send the commission 
of ambassador extraordinary to Pinckney, and send 
him also some clever fellow as secretary of embassy. 

But I repeat it with extreme solicitude, another 
mission is absolutely indispensable. 

On the subject of permitting our vessels to arm, 
there is some difficulty. You are right in the idea 
that merchant vessels under the convoy of ships-of- 
war are exempt from search. But I know no book 
where it is to be found. Yet I have so constantly 

v^^ 

264 Alexander Hamilton 

understood it to be the usage, that I venture to rely 
upon it. But I believe the privilege is confined 
to public ships of war, and could not, according 
to usage, be transferred to private armed vessels. 
The measure must, therefore, be justified by the 
extremity. 

Moreover^ I understand no other consequence as 
resulting from the being armed than that it exposes 
the vessel to confiscation for resisting a search. It 
is no breach of neutrality to permit the being armed. 

But I would avoid the formality of a commission, 
and would substitute some permit, perhaps to be 
signed by the head of a department. This should 
be united with great precautions to prevent abuse by 
cruising, by driving contraband trade by transfers to 
foreigners. 

At all events our trade must have protection ; for 
our whole mercantile capital will else be destroyed, 
our seamen lost, and our country involved in ex- 
treme distress. 

As to a provisional army, I reason thus: no plan of 
a militia which is not the equivalent, in other words, 
which is not under a positive engagement to con- 
stitute a permanent army in case of invasion, will be 
worth any thing. For we want a stable force created 
beforehand to oppose to the first torrent, which, with 
mere militia, would involve incalculable dangers and 
calamities. Hence, as a substitute for a standing 
army, I offer a provisional one. It would be com- 
posed thus : the officers to be appointed by the United 
States and rank with those of the establishment, to 
receive some pay till called into actual service — say 

Private Correspondence 265 

half, a third, or a fourth; those employed to recruit 
to be fully paid. 

The men to be regularly enlisted upon condition 
not to be called into actual service, except in case of 
invasion, and then to serve during the war; to re- 
ceive a uniform coat and a dollar, perhaps two dollars 
per month when not in the field; to be obliged to 
assemble for exercise so many days in the year, and 
then to have full pay and rations; when called into 
actual service to have the same compensations, etc., 
with the establishment; in short, to become part of 
it. To be armed by the United States ; to be liable 
from the beginning to the articles of war. 

I think such a corps, from the certainty of advan- 
tage, and the uncertainty of service, might be engaged 
sooner than a standing force, and, with precautions 
in the enlistment, would be a solid resource in case 
of need. 

I am much attached to the idea of a large corps of 
efficient cavalry, and I cannot allow this character to 
militia. It is all-important to an undisciplined 
against a disciplined army. It is a species of force 
not easy to be brought by an invader — ^by which his 
supplies may be cut off and his activity extremely 
checked. Were I to command an imdisciplined 
army, I should prefer half the force with a good corps 
of cavalry to twice the force without one. 

; 

!,< 

266 Alexander Hamilton 

TO TIMOTHY PICKERING 

Satiirday, May 13, 1797. 

My Dear Sir: 

Mr. Goodhue takes on with him a Boston paper, 
the printer of which states that he has obtained, by 
a ship just arrived, a London paper of March 24th, 
mentioning in positive terms an account just received 
from the Emperor, that in consequence of a com- 
bination between Prussia and France, he is driven to 
the necessity of making an immediate peace for the 
safety of the empire; that in consequence of this, the 
king, who was at Windsor, had been sent for, etc. 

The manner of announcing it is too positive to allow 
much doubt that the thing is substantially true. 

This intelligence confirms the expediency of a 
further attempt to negotiate, but I hope it will not 
carry us too far. A firm and erect countenance 
must be maintained, and the vigor of preparation 
increased. Safety can only be found in uniting 
energy with moderation. Honor certainly is only to 
be found there, and either as a man or citizen, I, for 
one, had rather perish than submit to disgrace. 

TO RUFUS KING % - ^^H^ '^^ 

J\ine 6, 1797. 

I thank you, my dear sir, for two letters lately re- 
ceived from you, the last by Mr. Church. I feel very 
guilty for my negligence. But how can I help it? 

The public prints will inform you of the course of 
public proceedings hitherto. You will perceive that 
the general plan is analogous to what was done in the 

Private Correspondence 267 

case of Great Britain, though there are faults in the 
detail. Some people cannot learn that the only 
force which befits a government is in the thought and 
action, not in words, and many reverse the golden 
rule. I fear we shall do ourselves no honor in the 
result, and we shall remain at the mercy of events, 
without those efficient preparations which are de- 
manded by so precarious situations ; and which, not 
provoking war, would put us in condition to meet it. 
All the consolation I can give is, that the public 
temper of this coimtry mends daily, and that there 
is no final danger of our submitting tamely to the 
yoke of France. 

TO OLIVER WOLCOTT 

Jiine 6, 1797. 


You some time ago put a question to me which, 
through hurry I never answered, viz. — whether 
there can be any distinction between the provision 
in the treaty with Great Britain respecting British 
debts and that respecting spoliations as to the power 
of the commissioners to rejudge the decisions of the 
courts f I answer that I can discover none. 

I am of the opinion, however, that in the exercise 
of this power two principles ought to be strenuously 
insisted upon. One — that the commissioners ought 
not to intermeddle but when it is unequivocally ascer- 
tained that justice cannot now be obtained through 
our courts. The other — that there ought to be no 
revision of the question of interest where abate- 
ments were made by juries undirected by any special 

268 Alexander Hamilton 

statute. For it is certain that interest is capable of 
being affected by circumstances, and that the law 
leaves a considerable discretion on this point with 
juries. I take it for granted also, that where com- 
promises were made between creditor and debtor 
without the intervention of courts, or the injunctions 
of positive law, there will be no revision. This is all 
a very delicate subject, one upon which great mod- 
eration on the part of the British commissioners is 
very important to future harmony. 

I like very well the course of Executive conduct 
in regard to the controversy with France, and I like 
the answer of the Senate in regard to the President's 
speech. 

But I confess, I have not been well satisfied with 
the answer reported in the House. It contains too 
many hard expressions; and hard words are very 
rarely useful in public proceedings. Mr. Jay and 
other friends here have been struck in the same man- 
ner with myself. We shall not regret to see the 
answer softened down. Real firmness is good for 
every thing. Strut is good for nothing. 

Last session I sent Sedgwick, with request to 
communicate to you, my project of a building tax. 
Enclosed is the rough sketch. I do not know whether 
there was any alteration in the copy sent to him. 

But the more I reflect, the more I become con- 
vinced that some such plan ought to be adopted, 
and the idea of valuation dropped, and I have also 
become convinced that the idea of a tax on land 
ought to be deferred. The building tax can be ac- 
commodated to the quota-mle. For what were in- 

Private Correspondence 269 

tended as rates may be considered as ratios of each 
individual's tax only, and then, as the aggregate of 
these ratios within a State is to the sum of the ratios 
on a particular building, so will the sum to be raised 
in the State be to the sum to be paid by the owner 
of that building, and so the very bad business of 
valuations may be avoided in general. In regard to 
stores y if they are comprehended, rents or valuations 
may be adopted, and these rents may also be repre- 
sented by ratios equivalent to the proportion of the 
specific ratios to the rents of houses to be estimated 
in the law. 

If these ideas are not clear I will on your desire 
give a further explanation. 

My plans of ways and means then for the present 
would be : 

A tax on buildings equal to $1,000,000 

On stamps, including a small percentage on 
policies of insurance and a percentage on 
collateral successions 500,000 

A duty on hats, say 5 per cent, for the com- 
monest kind, 10 per cent, for the middling, 
and 20 for the best, to be decided by the 
materials 

On saddle-horses dollars per horse 250,000 

On salt, so much as will make the whole duty 

25 cents — suppose 250,000 

$2,000,000 

I should like also a remodification of the duties 
on licenses to sell spirituous liquors by multiplying 
discriminations . 

270 Alexander Hamilton 

I would then open a loan for five millions of dol- 
lars, to be repaid absolutely within five years, upon 
which I would allow a high interest, say eight per 
cent., payable quarterly, and redeemable at pleasure 
by paying off, and I would accept subscriptions as 
low as one hundred dollars. In case of pressure. 
Treasury-bills bearing a like interest may be used. 

If unfortunately war breaks out, then every prac- 
ticable object of taxation should at once be seized 
hold of, so as to carry our revenue in the first in- 
stance to the extent of our ability. Nor is the field 
narrow. 

I give you my ideas full gallop and without man- 
agement of expression. I hope you always under- 
stand me a-right and receive my communications as 
they are intended, in the spirit of friendly frankness. 

TO OLIVER WOLCOTT 

June 8, 1797. 

Dear Sir: 

I have received your two letters of the 6th and 
7th. The last announced to me no more than I 
feared. Nor do I believe any sufficient external im- 
pulse can be given to save us from disgrace. This, 
however, will be thought of. 

I regret that you appear remote from the idea of 
a house tax simply, without combining the land. I 
do not differ from your general principle. The truth 
is a solid one that the sound state of political economy 
depends, in a great degree, on a general repartition 
of taxes on taxable property, by some equal rule. 

Private Correspondence 271 

But it is very important to relax in theory, so as to 
accomplish as much as may be practicable. I de- 
spair of a general land tax without actual war. I 
fear the idea of it ; it keeps men from the augmenta- 
tion of re/enue by other means which they might be 
willing to adopt. The idea of a house tax alone is 
not so formidable. If placed upon a footing which 
would evince practicability and moderation in the 
sum, I think it might succeed. Now, one million of 
dollars, computing the number of houses at six hun- 
dred thousand, would be an average of about a dollar 
and a half. The tax would be very low on the worst 
houses, and could not be high on the best. This idea 
would smooth a great deal. 

As to the circumstance of the habitations of the 
Southern negroes, I see no insuperable difficulty in 
applying ratios to them which would tend to indi- 
vidual equity. As between the States, the quota 
principle would make this point unimportant. 

As to the inequality in certain States, I believe, 
on the plan suggested, there could be no general tax 
which in fact would operate more equally. The 
idea of equalization by embracing lands does not 
much engage my confidence. Besides that, this 
may be an after-object, and we are to gain points 
successively. 

As to the productiveness of the stamp tax, with 
the items I suggest, it is difficult, in the first instance, 
to judge. But I am persuaded it would go far to- 
wards the point aimed at. There cannot be much 
fewer than three millions of hats consumed in a year 
in this country. At an average of eight cents per 

272 Alexander Hamilton 

hat, this would be two hundred and forty thousand 
dollars, a large proportion of the five hundred thou- 
sand dollars. If law proceedings can be included, 
directly or indirectly, the produce will be very con- 
siderable. I think you mistake when you say these 
taxes in England are inconsiderable in proportion. 
According to my recollection, the reverse is the truth. 

TO TIMOTHY PICKERING 

August 27, 1797. 


Some time since I received the enclosed, being 
directions concerning measures requisite to be pur- 
sued to obtain indemnification in case of capture by 
British cruisers. I laid it by in haste, and have since 
overlooked it. I do not recollect to have seen it in 
the newspapers, and yet it appeared to me necessary 
that it should be so. As it came to me from some 
one of our public characters in London, I presume 
you must have received the equivalent. I am 
curious to know if this has been the case, and if any 
thing has been done upon it. 

After perusal, and making such use as you may 
think proper, you will oblige me by returning it. 

TO WASHINGTON 

New York, August 28, 1797. 

My Dear Sir: 

The receipt two days since of your letter of the 21st 
instant gave me sincere pleasure. The token of your 

Private Correspondence 273 

regard which it announces is very precious to me, and 
will always be remembered as it ought to be. 

Mrs. Hamilton has lately added another boy to 
our stock; she and the child are both well. She 
desires to be affectionately remembered to Mrs. 
Washington and yourself. 

We have nothing new here more than our papers 
contain, but are anxiously looking forward to a 
further development of the negotiations in Europe, 
with an ardent desire for general accommodation. 
It is at the same time agreeable to observe that the 
public mind is adopting more and more sentiments 
truly American, and free from foreign tincture. 

I beg my best respects to Mrs. Washington. 

TO OLIVER WOLCOTT 

November 20, 1797. 

Dear Sir: 

Give me leave to remind you of your promise to 
send me the documents and information which au- 
thenticate the situation of Mr. Beaumarchais as to 
the unaccounted-for million. 

Allow me also to mention to you another point. I 
hear there is a plan among the directors of the bank 
to transfer the management of their concerns from 
the house of Cazenove to that of Baring. When the 
arrangement was originally upon the tapis, I felt 
some preference to the house of Baring as of more 
known solidity. But after its having taken a differ- 
ent course I should regret a change unless upon 
grounds which I am persuaded do not exist — cir- 

VOL. X— 18. 

2 74 Alexander Hamilton 

cumstances of insecurity in the conduct of affairs of 
the existing agents. I verily believe they unite pru- 
dence and solidity. The change might, without 
cause, injure their credit and do them positive harm. 
It was one thing to have entrusted them in the first 
instance. It is another to recall that trust, which 
neither justice nor the reputation of the bank will 
countenance, but for valid reasons of change of 
opinion. My friendship for Mr. Cazenove, the 
father, corresponds with my sense of propriety, to 
induce the wish that you may see fit to exert your 
influence in every proper way to prevent a change.^ 


1797. 


I thank you for your last letter. The opinion with 
regard to the conduct of the President is very im- 
portant. 

As to our finances, all will be well if our councils 
are wise and vigorous; if not, all will go to. ruin. I 
fear there is not among the friends sufficient capa- 
ciousness of views for the greatness of the occasion. 

I send the enclosed because it requires correction.^ 

TO rufus king 

(Probably March, 1798.) 

It is a great while, my dear friend, since I have 
written to you a line. You will not, I am sure, im- 

* Now first printed from the Wolcott papers in the possession of the 
Connecticut Historical Society. 

Private Correspondence 275 

pute my silence to any cause impeaching my friend- 
ship, for that must be always cordial and entire. 
The truth is that my professional avocations occupy 
me to the extent of the exertions my health permits, 
and I have been unwilling to sit down to write you 
without leisure to say some thing interesting. But 
I now depart from the rule, that my persevering 
silence may not make me sin beyond redemption. I 
have, however, only time to tell you that your friends 
are generally well, and as much attached to you as 
ever, and that I hear of no cabals against you. 

Being just returned from Albany, I would say 
nothing about the political juncture as it is affected 
by the unpleasant advices from our commissioners 
in France. I will only say, that the public mind is 
much sounder than that of our representatives in the 
national council, and that there is no danger of our 
entirely disgracing ourselves — that is, by any un- 
worthy compliances with the exorbitant pretensions , ^^^ 
of ''The Great Monster." ' 

TO TIMOTHY PICKERING 

New York, March 17, 1798. 

Dear Sir: 

I make no apology for offering you my opinion on 
the present state of our affairs. 

I look upon the question before the public as 
nothing less than whether we shall maintain our 
independence; and I am prepared to do it in every 

* Soi-disant, "The Great Nation." 

276 Alexander Hamilton 

event, and at every hazard. I am therefore of 
opinion that our Executive should come forth on 
this basis. 

I wish to see a temperate, but grave, solemn, and 
firm communication from the President to the two 
houses on the result of the advices from our com- 
missioners; this communication to review sum- 
marily the course of our affairs with France from the 
beginning to the present moment; to advert to her 
conduct towards the neutral powers generally, dwell- 
ing emphatically on the last decree respecting vessels 
carrying British manufactures, as an unequivocal act 
of hostility against all of them ; to allude to the dan- 
gerous and vast projects of the French government; 
to consider her refusal to receive our ministers as a 
virtual denial of our independence, and as evidence 
that, if circumstances favor the plan, we shall be 
called to defend that independence, our political in- 
stitutions, and our liberty, against her enterprises; 
to conclude, that leaving still the door to accommo- 
dation open, and not proceeding to final rupture, our 
duty, our honor, and safety, require that we shall 
take vigorous and comprehensive measures of de- 
fence, adequate to the immediate protection of our 
commerce, to the security of our ports, and to our 
eventual defence in case of invasion, and with a view 
to these great objects, calling forth and organizing all 
the resources of the country. I would, at the same 
time, have the President to recommend a day of fast- 
ing, humiliation, and prayer. The occasion renders 
it proper, and religious ideas will be useful. I have 
this last measure at heart. 

^e t 

Private Correspondence 277 

The measures to be advocated by our friends in 
Congress to be these: 

I. — Permission to our merchant vessels to arm and 
to capture those which may attack them. 

II. — The completion of our frigates, and the pro- 
vision of a considerable number of sloops-of-war 
not exceeding twenty guns. Authority to capture 
all attacking, and privateers found within twenty 
leagues of our coast. 

III. — Power to the President, in general terms, to ^ -^ 
provide and equip ten ships of the line in case of open ^^_ . 
rupture with any foreign power. \^ /f/_ 

IV. — The increase of our military establishment '^J- ^' 
to twenty thousand, and a provisional army of '^^^^'^ 
thirty thousand, besides the militia. <./ 

V. — The efficacious fortification of our principal 
ports, say Portsmouth, Boston, Newport, New Lon- 
don, New York, Philadelphia, Norfolk, Baltimore, 
Wilmington, N. C, Charleston, Savannah. It is 
waste of money to be more diffusive. 

VI. — The extension of our revenue to all the prin- 
cipal objects of taxation, and a loan commensurate 
with the contemplated expenditures. 

VII. — Th^ suspension of our treaties with France 
till a basis of connection shall be re-established by 
treaty. 

In my opinion, bold language and bold measures 
are indispensable. The attitude of calm defiance 
suits us. It is vain to talk of peace with a power 
with which we are actually in hostility. The elec- 
tion is between a tame surrender of our rights or a 
state of mitigated hostility. Neither do I think that 

278 Alexander Hamilton 

this state will lead to general rupture if France is 
unsuccessful; and if successful, there is no doubt 
in my mind that she will endeavor to impose her 
yoke upon us. 

P. S. — If Robert Troup resigns his office of district 
judge, the President cannot make a better choice 
than of Samuel Jones, Esq., the present Comptroller 
of the State. I imderstand he will accept. 

TO THEODORE SEDGWICK 

March, 1798. 

The President ought to make a solemn and manly 
communication to Congress — the language grave and 
firm, but without invective, in which, after recapitu- 
lating the progress of our controversy with France, 
the measures taken toward accommodation, and 
stating their degrading result, he ought to advert to 
the extremely critical posture of Europe, the exces- 
sive pretensions of France externally, her treatment 
of the neutral powers generally, and dwelling em- 
phatically on the late violent invasion of their com- 
merce, as an act destructive of the independence of 
nations, to state that eventual dangers of the most 
serious kind hang over us, and that we ought to 
consider ourselves as bound to provide with the ut- 
most energy for the immediate security of our in- 
vaded rights, and for the ultimate defence of our 
liberty and independence, and conclude with a 
recommendation in general terms to adopt efficient 

Private Correspondence 279 

measures for increasing our revenue, for protecting 
our commerce, for guarding our sea-ports, and ulti- 
mately for repelling invasion; intimating also, that 
the relations of treaty which have subsisted between 
us and France, and which have been so entirely dis- 
regarded by her, ought not to remain by our Con- 
stitution and laws binding upon us, but ought to be 
suspended in their operations, till an adjustment of 
differences shall re-establish a basis of connection 
and intercourse between two countries, taking espe- 
cial care, however, that merely defensive views be 
indicated.' 

TO TIMOTHY PICKERING 

(Post-marked March 23, 1798.) 

My Dear Sir: 

I understand that the Senate have called upon the 
President for papers. Nothing certainly can be more 
proper ; and such is the universal opinion here ; and 
it appears to me essential that as much as possible 
can be commimicated. Confidence will otherwise be 
wanting, and criticism will ensue which it will be 
difficult to repel. The observation is that Congress 
are called upon to discharge the most important of 
all their functions, and that it is too much to expect 
that they will rely on the influence of the Executive 
from materials which may be put before them. The 
recent examples of the British king are cited. Pray, 
let all that is possible be done. 

I Reprinted from the History of the Republic, vii., 114. 

28o Alexander Hamilton 


lo o'clock, Tuesday, March 27, 1798. 


I have this moment received your two favors of 
the 25th. I am delighted with their contents, but 
it is impossible for me to reply particularly to them 
so as to reach you to-morrow as you desire. I will 
therefore confine myself to one point. I am against 
going immediately into alliance with Great Britain. 
It is my opinion that her interests will insure us her 
co-operation to the extent of her power, and that 
a treaty will not secure her further. On the other 
hand, a treaty might entangle us. Public opinion 
is not prepared for it. It would not fail to be repre- 
sented as to the point to which our previous conduct 
was directed; and, in case of offers from France satis- 
factory to us, the public faith might be embarrassed 
by the calls of the people for accommodation and 
peace. 

The desideratum is that Britain could be engaged 
to lodge with her minister here powers commensurate 
with such arrangement as exigencies may require 
and the progress of opinion permit. I see no good 
objection on her part to this plan. 

It would be good policy in her to send to this 
( country a dozen frigates to pursue the directions of 
V."^ \^ \ this government. 

If Spain would cede Louisiana to the United 
States, I would accept it absolutely if obtainable 
absolutely, or with an engagement to restore, if it 
cannot be obtained absolutely. I shall write again 
to-morrow. 

Private Correspondence 281 

TO JOHN JAY 

New York, April 24, 1798. 

Dear Sir: 

I have received your two favors of the 19th in- 
stant. I feel, as I ought, the mark of confidence 
they announce. But I am obhged by my situation 
to dechne the appointment. This situation you are 
too well acquainted with to render it necessary for 
me to enter into explanation. There may arrive a 
crisis when I may conceive myself bound once more 
to sacrifice the interests of my family to public call. 
But I must defer the change as long as possible. 

I do not at present think of a person to recom- 
mend adapted to the emergency. I shall reflect and 
consult, and write you by the next post. This, the 
first day, is not decisive of our election here, but 
there is as yet nothing to discourage/ 

TO JAMES McHENRY 

May 17, 1798. 

My Dear Sir: 

I have received your letter of the 12th instant. 
Not having seen the law which provides the naval 
armament, I cannot tell whether it gives any new 
power to the President; that is, any power what- 
ever with regard to the employment of the ships. 
If not, and he is left at the foot of the Constitution, 
as I understand to be the case, I am not ready to say 
that he has any other power than merely to employ 
the ships as convoys, with authority to repel force 

''Jay was at this time Governor of New York, and he had written 
Hamilton, asking his permission to appoint hira U. S. Senator in place 
of Judge Hobart, who had resigned. 

282 Alexander Hamilton 

by force (but not to capture), and to repress hos- 
tilities within our waters, including a marine league 
from our coasts. 

Any thing beyond this must fall under the idea of 
reprisals, and requires the sanction of that depart- 
ment which is to declare or make war. 

In so delicate a case, in one which involves so im- 
portant a consequence as that of war, my opinion is 
that no doubtful authority ought to be exercised by 
the President; but, that as different opinions about 
his power have been expressed in the House of 
Representatives, and no special power has been 
given by the law, it will be expedient for him, and 
his duty, and the true policy of the conjuncture, to 
come forward by a message to the two houses of 
Congress, declaring that ''so far and no farther'' he 
feels himself confident of his authority to go in the 
employment of the naval force ; that as, in his opin- 
ion, the depredations on our trade demand a more 
extensive protection, he has thought it his duty to 
bring the subject under the review of Congress by 
a communication of his opinion of his own powers, 
having no desire to exceed the constitutional limits. 

This course w^U remove all clouds as to what the 
President will do ; will gain him credit for frankness 
and an unwillingness to chicane the Constitution, 
and will return upon Congress the question in a 
shape which cannot be eluded. 

I presume you will have heard before this reaches 
you that a French privateer has made captures at 
the mouth of our harbor. This is too much humilia- 
tion after all that has passed. 

Private Correspondence 283 

Our merchants are very indignant; our govern- 
ment very prostrate in the view of every man of 
energy. 

TO RUFUS KING 

May, 1798. 

My Dear Sir: 

It is a great while since I received a line from 
you, nor, indeed, have I deserved one; the vortex of 
business in which I have been having kept me from 
writing to you. At this moment, I presume, you 
will not be sorry to know my opinion as to the course 
of our public affairs. 

In Congress a good spirit is gaining ground, and, 
though measures march slowly, there is reason to 
expect that almost every thing which the exigency 
requires will be done. The plan is present defence 
against depredations by sea, and preparations for 
eventual danger by land. In the community, in- 
dignation against the French Government, and a 
firm resolution to support our own, discover them- 
selves daily by unequivocal symptoms. The ap- 
pearances are thus far highly consoling. 

But, in this posture of things, how unfortunate is 
it that the new instructions offered by Great Britain, 
which appear, according to the reports of the day, 
to be giving rise to many abusive captures of our 
vessels, are likely to produce a counter-current, and 
to distract the public dissatisfaction between two 
powers, who, it will be said, are equally disposed to 
plunder and oppress. In vain will it be urged that 
the British Government cannot be so absurd as at 

284 Alexander Hamilton 

such a juncture to intend us injury. The effects 
will be alone considered, and they will make the 
worst possible impression. By what fatality has the 
British Cabinet been led to spring any new mine, by 
new regulations, at such a crisis of affairs? What can 
be gained to counteract the mischievous tendency 
of abuses? Why are weapons to be furnished to 
our Jacobins ? 

It seems the captured vessels are carried to the 
Mole, where there is a virtuous judge, of the name 
of Cambault, disposed to give sanction to plunder 
in every shape. Events are not yet sufficiently 
unfolded to enable us to judge of the extent of the 
mischief, but nothing can be more unlucky than that 
the door has been opened. The recency of the thing 
may prevent your hearing any thing about it from 
the government by this opportunity. 

P. S. — It is said privateers are fitting out at An- 
tigua and St. Kitts. 

TO WASHINGTON 

New York, May 19, 1798. 


At the present dangerous crisis of public affairs, I 
make no apology for troubling you with a political 
letter. Your impressions of our situation, I am per- 
suaded, are not different from mine. There is cer- 
tainly great probability that we may have to enter 
into a very serious struggle with France; and it is 
more and more evident that the powerful faction 
which has for years opposed the government, is 

Private Correspondence 285 

determined to go every length with France. I am 
sincere in declaring my full conviction, as the result 
of a long course of observation, that they are ready 
to new-model our Constitution under the influence 
or coercion of France, to form with her a perpetual 
alliance, offensive and defensive, and to give her a 
monopoly of our trade by peculiar and exclusive 
privileges. This would be in substance, whatever it 
might be in name, to make this country a province 
of France. / Neither do I doubt that her standard, 
displayed in this country, would be directly or in- 
directly seconded by them, in pursuance of the pro- 
ject I have mentioned. 

It is painful and alarming to remark, that the 
opposition faction assumes so much a geographical 
complexion. As yet, from the south of Maryland 
nothing has been heard but accounts of disappro- 
bation of our government, and approbation of or 
apology for France. This is a most portentous symp- 
tom, and demands every human effort to change it. 

In such a state of public affairs, it is impossible not 
to look up to you, and to wish that your influence 
could in some proper mode be brought into direct 
action. Among the ideas which have passed through 
my mind for this purpose, I have asked myself 
whether it might not be expedient for you to make a 
circuit through Virginia and North Carolina, under 
some pretence of health, etc. This would call forth 
addresses, public dinners, etc., which would give 
you an opportunity of expressing sentiments in an- 
swers, toasts, etc., which would throw the weight of 
your character into the scale of the government, and 

286 Alexander Hamilton 

revive an enthusiasm for your person, that may be 
turned into the right channel. 

I am aware that the step is delicate, and ought to 
be well considered before it is taken. I have even 
not settled my own' opinion as to its propriety, but I 
have concluded to bring the general idea under your 
view, confident that your judgment will make a 
right choice; and that you will take no step which 
is not well calculated. The conjuncture, however, is 
extraordinary, and now, or very soon, will demand 
extraordinary measures. 

You ought also to be aware, my dear sir, that in 
the event of an open rupture v/ith France, the public 
voice will again call you to command the armies of 
your country; and, though all who are attached to 
you will, from attachment, as w^ell as from public 
considerations, deplore an occasion which should 
once more tear you from that repose to which you 
have so good a right, yet it is the opinion of all those 
with whom I converse, that you will be compelled 
to make the sacrifice. All your past labor may de- 
mand to give it efficacy this further, this very great 
sacrifice. Adieu, my dear sir. 


New York, June 2, 1798. 

My Dear Sir: 

I have before me your favor of the 27th of May. 
The suggestion in my last was an indigested thought, 
begotten by my anxiety. I have no doubt that 
your view of it is accurate and well founded. 

It is a great satisfaction to me to ascertain what I 

Private Correspondence 287 

had anticipated in hope, that you are not deter- 
mined in an adequate emergency against affording 
once more your mihtary services. There is no one 
but yourself that v^ould unite the pubhc confidence 
in such an emergency, independent of other con- 
siderations, and it is of the last importance that this 
confidence should be full and complete. As to the 
wish of the country, it is certain that it will be ardent 
and universal. You intimate a desire to be in- 
formed what would be my part in such an event as 
to entering into military service. I have no scruple 
about opening myself to you on this point. If I am 
invited to a station in which the service I may render 
may he proportionate to the sacrifice I am to make, I 
shall be willing to go into the army. If you com- 
mand, the place in which I should hope to be most 
useful is that of Inspector-General, with a command 
in the line. This I would accept. The public must 
judge for itself as to whom it will employ, but every 
individual must judge for himself as to the terms on 
which he will serve, and consequently must estimate 
his own pretensions. 

I have no knowledge of any arrangement contem- 
plated, but I take it for granted the service of all the 
former officers worth having may be commanded, 
and that your choice would regulate the Executive. 
With decision and care in the selection an excellent 
army may be formed. 

The view you give of the prospects in the South is 
very consoling. The public temper seems every- 
where to be travelling to a right point. This prom- ' / ^' 
ises security to the country in every event. 

-/ 

x4 

288 Alexander Hamilton 

TO OLIVER WOLCOTT 

New York, Jtine 5, 1798. 


The answer from the President to the Commander- 
in-Chief, etc., of New Jersey, contains in the close 
a very indifferent passage. The sentiment is intem- 
perate and revolutionary. It is not for us, par- 
ticularly for the government, to breathe an irregular 
or violent spirit. Hitherto I have much liked the 
President's answers, as, in the main, within proper 
bounds, and calculated to animate and raise the 
public mind. But there are limits which must not 
be passed, and from my knowledge of the ardor of 
the President's mind, and this specimen of the effects 
of that ardor, I begin to be apprehensive that he 
may run into indiscretion. This will do harm to the 
government, to the cause, and to himself. Some 
hint must be given, for we must make no mistakes. 

Enclosed is a sketch of some ideas which have run 
through my mind. They are perhaps none of them 
new, but they are offered as the evidence of my opin- 
ion on the point. As yet we are far short of the 
point of vigor. 

■•J • 

Further measures advisable to be taken without delay. 

^^ First. — To authorize the President to proceed 
t-^ forthwith to raise the ten thousand men already 

ordered. 

Secondly. — To establish an academy for naval 
and military instruction. This is a very important 
measure, and ought to be permanent. 
i'o Thirdly. — To provide for the immediate raising of 

Private Correspondence 289 

a corps of non-commissioned officers, viz. : sergeants 
and corporals, sufficient, with the present estabHsh- 
ment, for an army of fifty thousand men. The hav- 
ing these men prepared and disciplined will accelerate 
extremely the disciplining of an additional force. 

Fourthly. — To provide, before Congress rise, that 
in case it shall appear that an invasion of this country 
by a large army is actually on foot, there shall be a 
draft from the militia, to be classed, of a number 
sufficient to complete the army of fifty thousand 
men. Provision for volunteers in lieu of drafts. A 
bounty to be given „ 

Fifthly. — To authorize the President to provide a 
further naval force of six ships of the line and twelve 
frigates, with twenty small vessels not exceeding 
sixteen guns. It is possible the ships of the line and 
frigates may be purchased of Great Britain, to be 
paid for in stock. We ought to be ready to cut up 
all the small privateers and gun-boats in the West 
Indies, so as at the same time to distress the French 
islands as much as possible, and protect our own 
trade. 

Sixthly. — Is not the independence of the French 
colonies, und^r the guaranty of the United States, to 
be aimed at? If it is, there cannot be too much 
promptness in opening negotiations for the purpose. 
Victor Hugues is probably an excellent subject. 
This idea, however, deserves mature consideration. 

Seventhly. — It is essential the Executive should 
have half a million of secret-service money. If the 
measure cannot be carried without it, the expendi- 
ture may be with the approbation of three members 

VOL. X. — 19. 
Alexander Hamilton 

of each house of Congress. But it were better with- 
out this incumbrance. 

Eighthly. — Revenue in addition to the two millions 
of land tax, say : 

Probable 
Produce 

A stamp duty on hats, as well manufactured at 
home as imported, distributed into three 
classes: ten, fifteen, and twenty-five cents, $500,000 
Saddle-horses one dollar each, excluding those 

engaged in agriculture .... 100,000 
Salt, add so as to raise the present duty to 

twenty-five cents per bushel. 
Male servants of these capacities, by whatever 
name : maUre d' hotel, house steward, valet de 
chamhre, butler, under butler, confectioner^ 
cook, house porter, waiter, footman, coach- 
man, groom, postilion, stable-boy.^ 
For one such servant . . . . $1 
For two servants and not more . each, 2 
For three servants and not more . " 3 

Above three . . . . . ** 4 500,000 
(One dollar additional by bachelors.) 
New modification, with greater diversity of 

licenses for sale of wines, etc . . . 100,000 
One per cent, on all successions by descent or 

devise ....... 100,000 

Ninthly. — A loan of ten millions of dollars. The 
interest to be such as will insure the loan at par. It 
is better to give high interest redeemable at pleasure, 
than low interest with accumulation of capital, as in 
England. 

' In lieu of tax on slaves, which is liable to much objection. 

Private Correspondence 291 

TO RUFUS KING 

June 6, 1798. 

My Dear Sir: 

Official information and the public papers will give 
you all the information I could give of the measures 
going on in this country. You will have observed 
with pleasure a spirit of patriotism kindling every- 
where. And you will not be sorry to know that it is 
my opinion, that there will shortly be national una- 
nimity, as far as that idea can ever exist. Many of 
the leaders of faction will persist, and take ultimately 
a station in the public estimation like that of the 
tories of our revolution. 

Our chief embarrassment now is, the want of 
energy among some of our friends, and our councils 
containing too strong an infusion of those characters 
who cannot reform, and who, though a minority, are 
numerous enough and artful enough to perplex and 
relax. We do far less than we ought towards organ- 
izing and maturing for the worst the resources of the 
country. But I count that there is a progress of 
opinion which will probably shortly overcome this 
obstacle. 

How vexatious that at such a juncture there should 
be officers of Great Britain, who, actuated by a spirit 
of plunder, are doing the most violent things, calcu- 
lated to check the proper amount of popular feeling, 
and to furnish weapons to the enemies of govern- 
ment. Cambault at the Mole is acting a part quite 
as bad as the Directory and their instruments. I 
have seen several of his condemnations. They are 
wanton beyond measure. It is not enough that his 

292 Alexander Hamilton 

acts are disavowed, and a late and defective redress 
given through the channels of the regular courts. 
Justice, and the policy of the crisis, demand that 
he be decisively punished and disgraced. I think it 
probable you will be instructed to require this. It 
would be happy if the government where you are 
would anticipate. 

It is unlucky, too, that Cochran, of the Thetis, ap- 
pears to be doing some ill things. The Southern 
papers announce a number of captures lately made 
by him, and in some instances, if they say true, on 
very frivolous pretexts. The character of that gen- 
tleman would lead me to hope that there is in this 
some misrepresentation, but the present appearances 
against him are strong. 

There seems a fatality in all this. It cannot be 
doubted that the British cabinet must at this time 
desire to conciliate this country. It is to be hoped 
they will not want vigor to do it with effect, by pun- 
ishing those who contravene the object. 

TO TIMOTHY PICKERING 

June 7, 1798. 


As McHenry will probably have left Philadelphia 
before this reaches that place, I take the liberty to 
address the subject of it to you. 

I have received a letter from Capt. Van Rensselaer, 
in which he informs me that he is a candidate for 
a commission on board our navy, and requests 
my recommendation of it. As a connection of our 

Private Correspondence 293 

family, I cannot refuse it, as far as truth and pro- 
priety will warrant. 

When he first began his career, the young man did 
things which were not pretty, but he has since that 
retrieved his character by a conduct which has 
rapidly raised him to the command of a ship, which 
he has had of several. I have particularly inquired 
concerning him, and my inquiries have been satis- 
factorily answered, so that I really conclude he is 
a deserving man. But of this you can be better 
ascertained from persons in Philadelphia, in whose 
employ I believe he has sailed. 

My only intention is to request attention to 
his pretensions, as far as they appear to be good, 
and in the proportion which they bear to those 
of other candidates. I owe this to him as a fam- 
ily connection, and I may add that he is of a brave 
blood. 

What do the British mean? What are these 
stories of the Thetis, etc. ? In my opinion, our coun- 
try is now to act in every direction with spirit. Will 
it not be well to order one of our frigates to Charles- 
ton, to protect effectually our commerce in that 
quarter, and, if necessary, control the Thetis f This 
conduct will unite and animate. 

P. S. — If an alien bill passes, I would like to know 
what policy, in execution, is likely to govern the 
Executive. My opinion is, that while the mass ought 
to be obliged to leave the country, the provisions in 
our treaties in favor of merchants ought to be ob- 
served, and there ought to be guarded exceptions of 

294 Alexander Hamilton 

characters whose situation would expose them too 
much if sent away, and whose demeanor amongst us 
has been unexceptionable. There are a few such. 
Let us not be cruel or violent. 


June 8, 1798. 

My Dear Sir: 

Though I scarcely think it possible that the British 
Administration can have given the orders which ac- 
counts from various quarters attribute to them, yet 
the circumstance of these accounts coming from 
different quarters, and the conduct of such a man as 
Capt. Cochran, make me apprehensive. I take the 
liberty to express to you my opinion that it is of the 
true policy as well as of the dignity of our govern- 
ment, to act with spirit and energy as well toward 
Great Britain as France. I would mete the same 
measure to both of them, though it should ever furn- 
ish the extraordinary spectacle of a nation at war 
with two nations at war with each other. One of 
them will quickly court us, and by this course of con- 
duct our citizens will be enthusiastically united to 
the government. It will evince that we are neither 
Greeks nor Trojans. In very critical cases bold ex- 
pedients are often necessary. Will not a pointed 
call on the British Minister here to declare whether 
he has any knowledge of the instructions alleged be 
proper? The making this call and the answer public 
may have good effect. 

No one who does not see all the cards can judge 

Private Correspondence 295 

accurately. But I am sure the general course I in- 
dicate cannot but be well.' 

TO OLIVER V^OLCOTT 

June 29, 1798. 

Dear Sir: 

I have this moment seen a bill "" brought into the 
Senate, entitled "A Bill to define more particularly 
the crime of Treason," etc. There are provisions in 
this bill, which, according to a cursory view, appear 
to me highly exceptionable, and such as, more than 
any thing else, may endanger civil war. I have not 
time to point out my objections by this post, but I 
will do it to-morrow. I hope sincerely the thing may 
not be hurried through. Let us not establish a 
tyranny. Energy is a very different thing from \ 
violence. If we make no false step, we shall be es- 
sentially united, but if we push things to an extreme, 
we shall then give to faction body and solidity. 

TO WASHINGTON 

\ H, ■ July 8, 1798. 

Dear Sir: . j^^^-'f^* 

I was much surprised on my arrival here to discover 
that your nomination had been without any previ- 
ous consultation of you. Convinced of the good- 
ness of the motives, it would be useless to scan the 
propriety of the step. It is taken, and the question 

^ Now first printed from the Pickering papers in possession of the 
Massachusetts Historical Society. 

2 The first draft or project of what afterwards became the Alien and 
Sedition laws. 

296 Alexander Hamilton 

is, what, under the circumstances, ought to be done? 
I use the liberty which my attachment to you and 
to the public authorizes, to offer my opinion that you 
should not decline the appointment. It is evident 
that the public satisfaction at it is lively and uni- 
versal. It is not to be doubted that the circum- 
stance will give an additional spring to the public 
mind — will tend much to unite, and will facilitate 
the measures which the conjuncture requires. On 
the other hand, your declining would certainly pro- 
duce the opposite effects, would throw a great damp 
upon the ardor of the country, inspiring the idea that 
the crisis was not really serious or alarming. At 
least, then, let me entreat you, and in this all your 
friends, indeed, all good citizens will unite, that if 
you do not give an unqualified acceptance, that you 
accept provisionally, making your entering upon 
the duties to depend on future events, so that the 
community may look up to you as their certain 
commander. But I prefer a simple acceptance. 

It may be well, however, to apprise you that the 
arrangement of the army may demand your par- 
ticular attention. The President has no relative 
ideas, and his prepossessions on military subjects in 
reference to such a point are of the wrong sort. It 
is easy for us to have a good army, but the selection 
requires care. It is necessary to inspire confidence 
in the efficient part of those who may incline to mili- 
tary service. Much adherence to routine would do 
great harm. Men of capacity and exertion in the 
higher stations are indispensable. It deserves con- 
sideration whether your presence at the seat of gov- 

Private Correspondence 297 

ernment is not necessary. If you will accept it will 
be conceived that the arrangement is yours, and you 
will be responsible for it in reputation. This, and 
the influence of a right arrangement upon future 
success, seem to require that you should, in one 
mode or another, see efficaciously that the arrange- 
ment is such as you would approve. 

TO TIMOTHY PICKERING 

New York, July 17, 1798 

My Dear Sir: 

I thank you for your friendly letter by the post. 1 
had not contemplated the possibility that Knox 
might come into service, and was content to be sec- 
ond to him, if thought indispensable. Pinckney, if 
placed over me, ptits me a grade lower. I don't be- 
lieve it to be necessary. I am far from certain that 
he will not be content to serve under me, but I am 
willing that the affair should be so managed as that 
the relative ranks may remain open to future settle- 
ment, to ascertain the effect of the arrangement 
which has been contemplated. 

I am not, however, ready to say that I shall be 
satisfied with the appointment of Inspector-General, 
with the rank and command of Major-General, on 
the principle that every officer of high rank in the 
late army, who may be appointed, is to be above me. 

I am frank to own that this will not accord with 
my opinion of my own pretensions, and I have every 
reason to believe that it will fall far short of public 
opinion. 

298 Alexander Hamilton 

Few have made so many sacrifices as myself. To 
few would a change of situation for a military ap- 
pointment be so injurious as to myself. If, with 
this sacrifice, I am to be degraded below my just 
claim in public opinion, ought I to acquiesce? 

TO GENERAL DUPORTAIL ' 

New York, July 23, 1798. 

My Dear General: 

Though it is a great while since I have heard from 
you, I have not ceased to inquire after you, and I 
shall never cease to interest myself in your welfare. 

You have seen the progress of things between this 
country and France, and you must have made re- 
flections on your own situation. I am aware that 
the idea of your entering in any way into the military 
service of this country, on such an occasion, is one 
of great delicacy, and opposed by many motives. 
But knowing your opinion as to the revolution and 
revolutionary leaders of your country, I have thought 
it not wholly impossible that such an idea would not 
be entirely disagreeable to you, and I am desirous of 
ascertaining, in the most scrupulous confidence, the 
state of your mind on this point. The subject may 
divide itself into employment in the field and employ- 
ment out of the field. 

When I take the liberty to sound you on this head, 

^ The Chevalier Louis Duportail, a distinguished officer of engineers 
among our French allies. He was denounced after the fall of Lafay- 
ette, and fled to this country. He died on the voyage home, after the 
1 8th Brumaire made it possible for him to return. 

Private Correspondence 299 

I ought to assure you, as is truly the case, that the 
step is wholly from the suggestion of my own mind, 
and that I am altogether at a loss to conjecture 
whether those who must decide the matter would be 
at all disposed to avail themselves of your services. 
I pray you nevertheless to open to me freely your 
heart on this point, in the fullest reliance upon my 
prudence, honor, and delicacy. If it were not to in- 
trude too much upon you, I would request you to 
favor me with a digested plan of an establishment 
for a military school. This is an object I have ex- 
tremely at heart. 

TO WASHINGTON 

Philadelphia, July 29, 1798. 

My Dear Sir: 

Your letter of the 14th instant did not reach me 
till after the appointments mentioned in it were 
made. 

I see clearly in what has been done a new mark of 
your confidence, which I value as I ought to do. 

With regard to the delicate subject of the relative 
rank of the major-generals, it is very natural for me 
to be a partial judge, and it is not very easy for me 
to speak upon it. If I know myself, however, this, 
at least, I may say, that, were I convinced of injus- 
tice being done to others in my favor, I should not 
hesitate even to volunteer a correction of it, as far 
as my consent would avail. But in a case like this, 
am I not to take the opinion of others as my guide? 
If I am, the conclusion is that the gentlemen con- 
cerned ought to acquiesce. It is a fact of which 

300 Alexander Hamilton 

there is a flood of evidence that a great majority of 
leading Federal men were of opinion that in the 
event of your declining the command of the army, 
it ought to devolve upon me, and that in case of 
your acceptance, which everybody ardently desired, 
the place of second in command ought to be mine. 

It is not for me to examine the justness of this 
opinion. The illusions of self-love might be ex- 
pected too easily to give it credit with me. But 
finding it to exist, am I at liberty to seek to post- 
pone myself to others, in whose hands, according to 
that opinion, the public interests would be less well 
confided? Such are the reflections which would 
have determined me to let the business take its 
course. 

My own opinion, at the same time, is, that of the 
two gentlemen postponed to me, the cause of com- 
plaint, if any, applies emphatically to General Knox. 
His rank in the army was much higher than that 
either of Pinckney or m.yself. Pinckney's preten- 
sions on the score of real service are not extensive; 
those of Knox are far greater. Pinckney has, no 
doubt, studied tactics with great care and assiduity, 
but it is not presumable that he is as well versed in 
the tactics of a general as Knox. 

Pinckney's rank at the close of the war was only 
nominally greater than mine; it was, indeed, of more 
ancient date. But when, in the year 1777, the regi- 
ments of artillery were multiplied, I had good reason 
to expect that the command of one of them would 
have fallen to me, had I not changed my situation. 
And this, in all probability, would have led further. 

Private Correspondence 301 

I am aware, at the same time, that there were acci- 
dental impediments to Pinckney's progress in prefer- 
ment, but an accurate comparison would, I imagine, 
show that, on the score of rank merely, the claim of 
superiority on his part is not strongly marked. As 
to military service, I venture to believe that the gen- 
eral understanding of the late army would allow a 
considerable balance to me. 

As to civil services since the war, I am extremely 
'\^ mistaken if, in the minds of Federal men, there is 
any comparison between us. The circumstances of 
the moment, it is true, give him a certain eclat, but 
judicious men reduce the merit to the two points of 
judicious forbearance and the firmness not to sacrifice 
his country by base compliances. In all this, it is 
very far from my inclination to detract from Gen- 
eral Pinckney. I have a sincere regard for him, and 
hold him in high estimation. At the same time, en- 
deavoring to view the matter with all the impar- 
tiality which my situation permits, I must conclude 
that General Pinckney, on a fair estimate of all 
circumstances, ought to be well satisfied with the 
arrangement. 

After saying this much, I will add that regard to 
the public interest is ever predominant with me; 
that if the gentlemen concerned are dissatisfied, and 
the service likely to suffer by the preference given to 
me, I stand ready to submit our relative pretensions 
to an impartial decision, and to waive the prefer- 
ence. It shall never be said, with any color of truth, 
that my ambition or interest has stood in the way of 
the public good. 

302 Alexander Hamilton 

Thus, sir, have I opened my heart to you with as 
little reserve as to myself, willing, rather, that its 
weakness should appear than that I should be de- 
ficient in frankness. I will only add that I do not 
think it necessary to make public beforehand the 
ultimate intentions I have now disclosed. 

It is possible the difficulties anticipated may not 
arise. But, my dear sir, there is a matter of far 
greater moment than all this, which I must do vio- 
lence to my friendship by stating to you, but of 
which it is essential you should be apprised. It is 
that my friend McHenry is wholly insufficient for his 
place, with the additional misfortune of not having 
himself the least suspicion of the fact. This gener- 
ally will not surprise you, when you take into view 
the large scale upon which he is now to act. But 
you perhaps may not be aware of the whole extent 
of the insufficiency. It is so great as to leave no 
probability that the business of the War Depart- 
ment can make any tolerable progress in his hands. 
This has been long observed, and has been more 
than once mentioned to the President by members 
of Congress. 

He is not insensible, I believe, that the execution 
of the department does not produce the expected 
results; but the case is of course delicate and em- 
barrassing. 

My real friendship for McHenry, concurring with 
my zeal for the service, predisposed me to aid him 
in all that he could properly throw upon me, and I 
thought that he would have been glad, in the organi- 
zation of the army, and in the conduct of the recruit- 

Private Correspondence 303 

ing service, to make me useful to him. With this 
view, I came to this city, and I previously opened 
the way as far as I could with the least decency- 
But the idea has thus far been very partially em- 
braced, and to-morrow or next day I shall return to 
New York, without much fruit of my journey. I 
mention this purely to apprise you of the course of 
things, and the probable results. 

It is to be regretted that the supposition of co- 
operation between the Secretary of War and the 
principal military officers will unavoidably throw 
upon the latter a part of the blame which the ill 
success of the operations of the War Department 
may be expected to produce. Thus you perceive, 
sir, your perplexities are begun. 

P. S. — Since writing the above, I have concluded 
to write a letter, of which the enclosed is the copy.^ 
This effort to save a man I value, and promote the 
service, has, under the circumstances, cost some 
thing to my delicacy. 

Mr. Harper, of the House of Representatives, is 
desirous of being in your family. He is a man of 
very considerable talents and has the temper of a 
soldier. The shade of his useful qualities is vanity, 
but I think the good much outweighs the ill. Par- 
don this liberty in a point so delicate. 

New York, Aug. i, 1798. 

The above was written at Philadelphia, but a very 
pressing call to this place, added to occupation there, 

^ The writer of the enclosed letter is a man of respectability. I 
could recommend his primary object. (This is in the MS.) 

304 Alexander Hamilton 

prevented my being able to copy and forward it till 
now. 

Give me leave to suggest the expediency of your 
asking of McHenry a statement of all the military 
supplies, cannon, arms, etc., etc., which are already 
provided, and of the means and measures provided 
and in execution for augmenting the quantity. This 
will give you necessary information and prompt to 
exertion. 

TO OLIVER WOLCOTT 

August 6, 1798. 

My Dear Sir: 

You are probably apprised that in announcing to 
the general officers their appointments they are told 
that the emoluments are to be suspended until called 
into actual service, and that, as a consequence of 
this plan, they are to remain inactive. 

This project suits admirably my private arrange- 
ments, by leaving me to pursue in full extent my 
profession. But I believe it accords neither with 
the intention of the individuals who framed the laws 
nor with the good of the service. It is impossible 
for McHenry to get through all that is now upon his 
hands in a manner honorable to himself, satisfac- 
tory to the public, or proportioned to the energy of 
the conjuncture. You will see by the enclosed that 
I have sacrificed my delicacy to my friendship and 
public zeal. I have heard nothing in reply. I 
thought it expedient that you and Colonel Pickering 
should understand in confidence the situation of 
things. Without a change of plan they will not go 

Private Correspondence 305 

well, and the government and all concerned will be 
discredited. 

TO GENERAL DAYTON * 

New York, Aug. 6, 1798. 


I received at Philadelphia your letter of the 27th 
of July, the answer to which has been delayed by 
excessive occupation. 

You know, I trust, sufficiently my sentiments of 
you not to need being told how much pleasure your 
appointment gave me, and how highly I value the 
confidence you express in me. 

It will probably be unexpected to you to be told 
that I am not yet in the exercise of the functions 
of my military office, and that my participation in 
the preliminary arrangements is only occasional and 
very limited. 

Such, however, is the course of the plan which has 
been adopted by the Executive. 

But I have, notwithstanding, had conversation 
with the Secretary at War on the points you men- 
tion, and to the extent of my opportunity have en- 
deavored to promote a right direction. You no 
doubt have before this received a letter from the 
Secretary on the subject of proper characters for 
officers. It seems to be determined in his mind to 

^ Elias Dayton, of New Jersey, a distinguished revolutionary officer 
and father of Jonathan Dayton, at this time Speaker of the National 
House, and grandfather of William L. Dayton, senator from New 
Jersey, candidate on the Fremont ticket in 1856 for vice-president, and 
minister to France. 

VOL. X.— 20. 

3o6 Alexander Hamilton 

appoint Col. Aaron Ogden to the command of a 
regiment. 

Everybody must consider him as a great acquisi- 
tion in this station. The part of your letter which 
respects him, announcing the certainty of his accept- 
ance, was particularly grateful to me. 

Enclosed you will receive the instructions for the 
recruiting service, which were previously prepared 
by the Secretary at War. I made such remarks upon 
them as hastily occurred. Examine them carefully, 
and suggest to me whatever amendments or addi- 
tions may present themselves to you. You will 
oblige me by free communications at all times. 

TO BENJAMIN STODDERT ' 

New York, Aug. 7, 1798. 

Dear Sir: 

Capt. Robert Hamilton, a first cousin of mine, is 
desirous of employment in this country in the line of 
his profession. He is regularly bred to the sea, which 
he has followed since he was fourteen years old, and 
has had the best opportunities of improvement — 
among others that of voyages to the East Indies. He 
has also commanded a ship and has acted as super- 
cargo. I venture with confidence to recommend 
him as well qualified and every way worthy ; adding 
to skill in his profession the sentiments of a gentle- 
man, good morals, intelligence, and prudence. I in- 

' Benjamin Stoddert, of Maryland, at this time Secretary of the 
Navy. 

Private Correspondence 307 

terest myself very much in his success, and shall 
esteem it as a personal favor to myself whatever may 
be done for his interest. 

TO JAMES McHENRY 
(Private.) 

New York, Aug. 19, 1798. 

My Dear Sir: 

I write you herewith an official letter. Your pri- 
vate one of the 14th is before me. I regret that you 
have been unwell and rejoice that you are better. 

The affair of General Knox perplexes me. I wish 
him to serve. I am pained to occasion to him pain 
for I have truly a warm side for him, and a high value 
for his mierits; but my judgment tells me, and all I 
consult confirm it, that I cannot reasonably post- 
pone myself in a case in which a preference so im- 
portant to the public in its present and future 
consequences has been given me. In denominating 
the preference important, I do not intend to judge 
whether it will be well or ill founded ; in either case its 
tendency is so important, I am willing to confer, to 
adjust amicably, with the advice of mutual friends. 
But how can I abandon my pretension ? 

At foot, my dear sir, I transmit you the draft of 
such a reply as it seems to me proper for you to make 
to General Knox. It may also be well for you, in a 
private letter, to advise him to accept, with a reserva- 
tion of his claim ad referendum, upon the ground of 
the rule he quotes, and with the understanding that 
it will not be imderstood to engage him to continue, 

3o8 Alexander Hamilton 

if the matter be not finally settled according to his 
claim. 

(Draft above referred to) 

Sir: 
1. ' An answer to your letter of the 5th instant has 
> ^0 been delayed by some degree of ill health on my part. 

The general disposition it marks accords well with 
the patriotic sentiments you have so constantly 
manifested. It is extremely regretted that any cir- 
cumstances should induce you to hesitate about the 
acceptance of an appointment in which it is not to 
be doubted your services would be eminently useful. 

The paragraph of my former letter which you 
quote explains to you my conception of the relative 
rank of the generals in question as resulting from the 
order of the nominations and appointments. This 
conception, however, cannot affect the claim of 
either, if there be any subsisting binding rule in our 
military code which will arrange the priority of rank 
between officers nominated on the same day, ac- 
cording to their relative stations in the late army. 
This will naturally be the subject of some future de- 
cision in some proper mode. It is not understood 
that there has been any former repeal of the rule to 
which you allude. 

It remains, then, for you to determine whether you 
will or not accept the appointment, with the reserva- 
tion of a claim to the benefit of that rule. 

Private Correspondence 309 

TO JAMES McHENRY 



An absence from the city, upon some urgent avoca- 
tions, prevented my receiving till yesterday your let- 
ters of the loth and nth instant. 

I observe the suggestion which you have made to 
the President towards calling General Knox and my- 
self into immediate service. If he shall approve, I 
stand ready to execute, in the best manner I shall be 
able, whatever business may be confided to me; but 
I must earnestly hope that it will not be attended 
with the necessity of an immediate change of resi- 
dence. The nature of my arrangements would ren- 
der this absolutely ruinous to me, and I trust I shall 
not be reduced to such an alternative, unless events 
portending public danger shall ripen faster than, ac- 
cording to present appearances, they are likely to do. 
I do not object to a frequent attendance at the seat 
of government, for this can be reconciled with my 
other engagements, till they can be gradually pre- 
pared for a total relinquishment and a new position. 
With this, I am satisfied, every desirable end can be 
obtained, especially when the promptness of com- 
munication between this place and the seat of gov- 
ernment is considered. Be assured that none but 
very imperious motives could induce this hesitation 
on my part. In accepting the appointment I did 
not contemplate as probable a speedy dislocation of 
residence. 

The tenor of General Knox's letter, transmitted 
by you and now returned, occasions to me no small 

3IO Alexander Hamilton 

regret and embarrassment. My esteem and friend- 
ship for that gentleman would lead me far ; but there 
is a very great difficulty in waiving a station to which, 
I am well convinced, I have been called, no less by 
the public voice of the country than by the acts of the 
Commander-in-Chief and of the President and Sen- 
ate. The intention as to the relative grades of the 
officers appointed is presumed to be unequivocal. It 
is believed that the rule to which General Knox 
refers can have no application to the case of the for- 
mation of a new army at a new epoch, embracing 
officers not previously in actual service. 

It was not a permanent provision of law, but a 
regulation adapted to the peculiar circumstances of 
the late army, and governing, as far as I can recollect, 
only in the cases of promotions from lower subsisting 
grades to higher ones. At the same time, it is very 
delicate for me to give an opinion in a matter in 
which I am so personally interested. 

I send you back the list of applications which you 
transmitted to me, with remarks, and with the addi- 
tion of names. It has been in my power to do little 
as to candidates in any State but New York. I have 
supposed that you have had recourse to better 
sources of information as to others. 

TO WASHINGTON 

New York, Aug. 20, 1798. 

My Dear Sir: 

A necessary absence from this city prevented the 
receipt of your letter of the 9th instant till yesterday. 

It is very grateful to me to discover in each sue- 

Private Correspondence 311 

ceeding occurrence a new mark of your friendship 
towards me. Time will evince that it makes the 
impression that it ought on my mind. 

The effect which the course of the late military ap- 
pointments has produced on General Knox, though 
not very unexpected, is very painful to me. I have 
a respectful sense of his pretensions as an officer, and 
I have a warm personal regard for him. My em- 
barrassment is not inconsiderable between these sen- 
timents, and what I owe to a reasonable conduct on 
my own part, both in respect to myself and to the 
public. It is a fact, that a number of the most in- 
fluential men in our affairs would think that in waiv- 
ing the preference given to me I acted a weak part, 
in a personal view, and an unwarrantable one, in a 
public view ; and General Knox is much mistaken if 
he does not believe that this sentiment would em- 
phatically prevail in that region to which he sup- 
poses his character most interesting. I mean New 
England. 

Yet, my dear sir, I can never consent to see 
you seriously compromitted or embarrassed. I shall 
cheerfully place myself in your disposal, and facili- 
tate any arrangement you may think for the general 
good. It does not, however, seem necessary to pre- 
cipitate any thing. It may be well to see first what 
part Gen. Pinckney will act when he arrives. 

The Secretary at War has sent me a copy of Gen- 
eral Knox's letter to him on the subject of his 
appointment. It does not absolutely decline, but 
implies the intention to do it, unless a rule of the 
late army, giving, in cases of promotion on the same 

312 Alexander Hamilton 

day, priority according to the former relative rank, 
is understood to govern. I have addressed a reply 
of which a copy is enclosed. 

The commissions have issued, so that no altera- 
tion can now be made as between Generals Knox and 
Pinckney, if there were not the serious difficulties in 
the way which you seem to have anticipated. 

The Secretary at War has proposed to the Presi- 
dent a change of the plan announced in the first in- 
stance— which may bring into immediate activity 
the Inspector-General and Gen. Knox. In this case 
you may depend on the best efforts in my power, 
with a peculiar attention to the objects you men- 
tion, and you shall be carefully and fully advised of 
whatever it interests you to know. 

Col. Walker resides at present in the western part 
of this State. He is occupied in some important 
agencies for persons abroad, which renders it doubt- 
ful whether he would now accept military employ- 
ment. He has been written to, and will be proposed 
for the command of a regiment. 

Heth is, in many respects, very desirable, in the 
capacity you mention. But you are, I presume, 
aware of the impracticability of his temper. 

The papers sent by you are now returned. 

TO OLIVER WOLCOTT 

New York, Aug. 21, 1798. 


Your two letters of the 9th reached this place 
during an absence on necessary business which only 
terminated on Saturday. 

Private Correspondence 313 

Our friend Mr. McHenry has adopted the ideas 
suggested to him. And you may rely on my effect- 
ual co-operation. At the same time, as a total dis- 
location of residence, to fulfil in all its extent the 
idea you intimate, would be unqualified ruin to me, 
I must endeavor to avoid it. Frequent visits and 
constant communication, and the immediate charge 
of certain branches of the service will, I doubt not, 
substantially suffice. 

The objects you indicate as deserving primary at- 
tention will engage it. 

In respect to Mr. Wharton, I shall with pleasure 
promote whatever may suit him and the service 
But I do not know that there is in the establishment 
any provision for a clerk or secretary to a general 
officer. It is usual, except in case of the Commander- 
in-Chief for aides-de-camp to perform the duties of 
such characters. In reference to aides, my situa- 
tion is this — I have already yielded to the strong 
wishes of Mr. and Mrs. Church the promise to ap- 
point their eldest son as one; for the other I must 
endeavor to find an experienced officer. If Mr. 
Wharton desires an appointment in some regiment 
to take his chance for a place in the family of some 
general officer, I will assist the wish. Let me, if you 
please, understand this matter with precision.' 

^ Now first printed from the Wolcott papers in the possession of the 
Connecticut Historical Society. 

314 Alexander Hamilton 

TO RUFUS KING 

New York, Aug. 22, 1798. 

My Dear Sir: 

Your several letters of May 12th, June the 6th and 
8th, have regularly come to hand. 

You will be, no doubt, fully instructed of the 
measures which have taken place on the part of our 
government, and you will have seen in the numerous 
addresses to the President a confirmation of the 
opinion I gave you respecting the disposition of this 
country. From both you will have derived satis- 
faction, though you should not think we are yet 
where we now ought to be. But console yourself 
with the assurance that we are progressing in good. 
The indications are to my mind conclusive that we 
are approaching fast to as great unanimity as any 
country ever experienced, and that our energies will 
be displayed in proportion to whatever exigencies 
shall arise. 

I have received several letters from General Mi- 
randa. I have written an answer to some of them, 
which I send you to deliver or not, according to your 
estimate of what is passing in the scene where you 
are. Should you deem it expedient to suppress my 
letter you may do it, and say as much as you think 
fit on my part in the nature of a communication 
through you. 

With regard to the enterprise in question, I wish 
it much to be undertaken, but I should be glad that 
the principal agency be in the United States, — they to 
furnish the whole land force if necessary. The com- 
mand in this case would very naturally fall upon me, 

Private Correspondence 315 

and I hope I shall disappoint no favorable anticipa- 
tion. The independence of the separate territory 
under a moderate government, with the joint guar- 
anty of the co-operating powers, stipulating equal 
privileges in commerce, would be the sum of the re- 
sults to be accomplished. 

Are we yet ready for this undertaking ? Not quite. 
But we ripen fast, and it may, I think, be rapidly 
brought to maturity if an efficient negotiation for 
the purpose is at once set on foot upon this ground. 
Great Britain cannot alone insure the accomplish- 
ment of the object. I have some time since advised 
certain preliminary steps to prepare the way con- 
sistently with national character and justice. I was 
told they would be pursued, but I am not informed 
whether they have been or not. 

TO FRANCISCO MIRANDA * 


Sir: 

I have lately received by duplicates your letter of 
the 6th of April, with the postscript of the 9th of 
June. The gentleman you mention in it has not ^'^«^ 
made his appearance to me, nor do I know of his 

^ Francisco Miranda, bom in Caraccas, 1750, was a South American 
revolutionist and adventurer. He took part in our war, and then went 
to France and engaged in the revolution. He served with Dumouriez, 
was put in prison for his intrigues, was ordered to leave France, and 
twice afterwards (in 1797 and 1804) expelled. He was always setting 
on foot abortive revolutions, and finally, in 181 1, in an attempt at 
Caraccas, he was seized and carried to Spain, and died in prison at 
Cadiz in 1816. 

3^^ Alexander Hamilton 

arrival in this country ; so that I can only divine the 
object from the hints in your letter. 

The sentiments I entertain with regard to that 
object have been long since in your knowledge, but 
I could personally have no participation in it unless 
patronized by the government of this country. It 
was my wish that matters had been ripened for a 
co-operation in the course of this fall on the part of 
this country. 

But this can now scarcely be the case. The win- 
ter, however, may mature the project, and an effect- 
ual co-operation by the United States may take 
place. In this case I shall be happy, in my official 
station, to be an instrument of so good a work. 

The plan in my opinion ought to be: A fleet of 
Great Britain, an army of the United States, a gov- 
ernment for the liberated territory agreeable to both 
co-operators, about which there will be no difficulty. 
To arrange the plan a competent authority from 
Great Britain to some person here is the best expe- 
dient. Your presence here will, in this case, be ex- 
tremely essential. 

We are raising an army of about twelve thousand 
men. General Washington has resumed his station 
at the head of our armies. I am appointed second 
in command. 

TO OLIVER WOLCOTT 

Nbw York, Aug. 22, 1798. 

My Dear Sir: 

No one knows better than yourself how difficult 
and oppressive is the collection even of taxes very 

Private Correspondence 317 

moderate in their amount, if there be a defective 
circulation. According to all the phenomena which 
fall under my notice, this is our case in the interior 
parts of the country. 

Again, individual capitalists, and consequently 
the facility of direct loans, are not very extensive in 
the United States. The banks can only go a certain 
length, and must not be forced. Yet government 
will stand in need of large anticipations. 

For these and other reasons which I have thought , 
well of, I have come to a conclusion that our Treasury i 
ought to raise up a circulation of its own. I mean ' 
by the issuing of Treasury-notes payable, some on 
demand, others at different periods, from very short 
to pretty considerable — at first having but little 
time to run. 

This appears to me an expedient equally necessary 
to keep the circulation full and to facilitate the anti- 
cipations which government will certainly need. By 
beginning early the public eye will be familiarized, 
and as emergencies press it will be easy to enlarge 
without hazard to credit. 

Think well of this suggestion, and do not discard 
it without perceiving well a better substitute. 

TO JAMES McHENRY 

New York, Aug. 25, 1798. 

Dear Sir: 

I perceive it would be agreeable to the Commander- 
in-Chief to receive frequent communications from 
you, and particularly to understand the state of 

3i8 Alexander Hamilton 

public supplies; that is, the quantities on hand and 
the measures in execution to procure others. 

I give you this hint as a guide, and would advise 
to have a full statement made out, with notes of 
what is further doing, and send it to him. 

TO THEODORE SEDGWICK 

New York, Aug. 29, 1798. 

My Dear Sir: 

Your letter of the 3d instant came seasonably to 
hand. Business and absence from this place have 
delayed the acknowledgment. 

The persons you mention have been correspond- 
ently placed before the Secretary of War. 

As to military affairs, they lag not a little — ^no 
appointments of regimental officers yet made. Mc- 
Henry, as you know, is loaded beyond his strength. 
It was an obvious idea to derive aid from among 
general officers; but instead of embracing this re- 
source, they have all been told that the President 
hoped they would think it proper to waive the 
emoluments of their offices till called into actual 
service. 

Steps have been taken towards the correction of 
this obvious mistake, the success of which now de- 
pends on the President, and on that success the al- 
ternative of some or no energy. 

Private Correspondence 319 

TO TIMOTHY PICKERING 



Your friendly letters of the 21st, 2 2d, and 23d of 
August have been duly received. I feel myself at 
once much flattered and truly indebted for the very 
favorable opinion of me which you manifest. The 
good estimation of men of sense and virtue is an 
ample consolation for the censure and malice of those 
of a different character, while the expression of your 
sentiments has all the value which a well-known 
sincerity and integrity of disposition can give. Be 
assured that I shall be happy to be ranked by you 
in the number of your friends. The course of the 
thing in a particular quarter does not surprise. Be- 
sides the direct influence vv^hich would be exerted, I 
am aware that the circumstances of the late elec- 
tion for president have made some imfortimate 
impressions. 

The Com^mander-in-Chief , I am authorized by his 
own communications to me to believe, will not easily 
relinquish the original spirit of the primitive arrange- 
ments; but, in the last resort, I shall be inclined to 
have much deference for his wishes. It is important 
he should well understand, what I verily believe to 
be an undoubted fact, that New England would 
rather see high command in my hands than in those 
of Gen. Kjiox. 

320 Alexander Hamilton 

TO JAMES McHENRY. 

New York, Sept. 8, 1798. 

My Dear Sir: 

Yours, dated by mistake August 6th, I received 
yesterday. I postponed a reply till to-day, because 
I wished first to reflect maturely. My mind is un- 
alterably made up. I shall certainly not hold the 
commission on the plan proposed, and only wait an 
official communication to say so. 

I return you the enclosure in your letter. You 
may depend on my fidelity to your friendly confi- 
dence. I shall regret whatever of inconvenience 
may attend you. You doubtless will take care that 
you retain in your own power all the evidences of 
this transaction. 

TO WASHINGTON 

New York, Sept. 30, 1798. 


Your obliging favor of the 24th instant has duly 
come to hand. I see in it a new proof of sentiments 
towards me which are truly gratifying. But permit 
me to add my request to the suggestions of your own 
prudence that no personal considerations for me may 
induce more on your part than on mature reflection 
you may think due to public motives. It is ex- 
tremely foreign to my wish to create to you the least 
embarrassment, especially in times like the present, 
when it is more than ever necessary that the interests 
of the whole should be paramountly consulted. 

I shall strictly comply with the recommendation 
in the close of your letter. 

Private Correspondence 321 

TO RUFUS KING 

New York, Oct. 2, 1798. 


Mr. R. delivered me your letter of the 31st of July. 
The opinion in that and other of your letters con- 
cerning a very important point has been acted upon 
by me from the very moment that it became un- 
equivocal that we must have a decisive rupture with 
France. In some things my efforts succeeded; in ^ 
others they were disappointed ; in others I have had 
promises of conformity to lay the foundation of fu- 
ture proceeding, the performance and effect of which 
promises are not certainly known to me. The effect, 
indeed, cannot yet be known. 

The public mind of this country continues to pro- 
gress in the right direction. That must influence 
favorably the present Congress at the ensuing ses- 
sion. The next will be, in all appearance, intrinsically 
better. 

Of the executive I need say little; you know its 
excellent dispositions, its general character, and the 
composition of its parts. You know also how 
widely different the business of government is from 
the speculation of it, and the energy of the imagina- 
tion dealing in general propositions from that of 
execution in detail. 

These are causes from which delay and feebleness 
are experienced. But the difficulty will be sur- 
mounted, and I anticipate with you that this country 
will, erelong, assume an attitude correspondent with 
its great destinies — majestic, efficient, and operative 
of great things. A noble career lies before it. / 

\L^ 

VOL. X. — 21. ,- 1> 

322 Alexander Hamilton 

Why does not Gouverneur Morris come home ? His 
talents are wanted. Men like him do not super- 
abound. Indeed, I wish that you were here rather 
than where you are, though I think your position an 
important one at the present juncture. But we 
want to infuse more abilities into the management 
of our internal affairs. 

Governor Jay is well. He and all your friends 
continue to take a lively interest in all that concerns 
you. 

TO THE COUNT LATOUR DUPIN GOUVERNET ' 

New York, Oct. 3, 1798. 

I had yesterday, my dear sir, the pleasure of receiv- 
ing your letter of the 15th of July, accompanied by 
two others, one for Messrs. Le Roy and Bayard, the 
other for Mr. Olive, which will be sent to them in the 
country, where they now continue, in consequence 
of the sickness in this city. The letters which you 
mention to have before written have also been re- 
ceived. To mine I replied shortly after; nor can I 
imagine how it has happened that you have received 
no answer from either of the parties. 

On the subject of the sale of your farm Mr. Bayard 

^ Frederic Seraphin, Marquis de la Tour Du Pin Gouvemet, son of 
General Jean Frederic Latour Du Pin Gouvemet, Comte de Paulin. 
General Latour Du Pin, with his cousin, the Marquis Latour Du Pin, 
were distinguished soldiers and statesmen. They were summoned as 
witnesses at the trial of Marie Antoinette, and their devotion to the 
queen only hastened their own doom. They were both guillotined on 
the same day, in April, 1794. Frederic Seraphin, son of the General, 
fled to America, bought an estate, no doubt the one referred to in 
Hamilton's letter, and turned farmer. He returned to Europe after 

Private Correspondence 323 

and I myself had a conference, and we agreed that a 
sale at this time was inexpedient, as it could not 
be hoped that the farm would bring near its value, 
owing to the embarrassments in pecuniary opera- 
tions produced by the prospect of war. I shall, how- 
ever, now advise that an experiment be made. The 
offers received, if any, will determine whether a sale 
can take place without an imprudent sacrifice for 
you, and the result can be regulated accordingly. 

Be assured, my dear sir, that I shall be happy to 
be useful to you in this or any other matter. In 
doing so, I shall equally gratify the esteem and 
friendship with which you have inspired me for your- 
self, and that lively and affecting interest in what- 
ever concerns Madame de Gouvemet, which cannot 
but be felt by all w^ho have had an opportunity to 
know her value. 

If it shall conduce to her and your happiness to 
return to this country, it will certainly add to ours; 
and if you will beforehand apprise me of your reso- 

the 9th Thermidor, and to France permanently after the i8th Bnimaire, 
taking service under the Empire . During the Restoration he filled many- 
high posts, but after the revolution of July he was obliged to leave 
France on account of Legitimist intrigues, and died in exile at Lau- 
sanne, in 1837 (Larbusse, Diet. Universe!). This letter is correctly ad- 
dressed in the original draft in the State Department , but in the edition 
of 1850 it is changed to Coimt Latour Dupin Gouvion. Mr. J. C. 
Hamilton knew of no officer among our allies by such a name as Gouver- 
net, whereas there was one named Gouvion, and for this reason, ap- 
parently, he printed it Gouvion. Jean Baptiste Gouvion was an officer 
in the war, but he had no connection whatever with the Latour Dupin 
family, except that his last name, like theirs, began with G. If Mr. 
J. C. Hamilton had either looked up the Latour Dupin family, or if he 
had recollected that Frenchmen came to America in other capacities 
than that of military allies, he would have saved himself from the 
compHcated blunder which he made in the address of this letter. 

324 Alexander Hamilton 

lution, when taken, and your general plan, you will 
find me zealous to co-operate in giving it effect. 

I would invite you to return with the more con- 
fidence from the assurance in the stability of affairs 
in this country, which is derived from the late happy 
course of the public mind. An extraordinary union 
among the people in the support of their own govern- 
ment, and in resistance to all foreign encroachments, 
leaves nothing to be feared for our future security 
and prosperity. The most reasonable ideas in every 
respect prevail. 

Accept, whenever you shall come, under the roof 
of Mrs. Hamilton and myself, an asylum where you 
may be perfectly at home until you shall have com- 
pleted your arrangements for your future establish- 
ment. She joins me in cordial remembrance to 
Madame de Gouvemet and yourself. 

TO WILLIAM HETH * 

New York, Dec. 18, 1798. 

Dear Sir: 

Your letter of the 30th of July was duly received. 
It gave me much pleasure as a proof of your friendly 
remembrance, and as an indication that you were 
not disposed to be idle in a crisis of national danger. 
You are indeed one of those men who cannot be per- 
mitted to be idle, and you will no doubt be called to 
take the field in some eligible station, if the impend- 
ing storm shall not subside. You can imagine the 

^ William Heth, of Virginia, a gallant soldier of the Revolution who 
now came forward to again offer his services in case of war. 

Private Correspondence 325 

multiplicity and extent of my avocations, and I hope 
you will make a kind allov^ance for my silence. At- 
tribute it to any thing but want of regard for you; 
on this score depend that I have no retribution to 
make, being very cordially and truly yours, etc. 

P. S. — What do the factions in your State really 
aim at ? ' 

TO HARRISON GRAY OTIS ^ 

New York, Dec. 27, 1798. 

Dear Sir; 

I did not receive till yesterday your letter dated 
2ist instant. No apology was necessary for so 
gratifying a mark of your good opinion, upon which 
I set the high value it so justly deserves. 

In the enclosed extract of a letter to another of 
the government, you will find my ideas generally on 
the subject of your letter. I adopt this method of 
communication as equally effectual and best adapted 
to the multiplicity of my avocations. Some addi- 
tional remarks in direct reference to your particular 
questions, may perhaps be requisite to fulfil your 
object. 

Any reduction of the actual force appears to me 93J 

inexpedient. It will argue to our enemy that we are 
either very narrow in our resources, or that our jeal- 
ousy of his designs is abated. Besides, that with a 

^ Reprinted from Reminiscences of James A. Hamilton, p. 38. 

2 Harrison Gray Otis, of Boston, distinguished as a lawyer and orator, 
at this time member of Congress and one of the yoiinger Federalist 
leaders. He was afterwards, 181 7-182 2, United States Senator, and 
died in 1848, at the age of eighty-three. 

326 Alexander Hamilton 

view to the possibility of internal disorders alone, the 
force authorized is not too considerable. The efficacy 
of militia for suppressing such disorders is not too 
much to be relied upon. The experience of the West- 
em expedition ought not to be [forgotten ?]. That was 
a very uphill business. There were more than once 
appearances to excite alarm as to the perseverance of 
the troops, and it is not easy to foresee what might 
have been the result had there been serious resistance. 
The repetition of similar exertions may be found 
very difficult, insomuch as to render it extremely 
[needful?], in these precarious times, to have the 
government armed with the whole of the force which 
has been voted. 

There are several defects in the military establish- 
ment which demand reform as well for economy as 
efficiency. On these there has been an ample com- 
munication from the Commander-in-Chief to the De- 
partment of War. I cannot conceive why nothing 
has yet gone to Congress. Certainly this cannot be 
much longer delayed. Will it be amiss informally 
to interrogate the Minister? If the silence is per- 
sisted in, you shall know from me the objects. 

The extract answers your questions as to the pro- 
visional army. I think the act respecting the eighty 
thousand militia ought likewise to be revived. The 
effect abroad will be good, and it will likewise be so 
at home, as the evidence of a reliance of the govern- 
ment on the militia. 

Good policy does not appear to me to require ex- 
tensive appropriations for fortifications at the present 
juncture. Money can be more usefully employed in 

Private Correspondence 327 

other ways. A good deal of previous examination 
ought to lead to a plan for fortifying three or four 
cardinal points. More than this will be a misap- 
plication of money. Secure positions for arsenals 
and dock-yards are in this view a primary object. 

Your last question respecting the West India 
Islands I shall reserve for a future communication. 

TO THEODORE SEDGWICK ~^.,-.i^r^'^j}i.^^^^ 

Dear Sir: ^^^^^-^ii;,^ 

I have been reading the report of the Secretary of 
the Treasury on the subject of direct taxes. I think 
it does him credit. The general principles and ob- 
jects are certainly good, nor am I sure that any 
thing better can be done. 

I remember, however, that I once promised you to 
put in writing my ideas on the subject. I intended 
to have done it and communicated them to the 
Secretary. My hurry and press of business pre- 
vented me; but I concluded lately to devote an 
evening to a rude sketch, and to send it to you. You 
may show it to the Secretary and confer. If, in the 
course of the thing, it can be useful to the general 
end we all have in view, it will give me pleasure ; if 
not, there will have been but little time misspent. 
Of course, no use will be made of it in contradiction 
to the views of the Treasury Department. 

As to the part which relates to land, I do not feel 

* This is the date and place given this letter in the edition of 1850. 
The original is undated. 

328 Alexander Hamilton 

any strong preference of my plan to that in the re- 
port; for this, in my opinion, ought to be considered 
only as an auxiliary, and not as the pith of the tax. 
But I own I have a strong preference of my plan of 
a house-tax to that in the report. These are my 
reasons : 

It is more comprehensive, embracing all houses, 
and will be proportionately more productive. It is 
more certain, avoiding the evasions and partialities 
to which valuations will be for ever liable, and I 
think it for that reason likely to be at least as equal. 
I entertain no doubt that the rule of rates, adapted 
as they are to characteristic circumstances, will in 
fact be more favorable to equality than appraise- 
ments. I think the idea of taxing only houses of 
above a certain annual value will be dissatisfactory. 
The comparison of the proprietors of houses imme- 
diately above with those immediately below the line 
will beget discontent, and the errors of valuations 
will increase it. 

I think there will be a great advantage in throwing 
the weight of the tax on houses, as well because lands 
are more difficult to manage as because it will fall in 
a manner less dissatisfactory. 

My plan as to houses can be easily combined with 
that in the report as to land. 

Some years ago I proposed a similar plan in the 
Legislature of this State. It went through three 
readings and had a great majority in its favor, but as 
it was essentially different from what had always 
before obtained in the State it was thought best to 
postpone, to feel the sense of constituents. I left 

Private Correspondence 329 

the Legislature — changes in our poHtical situation 
rendered the plan of State taxation less important, 
and the business shrunk out of sight. But there was 
every appearance that the plan would have been 
popular in this State. 

You observe I confine myself to a million. It 
would not bear hard in this way. I would add, as 
aid, the taxes contemplated last session — on stamps, 
collateral successions, new modifications of some 
articles of imports, and, let me add, 5a(iG^/^-horses. 
The idea of taxing slaves generally will not work 
well. If confined to all menial servants for luxury, 
as coachmen, footmen, cooks, etc., it would be 
eligible. 

TO JONATHAN DAYTON ' 

1799. 

An accurate view of the internal situation of the 
United States presents many discouraging reflections 
to the enlightened friends of our government and 
country. Notwithstanding the unexampled success 
of our public measures at home and abroad — not- 
withstanding the instructive comments afforded by 
the disastrous and disgusting scenes of the French 
Revolution — public opinion has not been ameli- 
orated; sentiments dangerous to social happiness 
have not been diminished; on the contrary, there 
are symptoms which warrant the apprehension that 
among the most numerous class of citizens, errors of 

^ Of New Jersey, at this time Speaker of the national House. This 
letter, like the preceding, has no date in the original, and is placed and 
dated according to the edition of 1850. 

^2,0 Alexander Hamilton 

a very pernicious tendency have not only preserved 
but have extended their empire. Though some 
thing may have been .gained on the side of men of 
information and property, more has probably been 
lost on that of persons of a different description. An 
extraordinary exertion of the friends of government, 
aided by circumstances of momentary impression, 
gave, in the last election for members of Congress, a 
more favorable countenance to some States than 
they had before worn; yet it is the belief of well- 
informed men that no real or desirable change has 
been wrought in those States. On the other hand, 
it is admitted by close observers that some of the 
parts of the Union which, in times past, have been 
the soundest, have of late exhibited signs of a gan- 
grene begun and progressive. 

It is likewise apparent that opposition to the gov- 
ernment has acquired more system than formerly, 
is bolder in the avowal of its designs, less solicitous 
than it was to discriminate between the Constitution 
and the administration, and more open and more 
enterprising in its projects. The late attempt of 
Virginia and Kentucky to unite the State Legisla- 
tures in a direct resistance to certain laws of the 
Union can be considered in no other light than as an 
attempt to change the government. 

It is stated in addition that the opposition party 
in Virginia, the headquarters of the faction, have 
followed up the hostile declarations which are to be 
found in the resolutions of their General Assembly 
by an actual preparation of the means of supporting 
them by force, that they have taken measures to put 

Private Correspondence 331 

their militia on a more efficient footing — are prepar- 
ing considerable arsenals and magazines, and (which 
is an unequivocal proof how much they are in earn- 
est) have gone so far as to lay new taxes on their 
citizens. Amidst such serious indications of hos- 
tility, the safety and the duty of the supporters of 
the government call upon them to adopt vigorous 
measures of counteraction. It will be wise in them 
to act upon the hypothesis that the opposers of the 
government are resolved, if it shall be practicable, 
to make its existence a question of force. Possess- ^ 

ing, as they now do, all the constitutional powers, 
it will be an unpardonable mistake on their part if ,| 1;^^^; « 
they do not exert them to surround the Constitution ' ^^ ^ 
with more ramparts and to disconcert the schemes of 
its enemies. 

The measures proper to be adopted may be classed 
under heads. 

First. — Establishments which will extend the in- '• 

fluence and promote the popularity of the govern- 
ment. Under this head three important expedients 
occur. First. The extension of the judiciary system. 
Second. The improvement of the great communica- 
tions, as well interiorly as coastwise, by turnpike 
roads. Third. The institution of a society with 
funds to be employed in premiums for new in- 
ventions, discoveries, and improvements in agricul- 
ture and in the arts. 

The extension of the judiciary system ought to 
embrace two objects: one, the subdivision of each 
State into small districts (suppose Connecticut into 
four, and so on in proportion), assigning to each a 

tl 

332 Alexander Hamilton 

judge with a moderate salary; the other, the ap- 
pointment in each county of conservators or justices 
of the peace, with only ministerial functions, and 
with no other compensation than fees for the ser- 
vices they shall perform. This measure is necessary 
to give efficacy to the laws, the execution of which 
is obstructed by the want of similar organs and by 
the indisposition of the local magistrates in some 
States. The Constitution requires that judges shall 
have fixed salaries; but this does not apply to mere 
justices of the peace without judicial powers. Both 
those descriptions of persons are essential, as well 
to the energetic execution of the laws as to the pur- 
poses of salutary patronage. 

The thing, no doubt, would be a subject of clamor, 
but it would carry with it its own antidote, and when 
once established, would bring a very powerful sup- 
port to the government. 

The improvement of the roads would be a measure 
universally popular. None can be more so. For 
this purpose a regular plan should be adopted, co- 
extensive with the Union, to be successively exe- 
cuted, and a fund should be appropriated sufficient 
for the basis of a loan of a million of dollars. The 
revenue of the post-office naturally offers itself. The 
future revenue from tolls would more than reimburse 
the expense, and public utility would be promoted 
in every direction. The institution of a society, with 
the aid of proper funds, to encourage agriculture and 
the arts, besides being productive of general advan- 
tage, will speak powerfully to the feelings and in- 
terests of those classes of men to whom the benefits 

Private Correspondence 333 

derived from the government have been heretofore 
the least manifest. 

Second. — Provision for augmenting the means 
and consohdating the strength of the government. 
A milHon of dollars may without difficulty be added 
to the revenue, by increasing the rates of some exist- 
ing indirect taxes, and by the addition of some new ^^ 
items of a similar character. ^^ ^ 

The direct taxes ought neither to be increased nor ", ^ ^ ^ 
diminished. Our naval force ought to be completed 
to six ships of the line, twelve frigates, and twenty- 
four sloops of war. More at this juncture would be 
disproportioned to our resources, less would be in- 
adequate to the ends to be accomplished. Our 
military force should, for the present, be kept upon tT 

its actual footing; making provision for a re-en- 
listment of the men for five years in the event of a 
settlement of differences with France, — with this con- 
dition, that in case of peace between Great Britain, 
France, and Spain, the United States being then also 
at peace, all the privates of the twelve additional 
regiments of infantry, and of the regiment of dra- 
goons, not exceeding twenty to a company, shall be 
disbanded. The corps of artillerists may be left to 
retain the numbers which it shall happen to have, 
but without being recruited until the number of 
officers and privates shall fall below the standard of 
the infantry and dragoons. A power ought to be 
given to the President to augment the four old regi- 
ments to their war establishment. 

The laws respecting volunteer companies, and the 
eventual army, should be rendered permanent, and 

t:2.v 

334 Alexander Hamilton 

the Executive should proceed without delay to or- 
ganize the latter. Some modifications of the dis- 
cretion of the President will, however, be proper in 
a permanent law. And it will be a great improve- 
ment of the plan, if it shall be thought expedient to 
allow the enlistment, for the purpose of instruction, 
of a corps of sergeants equal to the number requisite 
for the eventual army. The institution of a military 
academy will be an auxiliary of great importance. 
Manufactories of every article, the woollen parts of 
clothing included, which are essential to the supply 
of the army, ought to be established. 

Third. — Arrangements for confirming and enlarg- 
ing the legal powers of the government. There are 
several temporary laws which, in this view, ought to 
be rendered permanent, particularly that which au- 
thorizes the calling out of the militia to suppress im- 
lawful combinations and insurrections. 

An article ought to be proposed, to be added to 
the Constitution, for empowering Congress to open 
canals in all cases in which it may be necessary to 
conduct them through the territory of two or more 
States, or through the territory of a State and that 
of the United States. The power is very desirable 
for the purpose of improving the prodigious facilities 
for inland navigation with which nature has favored 
this country. It will also assist commerce and agri- 
culture, by rendering the transportation of com- 
modities more cheap and expeditious. It will tend 
to secure the connection, by facilitating the com- 
munication between distant portions of the Union, 
and it will be a useful source of influence to the gov- 

Private Correspondence 335 

emment. Happy would it be if a clause could be , 
added to the Constitution, enabling Congress, on the \ 
application of any considerable portion of a State, » 
containing not less than a hundred thousand persons, 
to erect it into a separate State, on the condition of 
fixing the quota of contributions which it shall make 
toward antecedent debts, if any there shall be, re- 
serving to Congress the authority to levy within such 
State the taxes necessary to the payment of such 
quota, in case of neglect on the part of the State. The \ 
subdivision of the great States is indispensable to the .' 
security of the general government, and with it of the 
Union. \ 

Great States will always feel a rivalship with the \ 
common head; will often be supposed to machinate 
against it, and in certain situations will be able to do 
it with decisive effect. The subdivision of such States 
ought to be a cardinal point in the federal policy, and 
small States are doubtless best adapted to the purposes ; 
of local regulation and to the preservation of the repub- 
lican spirit. This suggestion, however, is merely 
thrown out for consideration. It is feared that it 
would be inexpedient and even dangerous to pro- 
pose, at this time, an amendment of the kind. ^- 

Fourth. — Laws for restraining and punishing in- ^ -$2.' 
cendiary and seditious practices. It will be useful to '^' 
declare that all such writings, etc., which at common 
law are libels, if levelled against any officer whatso- ^ 

ever of the United States, shall be cognizable in the 
courts of the United States. To preserve confidence 
in the officers of the general government, by preserv- 
ing their reputations from malicious and unfounded 

.^.^6 Alexander Hamilton 
slanders, is essential to enable them to fulfil the ends 
of their appointment. It is, therefore, both constitu- 
tional and politic to place their reputations under 
the guardianship of the courts of the United States. 
They ought not to be left to the cold and reluctant 
protection of State courts, always temporizing, and 
sometimes disaffected. But what avail laws which 
j are not executed? Renegade aliens conduct more 
than one of the most incendiary presses in the United 
States — and yet, in open contempt and defiance of 
the laws, they are permitted to continue their de- 
■'^v structive labors. Why are they not sent away ? Are 
laws of this kind passed merely to excite odium and 
^ remain a dead letter ? Vigor in the executive is at 
\ least as necessary as in the legislative branch. If 
f the President requires to be stimulated, those who 
can approach him ought to do it. 

TO LAFAYETTE 

New York, Jan. 6, 1799. 

Dear Sir: 

I have been made happy, my dear friend, by the 
receipt of your letter of the 1 2th of August last. No 
explanation of your political principles was neces- 
sary to satisfy me of the perfect consistency and 
purity of your conduct. The interpretation may 
always be left to my attachment for you. Whatever 
difference of opinion may on any occasion exist be- 
tween us, it can never lessen my conviction of the 
goodness both of your head and heart. I expect 

Private Correspondence 337 

from you a return of this sentiment so far as con- 
cerns the heart. 'T is needless to detail to you my 
political tenets. I shall only say that I hold with 
Montesquieu, that a government must be fitted to 
a nation, as much as a coat to the individual; and, 
consequently, that what may be good at Phila- 
delphia may be bad at Paris, and ridiculous at 
Petersburgh. 

I join with you in regretting the misunderstanding 
between our two countries. You will have seen by 
the President's speech that a door is again opened 
for terminating them amicably. And you may be 
assured that we are sincere, and that it is in the power 
of France, by reparation to our merchants for past 
injury, and the stipulation of justice in future, to 
put an end to the controversy. 

But I do not much like the idea of your being any 
way implicated in the affair, lest you should be com- 
promitted in the opinion of one or the other of the 
parties. It is my opinion that it is best for you 
to stand aloof. Neither have I abandoned the idea 
that it is most advisable for you to remain in Europe 
till the difference is adjusted. It would be very 
difficult for you here to steer a course which would 
not place you in a party, and not remove you from 
the broad ground which you now occupy in the hearts 
of all. It is a favorite point with me that you shall 
find in the universal regard of this country all the 
consolations which the loss of your own (for so I 
consider it) may render requisite. 

Mrs. Church and Mrs. Hamilton unite in assurance 
of their affectionate remembrance. 

VOL. X.— 22. 

^^S Alexander Hamilton 

TO HARRISON GRAY OTIS 

New York, Jan. 26, 1799. 


You will recollect that I reserved for a future an- 
swer part of a letter which I had the pleasure of 
receiving from you some time since. These are my 
ideas on that subject. 

I should be glad to see, before the close of the ses- 
sion, a law empowering the President, at his discre- 
tion, in case a negotiation between the United States 
and France should not be on foot by the first of Au- 
gust next, or being on foot should terminate without 
an adjustment of differences, to declare that a state 
of war exists between the two countries, and there- 
upon to employ the land and naval forces of the 
United States in such manner as shall appear to him 
most effectual for annoying the enemy, and for pre- 
venting and frustrating hostile designs of France, 
either directly or indirectly through any of her allies. 

This course of proceeding, by postponing the 
event, and giving time for the intervention of nego- 
tiation, would be a further proof of moderation in 
the government, and would tend to reconcile our 
citizens to the last extremity, if it shall ensue, gradu- 
ally accustoming their minds to look forward to it. 

If France be really desirous of accommodation, 
this plan will accelerate her measures to bring it 
about. If she have not that desire, it is best to 
anticipate her final vengeance, and to throw what- 
ever weight we have into the scale opposed to her. 
This conduct may contribute to disable her to do the 
mischief which she may meditate. 

Private Correspondence 339 

As it is every moment possible that the project 
of taking possession of the Floridas and Louisiana, 
long since attributed to France, may be attempted 
to be put in execution, it is very important that the 
Executive should be clothed with power to meet and 
defeat so dangerous an enterprise. Indeed, if it is 
the policy of France to leave us in a state of semi- 
hostility, 't is preferable to terminate it, and by tak- 
ing possession of those countries for ourselves, to 
obviate the mischief of their falling into the hands 
of an active foreign power, and at the same time to 
secure to the United States the advantage of keeping 
the key to the Western country. I have been long 
in the habit of considering the acquisition of those 
countries as essential to the permanency of the Union 
which I consider as very important to the welfare of 
the whole. 

If universal empire is still to be the pursuit of 
France, what can tend to defeat the purpose better 
than to detach South America from Spain, which is 
only the channel through which the riches of Mexico 
and Peru are conveyed to France? The Executive 
ought to be put in a situation to embrace favorable 
conjunctures for effecting that separation. 'T is 
to be regretted that the preparation of an adequate 
military force does not advance more rapidly. There 
is some sad nonsense on this subject in some good 
heads. The reveries of some of the friends of the 
government are more injurious to it than the attacks 
of its declared enemies. 

When will men learn to profit by experience? 

340 Alexander Hamilton 

TO THEODORE SEDGWICK 

February 2, 1799, 

What, my dear sir, are you going to do in Vir- 
ginia ? This is a very serious business, which will call 
for all the wisdom and firmness of the government. 
The following are the ideas which occur to me on the 
occasion. The first thing in all great operations of 
such a government as ours is to secure the opinion 
of the people. To this end the proceedings of Vir- 
ginia and Kentucky, with the two laws complained 
of,' should be referred to a special committee. That 
committee should make a report, exhibiting with 
great luminousness and particularity the reasons 
which support the constitutionality and expediency 
of those laws, the tendency of the doctrines advanced 
by Virginia and Kentucky to destroy the Constitu- 
tion of the United States, and with calm dignity 
united with pathos the full evidence which they 
afford of a regular conspiracy to overturn the govern- 
ment. And the report should likewise dwell upon 
the inevitable effect, and probably the intention, of 
the proceedings to encourage hostile foreign powers 
to decline accommodation and proceed in hostility. 

The government must not merely de^nd itself, it 
must attack and arraign its enemies., -^^ut in all this 
there should be great care to distinguish the people 
of Virginia from their Legislature, and even the 
greater part of those who may have concurred in 
the Legislature from their chiefs, manifesting, in- 
deed, a strong confidence in the good sense and 

* The Alien and Sedition laws. 

Private Correspondence 341 

patriotism of the people that they will not be the 
dupes of an insidious plan to disunite the people of 
America, to break down their Constitution, and ex- 
pose them to the enterprise of a foreign powei\/''' This 
report should conclude with a declaration that there 
is no cause for a repeal of the laws. If, however, on 
exanriination, any modifications consistent with the 
general design of the laws, but instituting better 
guards, can be devised, it may be well to propose 
them as a bridge for those who may incline to re- 
treat over. Concessions of this kind, adroitly made, 
have a good rather than a bad effect. On a recent, 
though hasty, revision of the Alien law, it seems to 
me deficient in precautions against abuse and for the 
security of citizens. This should not be. No pains 
or expense should be spared to disseminate this re- 
port. A little pamphlet containing it should find 
its way into every house in Virginia. This should 
be left to work and nothing to court a shock should 
be adopted. In the meantime the measures for 
raising the military force should proceed with ac- 
tivity. 'T is much to be lamented that so much 
delay has attended the execution of this measure. 
In times like the present, not a moment ought to 
have been lost to secure the government so powerful 
an auxiliary. Whenever the experiment shall be 
made to subdue a refractory and powerful State by 
militia, the event will shame the advocates of their 
sufficiency. In the expedition against the Western 
insurgents, I trembled every moment lest a great 
part of the militia should take it into their heads to 
return home rather than to go forward. When a 

342 Alexander Hamilton 

clever force has been collected, let them be drawn 
toward Virginia, for which there is an obvious pre- 
text, then let measures be taken to act upon the 
laws and put Virginia to the test of resistance. This 
plan will give time for the fervor of the moment to 
subside, for reason to resume the reins, and, by di- 
viding its enemies, will enable the government to 
triumph with ease.' 

TO TIMOTHY PICKERING 

New York, Feb. 9, 1799. 

Dear Sir: 

I am this moment favored with your letter of the 
9th instant. I shall immediately reflect on the most 
important point, and to-morrow give you the result. 

The provision in the law is ample. But in this, 
my dear sir, as in every thing else, we must unite 
caution with decision. The United States must not 
be committed on the independence of St. Domingo. 
No guaranty — no formal treaty — nothing that can 
rise up in judgment. It will be enough to let Tous- 
saint be assured verbally, but explicitly, that upon 
his declaration of independence a commercial inter- 
course will be opened, and continue while he main- 
tains it, and gives due protection to our vessels and 
property. I incline to think the declaration of in- 
dependence ought to precede. 

' Reprinted from the History of the Republic ^ vii., 277. 

Private Correspondence 343 

TO WASHINGTON 

{Private.) 

New York, Feb. i6, 1799. 


Different reasons have conspired to prevent my 
writing to you since my return to New York — the miil- 
tipHcity of miy avocations, an imperfect state of health, 
and the want of some thing material to communicate. 

The official letter herewith transmitted, will in- 
form you of the disposition of our military affairs 
which has been recently adopted by the department 
of war. There shall be no want of exertion on my 
part to promote the branches of the service con- 
fided to my care. 

But I more and more discover cause to apprehend 
that obstacles of a very peculiar kind stand in the 
way of an efficient and successful management of 
our military concerns. These it woiild be imsafe at 
present to explain. 

It may be useful that I should be able to write to 
you hereafter some confidential matters relating to 
our administration without the mention of names. 
When this happens, I shall designate the President 
by X, the Secretary of State by V, of the Treasury 
by I, and of the Department of War by C. 

Every thing in the northern quarter, as far as I 
can learn, continues favorable to the government. 


New York, Feb. 21, 1799. 

My Dear Sir: 

The multiplicity of my avocations joined to im- 
perfect health has delayed the commiinication you 

344 Alexander Hamilton 

desired respecting St. Domingo. And what is worse, 
it has prevented my bestowing sufficient thought to 
offer at present any thing worth having. 

No regular system of liberty will at present suit 
St. Domingo. The government, if independent, must 
I be military — partaking of the feodal system. 

A hereditary chief would be best, but this I fear 
is impracticable. 

Let there be then, a single Executive, to hold his 
place for life. 

The person to succeed on a vacancy to be either 
the officer next in command in the island at the time 
of the death of the predecessor, or the person who by 
plurality of voices of the commandants of regiments 
shall be designated within a certain time. In the 
meantime the principal military officers to admin- 
ister. 

All the males within certain ages to be arranged in 
military corps, and to be compellable to military ser- 
vice. This may be connected with the tenure of lands. 

Let the supreme judiciary authority be vested in 
twelve judges to be chosen for life by the generals or 
chief military officers. 

Trial by jury in all criminal causes not military to 
be established. The mode of appointing them must 
be regulated with reference to the general spirit of 
the establishment. 

Every law inflicting capital or other corporal pun- 
ishment, or levying a tax or contribution in any 
shape, to be proposed by the Executive to an assem- 
bly composed of the generals and commandants of 
regiments for their sanction or rejection. 

".'7 

Private Correspondence 345 

All other laws to be enacted by the sole authority 
of the Executive. 

The powers of war and treaty to be in the Execu- 
tive. 

The Executive to be obliged to have three minis- 
ters— of finance, war, and foreign affairs — ^whom he 
shall nominate to the generals for their approbation 
or rejection. 

The colonels and generals, when once appointed, 
to hold their offices during good behavior, removed 
only by conviction of an infamous crime in due course 
of law or the sentence of a court-martial cashiering 
them. 

Court-martials for trial of officers and capital of- 
fences to be not less than twelve, and well guarded 
as to mode of appointment. 

Duties of import and export, taxes on lands and 
buildings to constitute the chief branches of revenue. 

These thoughts are very crude, but perhaps they 
may afford some hints. 

How is the sending an agent to Toussaint to en- 
courage the independency of St. Domingo, and a 
minister to France to negotiate an accommodation 
reconcilable to consistency or good faith ? ^ 

TO THEODORE SEDGWICK 

New York, Feb. 21, 1799. 

The step announced in your letter just received, 
in all its circumstances, would astonish, if any thing 
from that quarter could astonish. 

^ Now first printed from the Pickering papers in the possession of the 
Massachusetts Historical Society. 

34^ Alexander Hamilton 

But as it has happened, my present impression is 
that the measure must go into effect with the addi- 
tional idea of a commission of three. 

The mode must be accommodated with the Presi- 
dent. Murray is certainly not strong enough for so 
immensely important a mission.' 

I will write to-morrow if my impression varies. 

TO OLIVER WOLCOTT 

New York, March 13, 1799. 

Dead Sir: 

It is natural for people, where their interest is 
concerned, to die hard. Mr. Juhel, the bearer of 
this, goes to Philadelphia to lay before you some 
supplementar}?- evidence with regard to the ship 
Ger mania, which he hopes may vary your determina- 
tion. At his request I give him this line to you, 
merely to say that he is a merchant of this city, of 
reputation, and, so far as his conduct has fallen 
under my observation, of candor and probity. I 
wish him success as far as personal considerations 
alone are concerned and no general rule of policy is 
contravened. 

But having occasion to write you on a subject con- 
nected with the law prohibiting intercourse with the 
French territories, I ought not to withhold from you 
an opinion which I deliberately entertain. It is that 
whatever may have been the intention of the Legis- 

I This letter refers to the message of John Adams of February 18, 
1799, announcing his intention of reopening negotiations with France 
and nominating William Vans Miirray as Minister to the French Repub- 
lic. This action on the part of the President, taken without consulting 
even his Cabinet, astonished the country and fell like a thunderbolt 
upon the Federalists. 

Private Correspondence 347 

lature in framing this law, it is in fact so worded 
that it will be a very violent thing in a court of jus- 
tice to pronounce that the prohibition of the third 
section extends to any but a French bottom. 

The leading and prominent feature of the pro- 
hibition, as to the subject, is a ''French ship or 
vessel.'' There are subsequent words which, by im- 
plication, look to vessels of other descriptions, but 
they may be understood consistently with the main 
and preliminary feature. 

Thus the proviso excepts ships or vessels ''bona 
fide the property of, or hired or employed by, the 
citizens of the United States." A French bottom, 
by her build and registry, may be the property of 
citizens of the United States. Again, these words 
will be satisfied by supposing that they intend ships 
and vessels which were French immediately before 
the voyage in question, but were purchased for the 
voyage by citizens of the United States. 

And this construction will better consist with the 
principles which govern the interpretation of penal 
laws, than to extend the prohibition which is to con- 
stitute the penalty beyond the letter by implication 
and force of proviso which is introduced to make an 
exception to the general terms. 

I am well aware of the course which in such a case 
policy will dictate to the Executive, but if this view 
of the law be correct, it may afford an argument 
for a mitigated course where no actual intention to 
evade appears." 

^ Now first printed from the Wolcott papers in the possession of the 
Connecticut Historical Society. 

34^ Alexander Hamilton 

TO GENERAL KNOX 

My Dear Sir: New York, March 14, 1799- 

The enclosed letters, as I concluded from others 
which accompany them, have been a long time getting 
to hand. There was a moment when their object 
seemed to present itself as one not entirely chimeri- 
cal, but the probability has diminished. 'T is, how- 
ever, a thing on which the mind may still speculate 
as in the chapter of extraordinary events which 
characterize the present wonderful epoch. 

My judgment tells me I ought to be silent on a cer- 
tain subject ; but my heart advises otherwise, and my 
heart has always been the master of my judgment. 
Believe me I have felt much pain at the idea, that any 
circumstance personal to me should have deprived 
the public of your services or occasioned to you the 
smallest dissatisfaction. Be persuaded, also, that the 
views of others, not my own, have given shape to what 
has taken place — and that there has been a serious 
struggle between my respect and attachment for you 
and the impression of duty. This sounds, I know, 
like affectation, but it is nevertheless the truth. In a 
case in which such great public interests were con- 
cerned, it seemed to me the dictate of reason and 
propriety, not to exercise an opinion of my own, but 
to leave that of others, who could influence the issue, 
to take a free course. In saying this much, my only 
motive is to preserve, if I may, a claim on your 
friendly disposition towards me, and to give you 
some evidence that my regard for you is unabated.' 

^ This last paragraph refers to Hamilton's having been placed at 
the head of the provisional army, which had so much chagrined Knox 
that he had resigned his commission. 

Private Correspondence 349 

TO JAMES McHENRY ^v J- W/ | ^^ 

(Private.) 

New York, March i8, 1799. 

Beware, my dear sir, of magnifying a riot into an 
insurrection, by employing, in the first instance, an 
inadequate force. 'T is better far to err on the other 
side. 

Whenever the government appears in arms, it 
ought to appear Hke a Hercules, and inspire respect j 
by the display of strength. The consideration of < 
expense is of no moment compared with the advan- 
tages of energy. 'T is true this is always a relative 
question, but 't is always important to make no 
mistake. I only offer a principle and a caution. 

A large corps of auxiliary cavalry may be had in 
Jersey, New York, Delaware, Maryland, without in- 
terfering with farming pursuits. 

Will it be inexpedient to put under marching orders 
a large force provisionally, as an eventual support of 
the corps to be employed, to awe the disaffected? 

Let all be well considered.^ 

TO OLIVER WOLCOTT ' 

New York, March 21, 1799. 

Dear Sir: 

It is a good principle for the United States to em- 
ploy directly its own means, only do not let this be 

^ Reprinted from the History of the Republic, vii., 313. 

2 This letter and the preceding refer to the troubles which became 
known as the Fries rebellion, and which grew out of the resistance in i 
Pennsylvania to the direct taxes. The disturbances were violent and 
riotous, and at last the President issued a proclamation and ordered 
out some troops, and the whole affair ended. Fries was arrested, tried, 
convicted of treason, sentenced to death, and pardoned by President 
Adams. 

350 Alexander Hamilton 

carried so far as to confine it to the use of inadequate 
means, or to embarrass the auxiliary means which 
circumstances may require. 

The idea of the late President's administration of 
considering the governor of each State as the first 
general of the militia, and its immediate organ in 
acting upon the militia, was wisely considered, and, 
in my opinion, wisely adopted, and well to be ad- 
hered to. In its final operation, it will obviate many 
difficulties and collisions, and by enhancing their im- 
portance, tend to draw the State Executives to the 
general government. Take good care that in the 
present instance the force be not inadequate. 

TO TIMOTHY PICKERING 

New York, April 4, 1799. 

Sir: 

I observe, by the Boston papers, that some dis- 
patches have been lately found on board a vessel 
from this port which was carried into Gibraltar. 
The late consul here, Mr. Rosier, has just been with 
me, and suggested that the dispatches are probably 
from him, and allude (but without naming me) to 
some conversations with me relating to his being 
received as consul-general some time last winter. 
Being so much engaged as not to have been able 
conveniently to call upon you, I mentioned the sub- 
ject while in Philadelphia to Mr. Wolcott, and was 
informed by him that Mr. Rosier could not then be 
received. In the interviews respecting this object, 

Private Correspondence 351 

some general conversation took place about the 
state of things between the two countries. Mr. 
Rosier will write to you offering the means of de- 
ciphering his dispatches, which he assures me, with 
every appearance of candor, will be found to contain 
nothing unfriendly to this country. It is his wish, 
in the meantime, that no idea may circulate of his 
being a conspirator. 

TO OLIVER WOLCOTT 

New York, April 8, 1799. 

Dear Sir: 

I send you in confidence the copy of a letter of this ^ ^/ 
date to the Secretary of War and of the plan to 
which it refers. Consider it well. Make the Secre- 
tary of War talk to you about it, without letting him 
know that I have sent it to you. And urge the es- 
tablishment of some plan which will effectually or- 
ganize this important branch of our military service. 
The proper course in the interest of the army is in- 
dicated by the plan I present. The connections be- 
tween the agents with the army and the principal 
officers at the seat of the government admit of such 
modifications as may be deemed best. I think it 
desirable to separate the quartermaster-general from 
the business of procuring supplies, and make him and 
his deputies, in this respect, checks. In addition to 
this duty he will have numerous military functions 
of great importance which will give him abimdant 
employment." 

^ Now first printed from the Wolcott papers in the possession of the 
Connecticut Historical Society. 

352 Alexander Hamilton 

-^ TO WASHINGTON 

(Private.) 

New York, June 15, 1799. 


I wrote to you a few days since, chiefly to inform 
you of the progress of the measures respecting the 
recruiting service, and that the symptoms with re- 
gard to it were sufficiently promising. The accounts 
continue favorable. 

1 have just received a letter from General Wilkin- 
son,' dated the 13th April, in which he assures me 
he will set out in the ensuing month for the seat of 
government. The interview with him will be useful. 

It strikes me forcibly that it will be both right 
and expedient to advance this gentleman to the 
grade of major-general. He has been long steadily 
in service and long a brigadier. This in so con- 
siderable an extension of the military establishment 
gives him a pretension to promotion. 

I am aware that some doubts have been enter- 
tained of him, and that his character on certain 
sides gives room for doubts. Yet he is at present in 
the service, is a man of more than ordinary talent — 
of courage and enterprise, — has discovered upon 
various occasions a good zeal, has embraced military 

' James Wilkinson, a soldier of the Revolution, and conspicuous at 
the time of Burr's conspiracy and in the War of 1812. He was a bom 
intriguer. During the Revolutionary War he was mixed up in the 
Conway cabal. He was involved with Burr, whom he finally decided 
to give up, at the time of the latter's conspiracy, and in the War of 
181 2 he was singularly unsuccessful and contentious. Hamilton's 
apparently favorable opinion is rather curious, although it is obvious 
that he recommends Wilkinson's promotion with many doubts. 

Private Correspondence 353 

pursuits as a profession, and will naturally find his 
interest, as an ambitious man, in deserving the 
favor of the government. While he will be apt to 
become disgusted if neglected, and through disgust 
may be rendered really what he is now only sus- 
pected to be. Under such circumstances it seems to 
me good policy to avoid all just grounds of discon- 
tent and to make it the interest of the individual to 
pursue his duty. 

If you should be also of this opinion, I submit to 
your considjration whether it would not be advisa- 
ble for you to express it in a private letter to the 
Secretary of War.' 

TO COLONEL TAYLOR' 

New York, July 3, 1799. 

Sir: 

I have written to the Secretary of War agreeably 
to the suggestion of your letter of the 26th of June, 
respecting Abijah Fenn. It is to be lamented that 
the most circumspect men are apt to have too much 
facility about recommendations. Warned by this 
instance, it is hoped that you will in future not pre- 
sent a candidate without personal knowledge or in- 
quiry through various channels. 

^ Now first printed from the Hamilton papers in the State Depart- 
ment, 

2 I have not been able to determine absolutely the identity of Col. 
Taylor, but I think it must have been Robert Barnard Taylor, of 
Virginia, afterwards Brigadier-General of Virginia militia and finally 
General in the regular army. This letter is now first printed from the 
Hamilton papers in the State Department. 

VOL. X. — 23, 

354 Alexander Hamilton 

TO JAMES McHENRY 

(Private.) 

New York, July lo, 1799. 

Why, my dear friend, do you suffer the business 
of providing to go on as it does? Every moment 
proves the insufficiency of the existing plan and the 
necessity of auxiliaries. I have no doubt that at 
Baltimore, New York, Providence, and Boston addi- 
tional supplies of clothing may promptly be pro- 
cured and prepared by your agents, and it ought 
to be done, though it should enhance the expense. 
'T is terrible at this juncture that there should be 
wants anywhere. 

So of tents. Calls for them are repeated from 
Massachusetts, where, better and cheaper than any- 
where else, they can certainly be provided. 

Pray, take a resolution adequate to the emer- 
gency, and rescue the credit of your department.^ 

TO JOSIAH O. HOFFMAN ^ 

1799. 

Sir: 

Greenleaf's New Daily Advertiser of this morning 
contains a publication entitled, " Extract of a Letter 
from Philadelphia, dated September 20th," which 
charges me with being at the "bottom of an effort 
recently made to suppress the Aurora'' (a news- 
paper of that city) by pecuniary means. 

^ Now first printed from the Hamilton papers in the State Depart- 
ment. 

2 Attorney-General of New York. This letter is undated in original, 
and is dated and placed here according to the edition of 1850. It was 
'i\ probably written in September or October of this year. 

Private Correspondence 355 

It is well known that I have long been the object 
of the most malignant calumnies of the faction op- 
posed to our government through the medium of 
the papers devoted to their views. Hitherto I have 
forborne to resort to the laws for the punishment of 
the authors or abettors, and were I to consult per- 
sonal considerations alone, I should continue in this 
course, repaying hatred with contempt. 

But public motives now compel me to a different 
conduct. The designs of that faction to overturn 
our government, and with it the great pillars of 
social security and happiness in this country, be- 
come every day more manifest, and have of late 
acquired a degree of system which renders them 
formidable. 

One principal engine for effecting the scheme is by 
audacious falsehoods to destroy the confidence of 
the people in all those who are in any degree con- 
spicuous among the supporters of the government — 
an engine which has been employed in time past 
with too much success, and which, unless coimter- 
acted in future, is likely to be attended with very 
fatal consequences. 

To counteract it is therefore a duty to the com- 
munity. Among the specimens of this contrivance, 
that which is the subject of the present letter demands 
peculiar attention. A bolder calumny — one more 
absolutely destitute of foundation — was never propa- 
gated, and its dangerous tendency needs no com- 
ment ; being calculated to inspire the belief that the 
independence and liberty of the press are endangered 
by the intrigues of ambitious citizens aided by 

35^ Alexander Hamilton 

foreign gold. In so flagrant a case the force of the 
laws must be tried. 

I therefore request that you will take immediate 
measures towards the prosecution of the persons who 
conduct the enclosed paper. 

TO WASHINGTON 

New York, Oct. 21, 1799. 

Dear Sir: 

On my return from Trenton the day before yes- 
terday I found your private letter of the 13th as 
well as your public letter of the 15th instant. 

The newspapers have probably informed you that 
poor Avery is dead of the yellow fever. 
f The President has resolved to send the commis- 
sioners to France, notwithstanding the change of 
affairs there. He is not understood to have con- 
sulted either of his ministers; certainly not either 
the Secretary of War or of Finance. All my calcula- 
tions lead me to regret the measure. I hope that it 
may not in its consequences involve the United 
States in a war on the side of France with her 
enemies. 

My trust in Providence, which has so often inter- 
posed in our favor, is my only consolation. 

TO TOBIAS LEAR * 

New York, Jan. 2, 1800. 


Your letter of the 15 th of December last was de- 
layed in getting to hand by the circumstance of its 

^ Washington's private secretary. 

Private Correspondence 357 

having gone to New York while I was at Philadelphia, 
and of its having arrived at Philadelphia after I had 
set out on my return to New York. 

The very painful event which it announces had, 
previous to the receipt of it, filled my heart with 
bitterness. Perhaps no man in this community has 
equal cause with myself to deplore the loss. I have 
been much indebted to the kindness of the General, 
and he was an j^gis very essential to me. But re- 
grets are unavailing. For great misfortunes it is the 
business of reason to seek consolation. The friends 
of General Washington have very noble ones. If 
virtue can secure happiness in another world, he is 
happy. In this the seal is now put upon his glory. 
It is no longer in jeopardy from the fickleness of 
fortune. 

P. S. — In whose hands are his papers gone? Our 
very confidential situation will not permit this to be 
a point of indifference to me. 

TO RUFUS KING 

New York, Jan. 5, 1800. 

It is indeed a long time, my dear sir, since I have 
written to you, and I feel my obligation to you for 
the continuance of your correspondence, notwith- 
standing my delinquency. 

Had it been true that I had left every thing else to 
follow the drum, my delinquency would not have 
been so great. But our military establishment 
offers too little inducement, and is too precarious to 

358 Alexander Hamilton 

have permitted a total dereliction of professional 
pursuits. The double occupation occasioned by 
these added military duties, and the attention which 
circumstances call me to pay to collateral objects, 
engage my time more than ever, and leave me less 
leisure to communicate with distant friends. 

If the projected cipher was established, I should 
now have very much to say to you. But for this the 
arrangement is not yet mature. Soon, however, I 
hope to make it so, by forwarding to you the coun- 
terpart, which is in preparation. I must, however, 
give you some sketch of our affairs. 

At home every thing is in the main well; except 
as to the perverseness and capriciousness of one, and 
the spirit of faction of many. 

Our measures from the first cause are too much 
the effect of momentary impulse. Vanity and 
jealousy exclude all coimsel. Passion wrests the 
helm from reason. 

The irreparable loss of an inestimable man removes 
a control which was felt, and was very salutary. 

The leading friends of the government are in a sad 
dilemma. Shall they risk a serious schism by an 
attempt to change? Or shall they annihilate them- 
selves and hazard their cause by continuing to up- 
hold those who suspect or hate them, and who are 
likely to pursue a course for no better reason than 
because it is contrary to that which they approve? 

The spirit of faction is abated nowhere. In Vir- 
ginia it is more violent than ever. It seems de- 
monstrated that the leaders there, who possess 
completely all the powers of the local government, 

Private Correspondence 359 

are resolved to possess those of the national, by the 
most dangerous combinations; and, if they cannot 
effect this, to resort to the employment of physical 
force. The want of disposition in the people to sec- 
ond them will be the only preventive. It is believed 
that it will be an effectual one. 

In the two houses of Congress we have a decided 
majority. But the dread of unpopularity is likely 
to paralyze it, and to prevent the erection of addi- 
tional buttresses to the Constitution, a fabric which 
can hardly be stationary, and which will retrograde 
if it cannot be made to advance. 

"In the mass of the people the dispositions are not 
bad. An attachment to the system of peace con- 
tinues. No project contrary to it could easily con- 
ciliate favor. Good-will towards the government, 
in my opinion, predominates ; ^ though a numerous 
party is still actuated by an opposite sentiment, and 
some vague discontents have a more diffused influ- 
ence. Sympathy with the French Revolution acts 
in a much narrower circle than formerly, but the 
jealousy of monarchy, which is as actual as ever, 
still furnishes a handle by which the factions mis- 
lead well-meaning persons. 

In our councils there is no fixed plan. Some are 
for preserving and invigorating the navy and de- 
stroying the army. Some among the friends of 
government for diminishing both on pecuniary 
considerations. 

My plan is to complete the navy to the contem- 
plated extent: say, six ships of the line, twelve frig- 
ates, and twenty-four sloops of war; to make no 

\ 

360 Alexander Hamilton 

alteration for the present as to the military force; 
and, finally, to preserve the organs of the existing 
force, reducing the men to a very moderate number. 
For this plan there are various reasons that appear 
to me solid. I must doubt, however, that it will 
finally prevail. 

The recent depredations of British cruisers, sanc- 
tioned in various instances by the courts, have re- 
kindled in many hearts an animosity which was fast 
being extinguished. Such persons think they see 
in this circumstance a new proof that friendship 
towards this country on the part of Great Britain 
will always be measured by the scale of her success. 
A very perplexing conflict of sensations is the result 
of this impression. 

I must hasten to a conclusion. It was unnecessary 
for me to have told you that for the loss of our illus- 
trious friend every heart is in mourning. Adieu. 

Who is to be Commander-in-Chief? 
Not the next in command. The appointment will 
probably be deferred. 

TO MRS. MARTHA WASHINGTON 

New York, Jan. 12, 1800. 

I did not think it proper, madam, to intrude amidst 
the first effusions of your grief ; but I can no longer 
restrain my sensibility from conveying to you an 
imperfect expression of my affectionate sympathy 
in the sorrows you experience. No one better than 
myself knows the greatness of your loss, or how much 
your excellent heart is formed to feel it in all its ex- 

Private Correspondence 361 

tent. Satisfied that you cannot receive consolation, 
I will attempt to offer none. Resignation to the will 
of Heaven, which the practice of your life insures, 
can alone alleviate the sufferings of so heartrending 
an affliction. 

There can be few who equally with me participate 
in the loss you deplore. In expressing this senti- 
ment, I may, without impropriety, allude to the nu- 
merous and distinguished marks of confidence and 
friendship of which you have yourself been a witness, 
but I cannot say in how many ways the continuance 
of that confidence and friendship was necessary to 
me in future relations. Vain, however, are regrets. 
From a calamity which is common to a mourning na- 
tion, who can expect to be exempt? Perhaps it is 
even a privilege to have a claim to a larger portion 
of it than others. 

I will only add, madam, that I shall esteem it a 
real and a great happiness if any future occurrence 
shall enable me to give you proof of that respectful 
and cordial attachment with which, etc. 

TO CAPTAIN GEORGE IZARD ^ 

New York, Feb. 27, 1800. 

Sir: 

Your letter of the 25 th instant was received yes- 
terday. I should certainly regret any occurrence 

^ Son of Ralph Izard, delegate and Senator from South Carolina. 
He was at this time Hamilton's aid, and remained in the army tintil 
1803, when he resigned. He re-entered the army in 1812, and at the 
close of the war was a major-general, when he again resigned from the 
army, and was appointed governor of the Territory of Arkansas, a post 
he held tintil his death in 1825. 

362 Alexander Hamilton 

which might deprive me of your services, unless 
being one which was likely to redound to your own 
honor and advantage. 

It is very certain that the military career in this 
country offers too few inducements, and it is equally 
certain that my present station in the army cannot 
very long continue under the plan which seems to 
govern. With these impressions it would consist 
with a candid and friendly part towards you to dis- 
courage your acceptance of the invitation you men- 
tion. You are doubtless aware of the uncertainties 
which rest on the diplomatic state also, and after 
balancing well you will make your election, perfectly 
assured of my cordial acquiescence in either event 
and of my constant wishes for your success. 

Major Toussard has informed me of his progress 
in preparing the regulations. The necessity of your 
further attention to this object has ceased.^ 

TO THEODORE SEDGWICK 


Dear Sir: 

When will Congress probably adjourn? Will any 
thing be settled as to a certain election? Will my 
presence be requisite as to this or any other purpose, 
and when? 

I observe more and more that by the jealousy and 
envy of some, the miserliness of others, and the con- 
curring influence of all foreign powers, America, if 

^ Now first printed from the Hamilton papers in the State Depart- 
ment. 

Private Correspondence 363 

she attains to greatness, must creep to it. Will it be 
so? Slow and sure is no bad maxim. Snails are a 
wise generation. 

P. S. — Unless for indispensable reasons, I had 
rather not come. 

TO HENRY LEE 

New York, March 7, 1800. 

My Dear Sir: 

The letters to which you allude in yours of the 5th 
instant have never been seen by me. The truth is, 
that I pay very little attention to such newspaper 
ebullitions, unless some friend points out a par- 
ticular case which may demand attention. 

But be assured once for all, that it is not easy for 
these miscreants to impair the confidence in and 
friendship for you, which are long habits of my mind; 
so that you may join me in looking with indifference 
upon their malicious efforts. 

You have mistaken a little an observation in my 
last. Believe me, that I feel no despondency of any 
sort. As to the country, it is too young and vigor- 
ous to be quacked out of its political health ; and 
as to myself, I feel that I stand on ground which, 
sooner or later, will insure me a triumph over all my 
enemies. 

But in the meantime I am not wholly insensible of 
the injustice which I from time to time experience, 
and of which, in my opinion, I am at this moment 
the victim. 

364 Alexander Hamilton 

Perhaps my sensibility is the effect of an exag- 
gerated estimate of my services to the United States ; 
but on such a subject a man will judge for himself; 
and if he is misled by his vanity, he must be content 
with the mortifications to which it exposes him. In 
no event, however, will any displeasure I may feel 
be at war with the public interest. This in my eyes 
is sacred. Adieu. 

TO WILLIAM SMITH 

New York, March 11, 1800. 

Dear Sir: 

You will probably have heard, before this reaches 
you, that I had appointed Captain Izard one of my 
aids. I part with him to you with all the reluctance 
that a strong impression of his merit can inspire. 
Yet I do not resist his going, because our military 
prospects in general, and mine in particular, are very 
uncertain. 

Though we have had no communication since your 
departure, you may be assured that I have not 
ceased to interest myself in your welfare. If you go 
to Constantinople, I wish you good luck. It is, per- 
haps, past the time for you to play the false Ibrahim. 
You see I am in a humor to laugh. What can we 
do better in this best of all possible worlds? Should 
you even be shut up in the seven towers, or get the 
plague, if you are a true philosopher you will con- 
sider this only a laughing matter. Adieu. 

Private Correspondence 365 

TO OLIVER WOLCOTT 

New York, March 12, 1800. 

Sir: 

I have written to you heretofore respecting Mr. 
Benjamin Wells, who acted as an excise officer in the 
western part of Pennsylvania at the time of the dis- 
turbances there. But this gentleman has just ar- 
rived here, and requests me to mention his case again 
to you. I comply with his request. 

It appeared from what I saw and heard at the 
time, that Mr. Wells distinguished himself by per- 
severing exertion to carry the laws into effect. He 
was, of course, marked out as an object of vengeance. 
The losses which he sustained were very considerable, 
and proceeded from the zeal he had displayed in sup- 
port of the government. To repair his losses and 
reward his zeal, is therefore a duty imposed on the 
government by the principles both of justice and 
policy. It is imposed by justice — ^for the injuries 
were committed by persons in disguise, or under 
circumstances which render it impossible to discover 
the offenders. It is vain, therefore, to refer Mr. 
Wells to the individuals by whose acts he suffered. 
This is to tell him that his losses will never be re- 
paired. 

Policy speaks in this case the same language with 
justice. Mr. Wells suffered in consequence of his 
efforts to support the government, and of his atten- 
tion to duty. Will the government then refuse to 
make him compensation? To do so, will be to vio- 
late the plainest maxims of policy, as it will effectu- 
ally damp the zeal of public officers in every future 

366 Alexander Hamilton 

case of difficulty. It is not to be expected that in- 
dividuals will expose their persons to violence, and 
their property to destruction, in support of a govern- 
ment that has not generosity sufficient to reward 
those who suffer in its cause. 

There appears to me to be no doubt of the meri- 
torious exertions of Mr. Wells. Even if there were 
some doubt, yet the excellent effect which the meas- 
ure is calculated to produce on public officers, will 
prove a full compensation for the money that may 
be advanced. I recollect to have mentioned to Mr. 
Wells, and other persons in the same capacity, that 
I considered the government as bound to indemnify 
them. So far, therefore, as my opinion could pledge 
the government, it was pledged. In giving this 
opinion I thought I was promoting the best interests 
of the nation, and it appears to me that the govern- 
ment will very widely mistake its policy in refusing 
to allow these men all reasonable claims. 

TO TIMOTHY PICKERING 

New York, March 15, 1800. 

Dear Sir: 

The bearer of this, Mr. DuPont, formerly consul 
at Charleston, is personally known to you. He 
comes with the rest of his family to establish them- 
selves in the United States. They are desirous of 
being favorably viewed by our government, and my 
intervention for this purpose has been requested. 

Inclosed is a letter from General Pinckney, which 

Private Correspondence 367 

speaks for itself. All that has come to my know- 
ledge of this particular gentleman is recommenda- 
tory of him, as far as situation has permitted. I 
have always understood that his sentiments towards 
this country have been amicable, and that he has 
not been very deeply tinctured with the revolution- 
ary spirit of his own, though circumstances have 
placed him in office under the new government. And 
I believe, if ever diseased, he is now perfectly cured. 
He is afraid that some expressions respecting the in- 
fluence of the British Government in this country 
may have given an ill impression. He explains by 
saying, first, that they are qualified; second, that 
they were a necessary concession to the prejudices 
of the persons to whom his observations were ad- 
dressed, calculated to procure attention to the con- 
ciliatory plan which he recommended, by screening 
him from the suspicion of being a corrupted partisan 
of this country. This solution seems to me an ad- 
missible one. In addressing enthusiasts, it is com- 
monly requisite to adopt a little of their nonsense. 

He has delivered me a paper which he sent to the 
Aurora to be published, but which he said was sup- 
pressed, and some thing of an insidious complexion 
substituted. He delivers the true communication, 
that it may be seen what he really did. 

I am much mistaken if his father be not really a 
benevolent, well-disposed man. Indeed, the family 
generally impress us here agreeably, and we are in- 
clined to augur well of them.' 

' Now first printed from the Pickering papers in the possession of the 
Massachusetts Historical Society. 

368 Alexander Hamilton 

TO OLIVER WOLCOTT 

New York, April 7, 1800. 


I thank yoii for the disposition shown to accom- 
modate Mr. Robertson. When I saw him some days 
ago, he hoped that the matter would be placed upon 
the footing which was indicated. 

I would readily comply with the wish of Mr. Evans, 
was I sure that it would not be a breach of propriety 
towards Mr. Madison. But if my memory does not 
deceive me, there was a sort of understanding be- 
tween us that there should be no disclosure but by 
mutual consent. You will be sensible that I ought 
to be peculiarly circumspect with regard to this 
gentleman. ' 

TO general CHARLES COTESWORTH PINCKNEY 

(Private.) 

New York, April 10, 1800. 

Dear Sir: 

I am perfectly content with the delay of com- 
munication to the Rev. Mr. Hill until the effect of 
your experiments with the Secretary of War shall be 
known. 

I have heard nothing as to the impression made 
by our mission to France upon the combined powers, 

^ Now first printed from the Wolcott papers in the possession of the 
Connecticut Historical Society. Mr. Evans's question must have re- 
ferred, I think, to the authorship of the Federalist, and one cannot help 
contrasting Hamilton's nice sense of honor, as shown here, with the 
course of Monroe in the Reynolds case. With Hamilton his differences 
with Madison only served to make him more circumspect. 

Private Correspondence 369 

but I cannot doubt that it is a disagreeable one, and 
certainly the course of events lately has not said 
much for the good policy of the measure. This cal- 
culation of the President on a general peace as the 
main argument for what was done, proves at least 
to be as fallacious as I ventured to predict to him 
just after he had resolved to consummate the error. 
Captain Izard has accepted his appointment under 
Mr. Smith, and has sailed for Europe. 

Mrs. H, and myself have learned with great 
pleasure the amendment of Mrs. P.'s health. Offer 
her and accept yourself our felicitations and best 
wishes. 

TO TIMOTHY PICKERING 

April 25, 1800. 


I send you the paragraph of a newspaper just pub- 
lished. I hope it is an electioneering lie; but as it 
is likely to do mischief, I will thank you, by return 
of post, to inform me whether you have any thing to 
confirm or refute, and particularly whether you have 
heard of the list with which Commodore Truxtim's' 
name is connected. 

I Thomas Truxtun, the first of otir naval officers to win distinction. 
He had been Captain of the Constellation, and in that frigate captured 
the French frigate L'Insurgente, Feb. 9, 1799. A year later he over- 
came another — La Vengeance, but she escaped by an accident to one 
of the masts of Truxtun's ship. In 1802, he was given the command 
of the Tripoli expedition, but refusing to go because the department 
would not allow him a captain as usual for his flag-ship, Jefferson dis- 
missed him from the service. It is needless to add that he had always 
been a strong Federalist. 

VOL. X.— 24. 

370 Alexander Hamilton 

(Copy of enclosed paragraph) 

New Haven, April isth. 

Captain James Stewart, of Chatham, in the brig Sally, 
arrived at New London on the 4th instant, from Jamaica, 
brings the most unpleasant accounts from that quarter. 
He states that the British capture all American vessels 
that afford the slightest pretext for condemnation, and 
impress all their seamen without discrimination. Cap- 
tain Stewart was taken by his majesty's ship A casta, of 
forty-four guns, the commander of which, Edward Fel- 
lows, came on board the Sally himself, ordered Captain 
Stewart's chest open, and, with his own hands, took out 
4250 dollars, besides plundering the captain of other 
articles. 

On the arrival of the brig at Kingston, every man on 
board except the captain and boy, all natives of Con- 
necticut, were impressed, and are left there. Captain 
Nathan Allyn, of Groton, had all his people impressed, 
with their protections in their hands. Captain Water- 
man, of New York, was treated in the same manner, with 
many others. And Mr. Savage, the American agent in 
Kingston, informed Captain Stewart that he had for- 
warded to the Secretary of State, by Commodore Trux- 
tun, an attested list of the names of one thousand and 
one bona fide American seamen who have lately been im- 
pressed by the British in that single port. American 
vessels and cargoes were constantly condemned in that 
place, a full account of which must soon be made public. 
Several masters and supercargoes of condemned vessels 
came home with Captain Stewart, who, besides the gen- 
eral usage, was himself treated with personal incivilities 
and contempt. 

Private Correspondence 371 

TO THEODORE SEDGWICK 

May 4, 1800. 

Dear Sir: 

You have heard of the loss of our election in the 
city of New York. This renders it too probable that 
the electors of President for this State will be anti- 
federal. If so, the policy which I was desirous of 
pursuing at the last election is now recommended by 
motives of additional cogency. 

To support Adams and Pinckney equally is the 
only thing that can possibly save us from the fangs 
of Jefferson. 

It is, therefore, essential that the Federalists 
should not separate without coming to a distinct 
and solemn concert to pursue this course bona fide. 

Pray attend to this, and let me speedily hear from 
you that it is done. 

TO JOHN JAY 

New York, May 7, 1800. 


You have been informed of the loss of our election 
in this city. It is also known that we have been 
unfortunate throughout Long Island and in West- 
chester. According to the returns hitherto, it is too 
probable that we lose our senators for this district. 

The moral certainty therefore is, that there will 
be an anti-federal majority in the ensuing Legisla- 
ture ; and the very high probability is that this will 
bring Jefferson into the chief magistracy, unless it be 

^iT^ Alexander Hamilton 

prevented by the measure which I shall now submit 
to your consideration, namely, the immediate calling 
together of the existing Legislature. 

I am aware that there are weighty objections to 

the measure, but the reasons for it appear to me to 

outweigh the objections; and in times like these in 

\ which we live, it will not do to be over-scrupulous. 

/ It is easy to sacrifice the substantial interests of society 

by a strict adherence to ordinary rules. 

In observing this, I shall not be supposed to mean 
that any thing ought to be done which integrity will 
forbid, but merely that the scruples of delicacy and 
propriety, as relative to a common course of things, 
ought to yield to the extraordinary nature of the 
\ crisis. They ought not to hinder the taking of a 
legal and constitutional step to prevent an atheist in 
religion, and a fanatic in politics, from getting pos- 
session of the helm of state. 

You, sir, know in a great degree the anti-federal 
party ; but I fear you do not know them as well as I 
do. It is a composition, indeed, of very incongru- 
ous materials; but all tending to mischief — some of 
them, to the overthrow of the Government, by 
stripping it of its due energies; others of them, to a 
Revolution, after the manner of Bonaparte. I 
speak from indubitable facts, not from conjectures 
and inferences. In proportion as the true character 
of the party is understood, is the force of the con- 
siderations which urge to every effort to disappoint 
it; and it seems to me, that there is a very solemn 
obligation to employ the means in our power. 

The calling of the Legislature will have for its ob- 

Private Correspondence 373 

\ 

ject the choosing of electors by the people in districts; 
this (as Pennsylvania will do nothing) will insure a 
majority of votes in the United States for a federal 
.candidate. The measure will not fail to be approved 
by all the federal party; while it will, no doubt, be 
condemned by the opposite. As to its intrinsic na- 
ture, it is justified by unequivocal reasons of Public 
Safety. 

The reasonable part of the world will, I believe, 
approve it. They will see it as a proceeding out of 
the common course, but warranted by the particular 
nature of the crisis and the great cause of social 
order. 

If done, the motive ought to be frankly avowed. 
In your communication to the Legislature they ought 
to be told that temporary circumstances had ren- 
dered it probable that, without their interposition, 
the executive authority of the general government 
would be transferred to hands hostile to the system 
heretofore pursued with so much success, and dan- 
gerous to the peace, happiness, and order of the 
country; that under this impression, from facts con- 
vincing to your own mind, you had thought it your 
duty to give the existing Legislature an opportunity 
for deliberating whether it would not be proper to 
interpose, and endeavor to prevent so great an evil 
by referring the choice of electors to the people dis- 
tributed into districts. 

In weighing this suggestion you will doubtless bear 
in mind that popular governments must certainly be ^^• 
overturned, and, while they endure, prove engines 
of mischief, if one party will call to its aid all the 

374 Alexander Hamilton 

resources which vice can give, and if the other (how- 
ever pressing the emergency) confines itself within 
all the ordinary forms of delicacy and decorum. 

The Legislature can be brought together in three 
weeks, so that there will be full time for the object; 
but none ought to be lost. 

Think well, my dear sir, of this proposition — ap- 
preciate the extreme danger of the crisis; and I am 
unusually mistaken in my view of the matter, if 
you do not see it right and expedient to adopt the 
measure.' 

/ 

TO THEODORE SEDGWICK 

New York, May 8, 1800. 

I thank you, my dear sir, for your letter of the 5th 
instant, which was received yesterday. The measure 
you mention has been attempted, but without much 
hope of success. 

Yet our friends are to-day in good spirits. The 
accounts from the northward, apparently authentic, 
give us the strong hope of still having a majority in 
our Legislature. But, be this as it may, our welfare 
depends absolutely on a faithful adherence to the 
plan which has been adopted. New York, if federal, 
will not go for Mr. Adams unless there shall be as 
firm a pledge as the nature of the thing will admit, 
that Mr. Pinckney will be equally supported in the 
Northern States. 

I The proposition in this letter was one entirely \in worthy of Hamil- 
ton. It was due to his anger and disgust at the result of the election 
in New York. Jay endorsed the letter "Proposing a measure for 
party purposes which it wotdd not become me to adopt." 

Private Correspondence 375 


New York, May lo, 1800. 

Dear Sir: 

I am very sorry for the information contained in 
your letter of the 7 th. But I am not intimate enough 
with Dexter to put myself upon paper to him. 

If on his return I can catch him at New York I 
shall have a particular conversation with him. 

He is, I am persuaded, much mistaken as to the 
opinion entertained of Mr. Adams by the federal 
party. Were I to determine from my own observa- 
tion, I should say most of the most influential men of 
that party consider him as a very unfit and incapable 
character. 

For my individual part my mind is made up. I 
will never more be responsible for him by my direct 
support, even though the consequence should be the 
election of Jefferson. 

If we must have an enemy at the head of the gov- 
ernment, let it be one whom we can oppose, and for 
whom we are not responsible, who will not involve 
our party in the disgrace of his foolish and bad 
measures. Under Adams, as under Jefferson, the 
government will sink. The party in the hands of 
whose chief it shall sink will sink with it, and the 
advantage will all be on the side of his adversaries. 

'T is a notable expedient for keeping the federal 
party together, to have at the head of it a man who 
hates and is despised by those men of it who, in 
time past, have been its most efficient supporters. 
If the cause is to be sacrificed to a weak and per- 
verse man, I withdraw from the party and act upon 

2,7^ Alexander Hamilton 

my own ground — never certainly against my prin- 
ciples, but in pursuance of them in my own way. I 
am mistaken if others do not do the same. 

The only way to prevent a fatal schism in the fed- 
eral party is to support General Pinckney in good 
earnest. 

If I can be perfectly satisfied that Adams and 
Pinckney will be upheld in the East with entire good 
faith, on the ground of conformity, I will, wherever 
my influence may extend, pursue the same plan. 

If not, I will pursue Mr. Pinckney as my single 
object. Adieu. 

TO TIMOTHY PICKERING 

May 14, 1800. 

My Dear Sir: 

I perceive that you as well as McHenry are quitting 
the administration. I am not informed how all this 
has been, though I conjecture. Allow me to suggest 
that you ought to take with you copies and extracts 
of all such documents as will enable you to explain 
both Jefferson and Adams. You are aware of a very 
curious journal of the latter when he was in Europe 
— a tissue of weakness and vanity. 

The time is coming when men of real integrity 
and energy must write against all empirics. ' 

' Now first printed from the Pickering papers in the possession of the 
Massachusetts Historical Society. 

Private Correspondence Zll 

TO OLIVER WOLCOTT 

New York, Jiily i, 1800. 

Dear Sir: 

I send you the enclosed; if any good use can be 
made of it, you will do it. I have been in Massa- 
chusetts, New Hampshire, and Rhode Island. There 
is little doubt of federal electors in all, but there is 
considerable doubt of a perfect union in favor of 
Pinckney. 

The leaders of the first class are generally right, 
but those of the second class are too much disposed 
to be wrong. It is essential to inform the most dis- 
creet of this description of the facts which denote 
unfitness in Mr. Adams. I have promised confiden- 
tial friends a correct statement. To be able to give 
it, I must derive aid from you, and any thing you 
may write shall, if you please, be returned to you. 
But you must be exact, and much in detail. The 
history of the mission to France, from the first steps 
connected with the declarations in the speech to Con- 
gress down to the last proceeding, is very important. 

I have serious thoughts of writing to the President, 
to tell him that I have heard of his having repeatedly 
mentioned the existence of a British faction in this 
country, and alluded to me as one of that faction, 
requesting that he will inform me of the truth of this 
information, and, if true, what have been the grounds 
of the suggestion. His friends are industrious in 
propagating the idea, to defeat the efforts to unite 
for Pinckney. The inquiry I propose may furnish an 
antidote and vindicate character. What think you 
of this idea ? For my part, I can set malice at defiance. 

>i> 

37^ Alexander Hamilton 

TO CHARLES CARROLL ' 

New York, Jtily i, 1800. 


/ I yesterday returned from an excursion through 
three of the four Eastern States, and found your 
letter of the i8th of April. It is very necessary that 
the true and independent friends of the government 
should communicate and understand each other at 
the present very embarrassed and dangerous crisis 
of public affairs. I am glad, therefore, of the oppor- 
tunity which your letter affords me of giving you 
some explanations which may be useful. They are 
given without reserve, because the times forbid tem- 
porizing, and I hold no opinions which I have any 
motives to dissemble. As to the situation of this 
State with regard to the election of President, it 
is perfectly ascertained that, on a joint ballot of 
the two houses of our Legislature, the opposers of 
the government will have a majority of more than 

, twenty, a majority which can by no means be over- 
come. Consequently all our electors will vote for 
Mr. Jefferson and Mr. Burr. I think there is little 
cause to doubt that the electors in the four Eastern 
States will all be federal. 

The only question seems to be as to Rhode Island, 
where there is some division, and a state of things 
rather loose. Governor Fenner, as far as he may 
dare, will promote the interest of Jefferson. 

A considerable diversion in favor of the opposition 

^ Charles Carroll, of Maryland, who lived to be the last survivor of the 
signers of the Declaration of Independence. Among the Hamilton 
papers in the State Department is a draft of this letter addressed to 
Jonathan R. Wilmer, also of Maryland. 

Private Correspondence 379 

has lately been made in New Jersey, but the best 
and best-informed men there entertain no doubt that 
all her electors will still be federal, and I believe this 
opinion may be relied upon. 

I go no further south, as I take it for granted your 
means of calculation with regard to that quarter are 
at least equal to mine. 

The result of a comprehensive view of the subject 
seems to me to be that the event is uncertain, but 
that the probability is that a universal adherence of 
the Federalists to Pinckney will exclude Jefferson. 

On this point there is some danger, though the 
greatest number of strong-minded men in New Eng- 
land are not only satisfied of the expediency of sup- 
porting Pinckney as giving the best chance against 
Jefferson, but even prefer him to Adams; yet, in the 
body of that people there is a strong personal at- 
tachment to this gentleman, and most of the leaders 
of the second class are so anxious for his re-election 
that it will be difficult to convince them that there 
is as much danger of its failure as there unquestion- 
ably is, or to induce them faithfully to co-operate 
in Mr. Pinckney, notwithstanding their common and 
strong dread of Jefferson. 

It may become advisable, in order to oppose their 
fears to their prejudices, for the middle States to de- 
clare that Mr. Adams will not be supported at all, 
when, seeing his success desperate, they would be 
driven to adhere to Pinckney. In this plan New 
Jersey, and even Connecticut, may be brought to 
concur. For both these States have generally lost 
confidence in Mr. Adams. 

380 Alexander Hamilton 

But this will be best decided by future events and 
elucidations. In the meantime, it is not advisable 
that Maryland should be too deeply pledged to the 
support of Mr. Adams. 

That this gentleman ought not to be the object 
of the federal wish is, with me, reduced to demon- 
stration. His administration has already very ma- 
terially disgraced and sunk the government. There 
are defects in his character which must inevitably 
continue to do this more and more. And if he is 
supported by the federal party, his party must, in 
the issue, fall with him. Every other calculation 
will, in my judgment, prove illusory. 

Doctor Franklin, a sagacious observer of human 
nature, drew this portrait of Mr. Adams: "He is 
always honest, sometimes great, but often mad.'' I 
subscribe to the justness of this picture, adding, as 
^ to the first trait of it, this qualification: "as far as 
a man excessively vain and jealous and ignobly at- 
tached to place can be." 

TO SAMUEL DEXTER ' 

New York, July 9, 1800. 

Sir: '^ "Z 

From a letter (not, however, couched in very ex- 
plicit terms) which I have received from Mr. Bu- 
reaux de Pusy,^ I am induced to think that this 

' Samuel Dexter, the eminent lawyer of Massachusetts, at this time 
Secretary of War. 

2 Jean Xavier Bureaux de Pusy was, as here said, a distinguished 
French officer and friend of Lafayette, whose imprisonment he shared 
at Olmutz. He came to this country in 1797, but returned after the 
1 8th Brumaire, and filled in succession three important prefectures 
under Napoleon. 

Private Correspondence 381 

gentleman would be willing to accept an appointment 
in the service of the United States. 

He was, under the royal government, an engineer 
of distinction in the service of France. You are, I 
dare say, informed of his political history. He w^as 
a member and once president of the constituent 
assembly. Attached warmly to Lafayette and in- 
volved in his fortunes, he withdrew with him and was 
his fellov/ prisoner with the Russians and Austrians. 
Tired of the tempest of Europe himself, with his 
father-in-law DuPont de Nemours,' and the whole 
connection have removed to this country and made 
a little establishment in Bergen County, New Jersey. 

His professional pretensions admit of no dispute. 
His private character is amuable ; his intelligence and 
information are highly respectable. 

After mature reflection I am well satisfied that it 
is advisable for the United States to engage him if 
they can. He may be one of the two engineers 
whom the President is empowered to employ with 
the grade of colonel and such emoluments as he may 
think proper to agree for. 

As the grade is rather below the pretensions of 
Mr. de Pusy, he may expect an increase of emolu- 
ments, which indeed is agreeable to the spirit of the 
provision made for this object. 

There is a little probability of finding a person 

' Pierre Samuel DuPont de Nemours, an eminent French economist 
and statesman. He took an active part in the Revolution, sustaining 
the moderate party, was thrown into prison, and narrowly escaped 
transportation. He came to this country in 1797, returned in 1802, 
but declined office under Napoleon, and in 1815 came back to the 
United States, where he died two years later. 

382 Alexander Hamilton 

better qualified than in all probability is this gentle- 
man. 

The institution of a military academy being an 
object of primary importance, will, I doubt not, 
be zealously pursued. Whenever it shall take place, 
Mr. de Pusy will be a most desirable character to be 
at the head of it." 

^^^ ' New York, Aug. i, 1800. 

Sir: 

It has been repeatedly mentioned to me that you 
have on different occasions asserted the existence of 
a British faction in this country, embracing a num- 
ber of leading or influential characters of the federal 
party, as usually denominated; and that you have 
sometimes named me, at others plainly alluded to 
me, as one of this description of persons. And I 
have likewise been assured that of late some of your 
warm adherents, for electioneering purposes, have 
employed a corresponding language. I must, sir, 
take it for granted that you cannot have made such 
assertions or insinuations without being willing to 
avow them, and to assign the reasons to a party who 
may conceive himself injured by them. I therefore 
trust that you will not deem it improper, that I 
apply directly to yourself, to ascertain from you, in 
reference to your own declarations, whether the in- 
formation I have received is correct or not, and if 
correct, what are the grounds upon which you have 
founded the suggestion. 

^ Now first printed from the Hamilton papers in the State Depart- 
ment. 

Private Correspondence 383 

TO OLIVER WOLCOTT 

New York, Aug. 3, 1800. 

Dear Sir: 

I have, two days since, written to Mr. Adams a 
I respectful letter on the subject I heretofore men- 
tioned to you. Occupation at court prevented its 
being done sooner. 

But I wait with impatience for the statement of 
facts which you promised me. It is plain that, un- 
less we give our reasons in some form or other, Mr. 
Adams' personal friends, seconded by the Jacobins, ' 
will completely run us down in the public opinion. 
Your name, in company with mine, that of T. Pick-\ 
ering etc., is in full circulation, as one of the British 
faction of which Mr. Adams has talked so much. 

I have serious thoughts of giving to the public my 
opinion respecting Mr. Adams, with my reasons, in 
a letter to a friend, with my signature. This seems 
to me the most authentic way of conveying the in- 
formation, and best suited to the plain dealing of my 
character. There are, however, reasons against it; 
and a very strong one is, that some of the principal 
causes of my disapprobation proceed from yourself, 
and other members of the administration, who 
would be understood to be the sources of my infor- 
mation, whatever cover I might give the thing. 

What say you to this measure ? I could predicate 
it on the fact that I am abused by the friends of Mr. 
Adams, who ascribe my opposition to pique and 
disappointment; and could give it the shape of a 
defence of myself. 

You have doubtless seen the Aurora publication 

384 Alexander Hamilton 

of treasury documents, and the manner in which my 
name is connected with it. These publications do 
harm with the ignorant, who are the greatest num- 
ber. I have thoughts of insinuating an action of 
slander, to be tried by a struck jury, against the 
editor. If I do it, I should claim you and the super- 
visors, collectors, and loan officers of all the States, 
from Maryland to New York, inclusively, as wit- 
nesses, to demonstrate completely the malice and 
falsity of the accusation. What think you of this? 
You see I am in a very belligerent humor. 

But I remember that, at the outset, before the 
sums payable for interest, pensions, etc., were as- 
certained, I placed the money in the hands of the 
paying officers, upon estimate, and that, to avoid 
disappointment, I made the estimates large. Pray 
look into this, and see how far it may give any color 
to the calumny. 

Let me hear from you soon. 

TO JAMES ASHTON BAYARD * 

New York, Aug. 6, 1800. 


The president of Columbia College, in this city, has 
resigned, and we are looking out for a successor. Dr. 
Wharton has occurred to me as a character worthy 
of inquiry; and the great confidence I feel in your 
judgment and candor, induces me to have recourse 
to you. 

' At this time member of Congress, from Delaware; afterwards for 
many years Senator from that State. He was one of the peace com- 
missioners at Ghent, and died soon after his rettim, in August, 1815. 

Private Correspondence 385 

We are extremely anxious to have a well-qualified 
man, as this is the only thing wanted to render our 
institution very flourishing. We have two very good 
professors — one of the languages, the other of the 
mathematics and natural philosophy; and we have 
a professor of chemistry — this branch having been 
lately made a part of the academic course, — together 
with better funds, as I believe, than any similar in- 
stitution in the United States. I mention these par- 
ticulars to impress you with the importance of our 
college to the cause of literature, and with the duty 
which thence results of peculiar circumspection and 
care in the choice of a president. It is essential 
that he be a gentleman in his manners, as well as a 
sound and polite scholar; that his moral character 
be irreproachable; that he possess energy of body 
and mind, and be of a disposition to maintain disci- 
pline without undue austerity; and, in the last place, 
that his politics be of the right sort. I beg you to 
inform me particularly how far Dr. Wharton meets 
this description, in what, if any thing, he fails. You 
will, of course, see the propriety of mentioning no- 
thing about this inquiry. 

In the present eventful crisis of our affairs, a mu- 
tual communication of informations and opinions • 
among influential men of the federal party, may be 
attended with some advantage to their cause. Un- 
der this impression I shall give you a summary of the 
state of things north of the Delaware; south of it, 
your information is likely to be as good as mine ; and, '^ ,1 i)i) 
accordingly, I shall request your view of what is to 
be expected from that quarter. In New Hampshire 

VOL. X.— 25. ; 

386 Alexander Hamilton 

there is no doubt of federal electors; but there is 
a decided partiality for Mr. Adams. I took pains 
to possess Governor Gilman, whose influence is very 
preponderating, of the errors and defects of Mr. 
Adams, and of the danger that no candidate can pre- 
vail, by mere federal strength; consequently of the 
expediency and necessity of unanimously voting for 
General Pinckney (who, in the South, may get some 
anti-federal votes) as the best chance of excluding 
Mr. Jefferson. The Governor appeared convinced of 
the soundness of these views, and cautiously gave 
me to expect his co-operation. Yet I do not count 
upon New Hampshire for more than two things: 
one, a unanimous vote for Mr. Adams ; the other, no 
vote for any Anti-federalist. In Massachusetts, al- 
/ most all the leaders of the first class are dissatisfied 
with Mr. Adams ; and enter heartily into the policy 
of supporting General Pinckney. But most of the 
leaders of the second class are attached to Mr. Adams, 
and fearful of jeopardizing his election by promoting 
that of General Pinckney ; and the mass of the peo- 
ple are well affected to him and to his administra- 
tion. Yet I have strong hopes that, by the exertions 
of the principal Federalists, Massachusetts will unani- 
mously vote for Adams and Pinckney. Rhode 
Island is in a state somewhat uncertain. Schisms 
have grown up from personal rivalships, which have 
been improved by the Anti-federalists, to strengthen 
their interests. Governor Fenner expresses a hope 
that there will be two anti-federal electors ; but our 
friends reject this idea as wholly improbable. But 
I am not quite convinced that they know the ground. 

Private Correspondence z^7 

In every event, however, I expect that Mr. Adams 
will have there an unanimous vote. 

I think nothing can be relied upon as to General 
Pinckney. Connecticut will, I doubt not, unani- 
mously vote for General Pinckney, but, being very 
much displeased with Mr. Adams, it will require the jy 

explicit advice of certain gentlemen to induce them 
to vote for him. No Anti-federalist has any chance 
there. About Vermont I am not as yet accurately 
informed, but I believe Adams and Pinckney will 
both have all the votes. In New York, all the votes 
will certainly be for Jefferson and Burr. New Jersey 
does not stand as well as she used to do. The Antis 
hope for the votes of this State, but I think they will 
be disappointed. If the electors are federal, Pinck- 
ney will certainly be voted for, and Adams will be, 
or not, as leading friends shall advise. Adding to 
this view of the Northern what I have imderstood 
of the Southern quarter, our prospects are not bril- 
liant. There seems to be too much probability that 
Jefferson or Burr will be President. The latter is \ 
intriguing with all his might in New Jersey, Rhode i 
Island, and Vermont, and there is a possibility of 
some success in his intrigues. He counts positively 
on the universal support of the Anti-federalists, and ! 
that, by some adventitious aid from other quarters, 
he will overtop his friend Jefferson. Admitting the 
first point, the conclusion may be realized; and if it 
is so. Burr will certainly attempt to reform the gov- 
ernment a la Bonaparte. He is as tmprincipled and 
dangerous a man as any country can boast — as true 
a Catiline as ever met in midnight conclave. 

^^ i (L-^^^_^ ffj ^^ 

388 Alexander Hamilton 

TO JAMES McHENRY 

New York, Aug. 27, 1800. 

Indeed, my dear Mac, I have not enough the gift 
of second sight to foresee what New England will do. 

The mass of the people there are attached to 
Adams and the leaders of the second class pretty 
generally. The leaders of the first class pretty gen- 
erally promote the joint support of Adams and 
Pinckney, either because they dislike Adams, or hate 
or fear Jefferson. 

Upon the whole, I believe, though not with perfect 
assurance, that Pinckney will have almost all the 
votes of New England. Adams will have all. 

The State of New Jersey is more uncertain than I 
could wish. Parties will be too nicely balanced there. 
But our friends continue confident of a favorable 
result. If the electors in this State are federal, they 
will certainly vote for Pinckney, and I rather think 
will do, with respect to Mr. Adams, what may be 
thought right. 

In New York, there is no chance for any federal 
candidate. 

I think, at all events, Maryland had better choose 
by the Legislature. If we have a majority of federal 
votes throughout, we can certainly exclude Jeffer- 
son, and, if we please, bring the question between 
Adams and Pinckney to the House of Represent- 
atives. 

We fight Adams on very unequal grounds, because 
we do not declare the motives of our dislike. The 
exposition of these is very important — ^but how? I 
would make it and put my name to it, but I cannot 

Private Correspondence 389 

do it without its being conclusively inferred that as 
to very material facts I must have derived my in- 
formation from members of the administration. Yet, 
without this, we have the air of mere caballers, and 
shall be completely run down in the public opinion. 
I have written a letter, of which I shall send a copy 
to you, another to Wolcott. If I am not forbidden. 
Colonel Ogden, to whom it will be addressed, will 
commit it to the newspapers. 

P. S. — I have concluded to send the enclosed to 
you instead of Major Jackson.' 

TO OLIVER WOLCOTT 

New York, Sept. a6, 1800. 

Dear Sir: 

As I hinted to you some time since, I have drafted 
a letter which it is my wish to send to influential in- 
dividuals in the New England States. I hope from 
it two advantages — the promoting of Mr. Pinckney's 
election and the vindication of ourselves. 

You may depend upon it, a very serious impres- 
sion has been made on the public mind, by the par- i 
tisans of Mr. Adams, to our disadvantage; that the 
facts hitherto known have very partially impaired ^ ~,^^ 
the confidence of the body of the Federalists in Mr. 
Adams, who, for want of information, are disposed 
to regard his opponents as factious men. If this can- 
not be counteracted, our characters are the sacrifice. 

^ Now first printed from the Hamilton papers in the State Depart- 
ment. 

390 Alexander Hamilton 

To do it, facts must be stated with some authentic 
stamp. Decorum may not permit going into the 
newspapers, but the letter may be addressed to so 
many respectable men of influence as may give its 
contents general circulation, 
t What say you to the measure ? Anonymous pub- 
lications can now effect nothing. 

Some of the most delicate of the facts stated I hold 
from the three ministers, yourself particularly, and I 
do not think myself at liberty to take the step with- 
out your consent. I never mean to bring proof, but 
to stand upon the credit of my own veracity. 

Say quickly what is to be done, for there is no 
time to spare. Give me your opinion not only of the 
measure, but of the fashion and spirit of the letter in 
regard to utility and propriety. If there are excep- 
tionable ideas or phrases, note them. 

As it is a first draught, there is much I should my- 
self mend. But I have not now leisure for it pre- 
vious to your inspection.^ 

TO JOHN ADAMS 

New York, Oct. i, 1800. 

Sir: 

The time which has elapsed since my letter of the 
I St Aug. was delivered to you precludes the further 
expectation of an answer. 

From this silence I will draw no inference, nor will 
I presume to judge of the fitness of silence on such an 

^ Reprinted from the Administrations of Washington and Adams, ii., 
421. 

Private Correspondence 391 

occasion on the part of the chief magistrate of a re- 
pubHc towards a citizen who, without a stain, has 
discharged so many important pubhc trusts. 

But this much I will affirm, that by whomsoever a 
charge of the kind mentioned in my former letter 
may at any time have been made or insinuated 
against me, it is a base, wicked, and cruel calumny, 
destitute even of a plausible pretext to excuse the 
folly or the depravity which must have dictated it. 

TO TIMOTHY PICKERING 

New York, Nov. 13, 1800. 

Dear Sir: 

You no doubt have seen my pamphlet respecting 
the conduct and character of President Adams. The 
press teems with replies, and I may finally think it 
expedient to publish a second time. In this case I 
shall reinforce my charges by new anecdotes. My 
friends will, no doubt, be disposed to aid me. You 
probably possess some which are unknown to me. 
Pray let me have them without delay. 

You will observe that a prejudice is attempted to 
be excited against you as wishing to bring about an 
alliance with Great Britain. Explain to me fully 
this affair. I remember that you once consulted me 
about the expediency of the measure, and that I in 
reply gave you my opinion. I think it was that the -;. "^ ^ 

thing was in any event problematical — that it was 
not advisable to go into at the time — that the most 
prudent course would be for Great Britain to have 
a power competent to the purpose vested in her 

392 Alexander Hamilton 

Minister in this country, and to take the matter ad 
referendum to be governed by future circumstances. 
I have not a copy of my letter. You will oblige 
me by letting me have it. 

TO OLIVER WOLCOTT 

New York, Dec. i6, 1800. 

It is now, my dear sir, ascertained that Jefferson 
or Burr will be President, and it seems probable that 
they will come with equal votes to the House of 
Representatives. It is also circulated here that, in 
this event, the Federalists in Congress, or some of 
them, talk of preferring Burr. I trust New England, 
at least, will not so far lose its head as to fall into 
this snare. There is no doubt but that, upon every 
virtuous and prudent calculation, Jefferson is to be 
preferred. He is by far not so dangerous a man; 
and he has pretensions to character. 

As to Burr, there is nothing in his favor. His pri- 
vate character is not defended by his most partial 
friends. He is bankrupt beyond redemption, except 
by the plunder of his country. His public principles 
have no other spring or aim than his own aggrand- 
izement, per fas et nefas. If he can, he will certainly 
disturb our institutions, to secure to himself per- 
manent power, and with it wealth. He is truly the 
Catiline of America; and, if I may credit Major 
i\\\^- Wilcocks, he has held very vindictive language re- 
specting his opponents. 

But early measures must be taken to fix on this 
point the opinions of the Federalists. Among them, 

Private Correspondence 393 

from different motives, Burr will find partisans. If 
the thing be neglected, he may possibly go far. 

Yet it may be well enough to throw out a lure for 
him, in order to tempt him to start for the plate, and 
then lay the foundation of dissension between the 
two chiefs. 

You may communicate this letter to Marshall^ 
and Sedgwick. Let me hear speedily from you in 
reply. 


December 17, 1800. 

Your last letter, my dear sir, has given me great 
pain, not only because it informed me that the opin- 
ion in favor of Mr. Burr was increasing among the 
Federalists, but because it also told me that Mr. > 
Sedgwick was one of its partisans. I have a letter 
from this gentleman, in which he expresses decidedly 
his preference of Mr. Jefferson. I hope you have 
been mistaken, and that it is not possible for him to 
have been guilty of so great duplicity." 

There is no circumstance which has occurred in 
the course of our political affairs that has given me 
so much pain as the idea that Mr. Burr might be ele- 
vated to the Presidency by the means of the Federal- 
ists. I am of opinion that this party has hitherto 
solid claims of merit with the public, and so long as 
it does nothing to forfeit its title to confidence, I 

^ John Marshall, at this time Secretary of State, and afterwards 
Chief-Justice. 

2 Hamilton was right, and Wolcott mistaken; Sedgwick preferred .,. i^^ /^ 
Jefferson. -72 / 

394 Alexander Hamilton 

shall continue to hope that our misfortunes are tem- 
porary, and that the party will erelong emerge from 
its depression. But if it shall act a foolish or un- 
worthy part in any capital instance, I shall then 
despair. 

Such, without doubt, will be the part it will act, if 
it shall seriously attempt to support Mr. Burr, in op- 
position to Mr. Jefferson. If it fails, as, after all, is 
not improbable, it will have riveted the animosity 
of that person ; will have destroyed or weakened the 
motives to moderation which he must at present feel, 
and it will expose them to the disgrace of a defeat, in 
an attempt to elevate to the first place of the govern- 
ment one of the worst men in the community. 

If it succeeds, it will have done nothing more nor 
less than place in that station a man who will possess 
the boldness and daring necessary to give success to 
the Jacobin system, instead of one who, for want of 
that quality, will be less fitted to promote it. 

Let it not be imagined that Mr. Burr can be won to 
the federal views. It is a vain hope. Stronger ties 
and stronger inducements than they can offer will 
impel him in a different direction. His ambition 
will not be content with those objects which virtuous 
men of either party will allot to it, and his situation 
and his habits will oblige him to have recourse to 
corrupt expedients, from which he will be restrained 
by no moral scruple. To accomplish his ends, he 
must lean upon unprincipled men, and will continue 
to adhere to the myrmidons who have hitherto sec- 
onded him. To these he will, no doubt, add able 
rogues of the federal party, but he will employ the 

.^v^^^ 

v/. «4' 

Private Correspondence 395 

rogues of all parties to overrule the good men of all 
parties, and to prosecute projects which wise men 
of every description will disapprove. 

These things are to be inferred, with moral cer- 
tainty, from the character of the man. Every step 
in his career proves that he has formed himself upon 
the model of Catiline, and he is too cold-blooded and 
too determined a conspirator ever to change his plan. 

What would you think of these toasts and this 
conversation at his table within the last three or four 
weeks ? 

ist. The French republic. 

2d. The commissioners on both sides who nego- 
tiated the convention. 

3d. Bonaparte. 

4th. Lafayette. 

What would you think of his having seconded the 
positions, that it was the interest of this country to 
allow the belligerent powers to bring in and sell their 
prizes, and build and equip ships in our ports? Do 
you not see in this the scheme of war with Great 
Britain, as the instrument of power and wealth? ' ^'^ 
Can it be doubted that a man who has all his life 
speculated upon the popular prejudices, will consult 
them in the object of a war when he thinks it is expe- 
dient to make one ? Can a man who, despising de- „ .771' i? ^ 
mocracy, has chimed in with all its absurdities, be ' '^'^ 
diverted from the plan of ambition which must have 
directed his course? They who suppose it must 
understand little of human nature. 

If Jefferson is President, the whole responsibility , -^"'^ 

of bad measures will rest with the Anti-federalists. '' 

U06- 

li 

39^ Alexander Hamilton 

If Burr is made so by the Federalists, the whole re- 
sponsibility will rest with them. The other party 
will say to the people: We intended him only for 
Vice-President; here he might have done very well, 
or been at least harmless. But the Federalists, to 
disappoint us, and a majority of you, took advan- 
tage of a momentary superiority to put him in the 
first place. He is therefore their President, and 
they must answer for all the evils of his bad conduct. 
And the people will believe them. 

Will any reasonable calculation on the part of the 
Federalists uphold the policy of assuming so great 
a responsibility in the support of so unpromising a 
character? The negative is so manifest that, had 
I not been assured of the contrary, I should have 
thought it impossible that assent to it would have 
been attended with a moment's hesitation. 

Alas! when will men consult their reason rather 
than their passions? Whatever they may imagine, 
the desire of mortifying the adverse party must be 
the chief spring of the disposition to prefer Mr. Burr. 
This disposition reminds me of the conduct of the 
Dutch moneyed men, who, from their hatred of the 
old aristocracy, favored the admission of the French 
into Holland, to overturn every thing. 

Adieu to the Federal Troy, if they once introduce 
this Grecian horse into their citadel. 

Trust me, my dear friend, you cannot render a 
greater service to your country than to resist this 
project. Far better will it be to endeavor to obtain 
from Jefferson assurances on some cardinal points: 

I St. The preservation of the actual fiscal system. 

„s 

Private Correspondence 397 

2d. Adherence to the neutral plan. 

3d. The preservation and gradual increase of the 
navy. 

4th. The continuance of our friends in the offices 
they fill, except in the great departments, in v^hich 
he ought to be left free. 

TO THEODORE SEDGWICK 

New York, Dec. 22, 1800. 

I entirely agree with you, my dear sir, that, in the 
event of Jefferson and Burr coming to the House of 
Representatives, the former is to be preferred. The 
appointment of Burr as President would disgrace 
our country abroad. No agreement with him could 
be relied upon. His private circumstances render 
disorder a necessary resource. His public principles 
offer no obstacle. His ambition aims at nothing 
short of permanent power and wealth in his own \\ }i\'f'^ 
person. For heaven's sake, let not the federal party 
be responsible for the elevation of this man! / J/ ^"^ -^'^I-a 

The convention with France is just such an issue 
as was to have been expected. It plays into the 
hands of France, by the precedent of those prin- 
ciples of navigation which she is at this moment de- 
sirous of making the basis of a league of the northern 
powers against England. This feature will be pe- 
culiarly disagreeable to the latter, and, as it relates 
to the general politics of the world, is a make-weight 
in the wrong scale. 

The stipulation about privateers and prizes is of 

398 Alexander Hamilton 

questionable propriety. If third powers are en- 
titled to the benefit of annulling our treaties with 
France, it is a plain violation of our compact with 
Great Britain. 

But I rather think it the better opinion that, pend- 
ing the differences which produced that measure, it 
is a matter purely between France and ourselves, by 
which no third power has a right to profit, and that 
even the status quo would not have been a violation 
of our engagements with Great Britain. 

Thus situated, I am of opinion the treaty must be 
ratified. The contrary condition would, I think, ut- 
terly ruin the federal party and endanger our internal 
tranquillity. Moreover, it is better to close the 
thing where it is, than to leave it to a Jacobin to do 
much worse. 

This is a deliberately formed sentiment, and I hope 
will accord with the conclusions of our friends. At 
the same time, I wish it to be declared by our friends 
in the Senate, that they think the treaty liable to 
strong objections and pregnant with dangers to the 
interests of this country, but having been negotiated, 
they will not withhold their assent. 

Reasons should be given. 

TO GOUVERNEUR MORRIS ^ 

New York, Dec. 24, 1800. 

Dear Sir: 

I w411 run the risk with you of giving countenance 
to a charge lately brought against me, though it has 

* At this time Senator from New York. 

Private Correspondence 399 

certainly had a very false direction. I mean that of 
being fond of giving advice. 

Several friends at Washington inform me that 
there is likely to be much hesitation in the Senate 
about ratifying the convention with France. I do 
not wonder at it, and yet I should be sorry that it 
should mature itself into a disagreement to the in- 
strument. Having received its present form, I think 
it should be ratified. 

In my opinion, there is nothing in it contrary to j 
our treaty with Great Britain. The annulling of our 
former treaties with France was an act of reprisal in 
consequence of hostile differences, of which no other 
power had a right to benefit, and which, upon an ac- 
commodation, might have been rescinded, even to 
the restoration of the status quo. Great Britain is 
now, in this respect, in a better situation than she 
was when she made the treaty. She has, so far, no 
good cause to complain. 

There are, indeed, features which will not be 
pleasant to the British cabinet, particularly the prin- 
ciple that free ships shall make free goods, and that j 
the flag of ships-of-war shall protect. As these are 
points upon which France was endeavoring to form 
hostile combinations against Great Britain, the giv- 
ing place to them in the convention will have an un- 
friendly countenance towards her and us, and is to 
be regretted in the present moment. Yet we had a 
right to make these stipulations, and as they may be 
fairly supposed to be advantageous to us, they are 
not in fact indications of enmity. They give no 
real cause of umbrage, and, considering the general 

400 Alexander Hamilton 

interests of Great Britain and her particular situa- 
tion, it does not seem probable that they will produce 
on her part a hostile conduct. 

As to the indemnification for spoliations, that was 
rather to be wished than expected, while France is 
laying the world under contribution. The people of 
this country will not endure that a definitive rupture 
with France shall be hazarded on this ground. 

If this convention is not closed, the leaving of the 
whole subject open will render it easier for the Jacobin 
administration to make a worse thing. 

On the whole, the least evil is to ratify. The con- 
trary would finish the ruin of the federal party, and 
endanger our internal tranquillity. It is better to 
risk the dangers on the other hand, than on this side. 

Another subject. Jefferson or Burr? the former 
without all doubt. The latter, in my judgment, has 
no principle, public or private; could be bound by 
no agreement; will listen to no monitor but his am- 
bition, and for this purpose will use the worst part 
of the community as a ladder to climb to permanent 
power, and an instrument to crush the better part. 
He is bankrupt beyond redemption, except by the 
resources that grow out of war and disorder, or by 
a sale to a foreign power, or by great peculation. 
War with Great Britain would be the immediate 
instrument. He is sanguine enough to hope every 
thing, daring enough to attempt every thing, wicked 
enough to scruple nothing. From the elevation of 
such a man may heaven preserve the country! 

Let our situation be improved to obtain from Jef- 
ferson assurances on certain points : the maintenance 

o-? 

Private Correspondence 401 

of the present system, especially on the cardinal ar- 
ticles of public credit — a navy, neutrality. Make 
any discreet use you may think fit of this letter. 

TO GOUVERNEUR MORRIS 

New York, Dec. 26, 1800. 

Dear Sir: 

The post of yesterday gave me the pleasure of a 
letter from you. I thank you for the communica- 
tion. I trust that a letter which I wrote you the day 
before the receipt of yours will have duly reached you, 
as it contains some very free and confidential ob- 
servations ending in two results. 

I St. That the convention with France ought to 
be ratified as the least of two evils. 

2d. That on the same ground Jefferson ought to 
be preferred to Burr. 

I trust the Federalists will not finally be so mad 
as to vote for the latter. I speak with an intimate 
and accurate knowledge of character. His elevation ■' k ^s^ ^, 
can only promote the purposes of the desperate and 
profligate. 

If there be a man in the world I ought to hate, it is 
Jefferson. With Burr I have always been personally 
well. But the public good must be paramount to 
every private consideration. 

My opinion may be freely used with such reserves 
as you shall think discreet. 

VOL. X.— 36. 

Z^ 

402 Alexander Hamilton 

TO JAMES A. BAYARD 

New York, Dec. 27, 1800. 

Dear Sir: 

Several letters to myself and others from the city 
, of Washington, excite in my mind extreme alarm on 
' the subject of the future President. It seems nearly 
ascertained that Jefferson and Burr will come into 
the House of Representatives with equal votes, and 
those letters express the probability that the federal 
party may prefer the latter. In my opinion, a cir- 
cumstance more ruinous to them, or more disastrous 
to the country, could not happen. 

This opinion is dictated by a long and close atten- 
tion to the character of B., with the best opportuni- 
ties of knowing it — an advantage of judging which, 
few of our friends possess, and which ought to give 
some weight to my opinion. 

Be assured, my dear sir, that this man has no prin- 
ciple, public nor private. As a politician, his sole 
spring of action is an inordinate ambition ; as an in- 
dividual, he is believed by friends as well as foes to 
be without probity; and a voluptuary by system — 
with habits of expense that can be satisfied by no 
fair expedients. As to his talents, great manage- 
ment and cunning are the predominant features ; he 
is yet to give proofs of those solid abilities which 
characterize the statesman. Daring and energy 
must be allowed him; but these qualities, under the 
direction of the worst passions, are certainly strong 
objections, not recommendations. He is of a temper 
to undertake the most hazardous enterprises, be- 
cause he is sanguine enough to think nothing im- 

Private Correspondence 403 

practicable ; and of an ambition that will be content 
with nothing less than permanent power in his own 
hands. The maintenance of the existing institu- 
tions will not suit him; because under them his 
power will be too narrow and too precarious. Yet 
the innovations he may attempt will not offer the 
substitute of a system durable and safe, calculated 
to give lasting prosperity, and to unite liberty with 
strength. It will be the system of the day, sufficient '' 
to serve his own turn, and not looking beyond him- 
self. To execute this plan, as the good men of the 
country cannot be relied upon, the worst will be used. 
Let it not be imagined that the difficulties of execu- 
tion will deter, or a calculation of interest restrain. 
The truth is, that under forms of government like 
ours, too much is practicable to men who will, with- 
out scruple, avail themselves of the bad passions of 
human nature. To a mian of this description, pos- 
sessing the requisite talents, the acquisition of per- 
manent power is not a chimera. I know that Mr. 
Burr does not view it as such, and I am sure there 
are no means too atrocious to be employed by him. 
In debt, vastly beyond his means of payment, with 
all the habits of excessive expense, he cannot be 
satisfied with the regular emoluments of any office 
of our government. Corrupt expedients will be to 
him a necessary resource. Will any prudent man \ 
offer such a President to the temptations of foreign 
gold? No engagement that can be made with him 
can be depended upon ; while making it, he will laugh 
in his sleeve at the credulity of those with whom he 
makes it ; — and the first moment it suits his views to 

r. ■^ 

404 Alexander Hamilton 

break it, he will do so.' Let me add, that I could 
scarcely name a discreet man of either party in our 
State, who does not think Mr. Burr the most tmfit 
man in the United States for the office of President. 
Disgrace abroad, ruin at home, are the probable 
fruits of his elevation. To contribute to the disap- 
pointment and mortification of Mr. J., would be, on 
my part, only to retaliate for unequivocal proofs of 
enmity; but in a case like this, it would be base to 
listen to personal considerations. In alluding to the 
situation, I mean only to illustrate how strong must 
be the motives which induced me to promote his 
elevation in exclusion of another. 

For heaven's sake, my dear sir, exert yourself to 
the utmost to save our country from so great a 
calamity. Let us not be responsible for the evils, 
which in all probability will follow the preference . All 
calculations that may lead to it must prove fallacious. 

TO JOHN RUTLEDGE 

December, 1800. 

As long as the federal party pursue their high 
ground of integrity and principle, I shall not despair 

^ A recent incident will give you an idea of his views as to foreign 
politics. I dined with him lately. His toasts were : "The French Re- 
public," "The Commissioners who Negotiated the Convention," " Buo- 

"^ naparte," "The Marquis La Fayette." His doctrines, that it would be 

the interest of this country to permit the indiscriminate sale of prizes 
by the belligerent powers; and the building and equipment of vessels 
— a project amounting to nothing more nor less (with the semblance of 
equality) than to turn all our naval resources into the channel of France, 
and compel Great Britain to war. Indeed, Mr. Burr must have war, 
as the instrument of his ambition and cupidity. The peculiarity of 

■"^ the occasion will excuse my mentioning in confidence the occurrences of 

a private table. 

Private Correspondence 405 

of the public weal ; but if they quit it and descend to 
be willing instruments of the elevation of the most 
unfit and most dangerous man of the community to 
the highest station in the government, I shall no 
longer see any anchor for the hopes of good men. I 
shall at once anticipate all the evils that a daring and 
unprincipled ambition, wielding the lever of Jacob- 
inism, can bring upon an infatuated country. 'T is 
not to the chapter of accidents that we ought to 
trust the government, peace, and happiness of our 
country. 'T is enough for us to know that Mr. Burr 
is one of the most unprincipled men in the United 
States, to determine us to decline being responsible 
for the precarious issues of his calculations of inter- 
est. You cannot, in my opinion, render a greater 
service to your country than by exerting your in- 
fluence to counteract the impolitic and impure idea 
of raising Mr. Burr to the chief magistracy.' 

TO JAMES ROSS * 

I80I. 

Letters which myself and others have received 
from Washington give me much alarm at the pro- 
spect that Mr. Burr may be supported by the Feder- 
alists in preference to Mr. Jefferson. Be assured, my 
dear sir, that this would be a fatal mistake. From 

^Reprinted from the History of the Republic, vii., 445. General 
John Rutledge, of South Carolina, to whom this letter is addressed, 
was the son of the revolutionary patriot and statesman of the same 
name. He was at this time Member of Congress from South Carolina. 

2 James Ross, Senator from Pennsylvania, was one of the leaders of 
the Federalists and a lawyer of distinguished ability. 

4o6 Alexander Hamilton 

a thorough knowledge of the characters, I can pro- 
nounce with confidence that Mr. Burr is the last 
man in the United States to be supported by the 
Federalists. 

First. It is an opinion firmly entertained by his 
enemies and not disputed by his friends, that, as a 
man, he is deficient in honesty. Some very sad 
stories are related of him. That he is bankrupt for 
a large deficit, is certain. Second. As a politician, 
discerning men of both parties admit that he has but 
one principle — to get power by any means, and to 
keep it by all means. Third. Of an ambition too 
irregular and inordinate to be content with institu- 
tions that leave his power precarious, he is of too 
bold and sanguine a temper to think any thing too 
hazardous to be attempted, or too difficult to be ac- 
complished. Fourth. As to talents, they are great 
for management and intrigue — but he is yet to give 
the first proofs that they are equal to the act of 
governing well. Fifth. As to his theory, no man can 
tell what it is. Institutions that would serve his own 
purposes (such as the government of France of the 
present day), not such as would promise lasting pro- 
sperity and glory to the country, would be his prefer- 
ence, because he cares only for himself, and nothing 
for his country or glory. Sixth. Certain that his 
irregular ambition cannot be supported by good men, 
he will court and employ the worst men of all parties 
as the most eligible instruments. Jacobinism in 
its most pernicious form will scourge the country. 
Seventh. As to foreign politics, war will be a neces- 
sary means of power and wealth. The animosity to 
Private Correspondence 407 

the British will be the handle by which he will at- 
tempt to wield the nation to that point. Within a 
fortnight he has advocated positions, which, if acted 
upon, would in six months place us in a state of war 
with that power. From the elevation of such a man 
may heaven preserve the country. Shotild it be by 
the means of the Federalists, I should at once despair. 
I should see no longer any thing upon which to rest 
the hope of public or private prosperity. 

No. Let the Federalists vote for Jefferson. 

But, as they have much in their power, let them 
improve the situation to obtain assurances from him : 

1. The preservation of the actual system of 
finance and public credit. 

2. The support and gradual increase of the navy. 

3. A bona fide neutrality towards belligerent 
powers. 

4. The preservation in office of our friends, ex- 
cept in the great departments, in respect to which 
and to future appointments he ought to be at liberty 
to promote his friends.' 

TO GOUVERNEUR MORRIS 

New York, Jan. 9, 1801. 

I have lately, my dear sir, written you two letters. 
As they contained some delicate topics, I shall be 
glad to know that they got to hand. 

It has occurred to me that perhaps the Federalists 
may be disposed to play the game of preventing an 
election, and leaving the executive power in the 

^ Reprinted from the History of the Republic, vii., 445. ' p 

jri 

4o8 Alexander Hamilton 

hands of a future President of the Senate. This, if 
it could succeed, would be, for obvious reasons, a 
most dangerous and unbecoming policy. But it is 
well it should be understood that it cannot succeed. 
The Anti-federalists, as a body, prefer Jefferson, but 
among them are many who will be better suited by 
the dashing, projecting spirit of Burr, and who, after 
doing what they will suppose to be saving appear- 
ances, they will go over to Mr. Burr. Edward Liv- 
ingston has declared among his friends that his first 
jT^^^ ballot will be for Jefferson; his second for Burr. 
^,^1^^^ The present is a crisis which demands the exertions 

of men who have an interest in public order. 


New York, Jan. lo, 1801. 

I thank you, my dear sir, for your letter of the 5th 
instant. The scruples you express about the rati- 
fication of the convention are very respectable. No 
well-informed man can doubt that it is an exception- 
able instrument, but I continue of the opinion that 
it is best, upon the whole, to ratify it unconditionally. 

It does not appear to me that, on fair construction, 
the existence of the old treaties is recognized, though 
a right of mutual indemnities as to the past is ad- 
mitted. But inasmuch as it is declared that they 
shall hereafter have no effect until a future agree- 
ment, this appears to me to amount to the consent 
of France that they shall become inoperative and 
null, unless they shall be revived by the consent of 

Private Correspondence 409 

the United States. So far I think that some thing 
is gained. For the right of one party to annul a 
treaty is a Htigious right, never consummated till the 
other party waives its opposition. This is now in 
substance done by France. And, in my opinion, to 
have advanced so far is a matter of considerable 
importance. 

The indemnification for spoliation is, I admit, vir- 
tually relinquished as the price of the waiver of the 
treaties; but considering our situation, and the im- 
mense and growing power of France, that price is not 
too great. 

Further, there are such potent obstacles in the 
nature of things to the obtaining of effectual in- 
demnification, that it is very well to leave it to the 
chapter of accidents. 

The restoration of ships-of-war is an unpleasant, 
and, I do not deny, rather a humiliating thing. 

But as it is in form reciprocal, it does not seem 
to me that unequivocal species of dishonor which 
ought to induce us to run great risks. Our conduct 
heretofore has gone on the ground that, though we 
ought not to submit to unequivocal disgrace, yet we 
ought not to be too susceptible or overcurious and 
nice. In this spirit we have borne a great deal, 
sometimes too much, from all the belligerents. Cir- 
cumstances do not now invite to a different course. 
Our rapid progress to strength will, erelong, encour- 
age to and warrant higher pretensions. 

You seem to have gotten over the difficulty of 
the supposed collision between the convention and 
our treaty with Britain. You already know that this 

4 TO Alexander Hamilton 

accords with my opinion. Yet it seems to me the 
most thorny point, as it draws into question our 
faith towards a third power. 

This gotten over, there is not, in my apprehension, 
any remaining obstacle to a full ratification which 
may not be overcome. 

The limitation of the treaty as to time is doubtless 
desirable, but we may be sure it will not be eternal 
in fact. Perpetual peace will not exist. A war cuts 
the knot, and leaves us free to renew or not, to renew 
absolutely, or with qualifications. 

With this view of the subject, I do not consider 
the objections to a simple ratification to be strong 
enough to countervail the dangers of a qualified one, 
which certainly will leave it in the option of the other 
party to recede. 

It is possible that, in the pride of success, our 
backwardness to ratify may be the pretext of a 
rupture to punish the presumption. Under existing 
circumstances, such an event would be disastrous, 
if not for the evils which the arms of France might 
inflict, yet for the hazard of internal schisms and dis- 
cord. The mania for France has in a great degree 
revived in our country, and the party which should 
invite a rupture would be likely to be ruined. 

Perhaps, with the administration we are going to 
have, there may be less danger of rupture than with 
one of a different cast ; yet not much reliance can be 
placed on this circumstance, and there is another 
side to the question which deserves attention. 

If the present convention be ratified, our relations 
to France will have received a precise shape. To 

Private Correspondence 411 

take up the subject anew and mould it into a shape 
better according with Jacobin projects will not be 
as easy as finding the whole business open to give it 
that shape. I think it politic, therefore, to close as 
far as we can. 

Again, it will be of consequence to the federal 
cause in future to be able to say the federal adminis- 
tration steered the vessel through all the storms r'^'^,^^ 
raised by the contentions of Europe into a peaceful -'Z' j^ ^ 
and safe port. This cannot be said if the contest 
with France continues open. 

Inclosed you have some recent intelligence which 
seems to strengthen the argument for a simple rati- 
fication. Great Britain stands on a precipice. The 
misfortune for her is that there are manifest symp- 
toms of a depreciated and depreciating paper cur- 
rency. This may cut deep. 

The result is that good understanding with the 
United States is more than ever necessary to Great 
Britain. She will not lightly take umbrage while 
France is in a position to ride a high horse. These 
facts cannot prudently be excluded from the calcu- 
lation. 

So our eastern friends want to join the armed neu- 
trality and make war upon Britain. I infer this 
from their mad propensity to make Burr President. 
If Jefferson has prejudices leading to that result, he ^ 
has defects of character to keep him back. Burr, 
with the same propensities, will find the thing neces- 
sary to his projects, and will dare to hazard all con- 
sequences. They may as well think to bind a giant 
by a cobweb as his ambition by promises. 

412 Alexander Hamilton 

TO JAMES A. BAYARD 

New York, Jan. i6, 1801. 

I was glad to find, my dear sir, by your letter that 
you had not yet determined to go with the current 
of the federal party in the support of Mr. Burr, and 
that you were resolved to hold yourself disengaged 
till the moment of final decision. Your resolution 
to separate yourself in this instance from the federal 
party, if your conviction shall be strong of the un- 
fitness of Mr. Burr, is certainly laudable. So much 
does it coincide with my ideas, that if the party shall, 
by supporting Mr. Burr as President, adopt him for 
their official chief, I shall be obliged to consider my- 
self as an isolated man. It will be impossible for me 
to reconcile with my notions of honor or policy the 
continuing to be of a party which, according to 
my apprehension, will have degraded itself and the 
country. 

I am sure, nevertheless, that the motives of many 
will be good, and I shall never cease to esteem the in- 
dividuals, though I shall deplore a step which, I fear, 
experience will show to be a very fatal one. Among 
the letters which I receive assigning the reasons pro 
> and con for preferring Burr to J., I observe no small 
exaggeration to the prejudice of the latter, and 
some things taken for granted as to the former, which 
are at least questionable. Perhaps myself the first, 
at some expense of popularity, to unfold the true 
character of Jefferson, it is too late for me to become 
his apologist ; nor can I have any disposition to do it. 

I admit that his politics are tinctured with fanatic- 

Private Correspondence 413 v' - 

ism; that he is too much in earnest in his demo- 
cracy ; that he has been a mischievous enemy to the 
principal measures of our past administration; that 
he is crafty and persevering in his objects; that he is 
not scrupulous about the means of success, nor very 
mindful of truth, and that he is a contemptible hypo- 
crite. But it is not true, as is alleged, that he is an 
enemy to the power of the Executive, or that he is 
for confounding all the powers in the House of Re- 
presentatives. It is a fact which I have frequently 
mentioned, that, while we were in the administra- 
tion together, he was generally for a large construc- 
tion of the Executive authority and not backward to 
act upon it in cases which coincided with his views. 
Let it be added that in his theoretic ideas he has 
considered as improper the participations of the Sen- 
ate in the Executive authority. I have more than 
once made the reflection that, viewing himself as the \y ^^ 
reversioner, he was solicitous to come into the pos- 
session of a good estate. Nor is it true that Jeffer- 
son is zealot enough to do any thing in pursuance of 
his principles which will contravene his popularity or 
his interest. He is as likely as any man I know to 
temporize — to calculate what will be likely to pro- 
mote his own reputation and advantage; and the 
probable result of such a temper is the preservation 
of systems, though originally opposed, which, being 
once established, could not be overturned without 
danger to the person who did it. To my mind a 
true estimate of Mr. Jefferson's character war- 
rants the expectation of a temporizing rather than 
a violent system. That Jefferson has manifested a 

4H Alexander Hamilton 

culpable predilection for France is certainly true ; but 
I think it a question whether it did not proceed quite 
as much from her popularity among us as from senti- 
ment, and, in proportion as that popularity is di- 
minished, his zeal will cool. Add to this that there is 
no fair reason to suppose him capable of being cor- 
rupted, which is a security that he will not go be- 
yond certain limits. It is not at all improbable that 
under the change of circumstances Jefferson's Gal- 
licism has considerably abated. 

As to Burr these things are admitted, and indeed 
cannot be denied, that he is a man of extreme and 
irregular ambition; that he is selfish to a degree 
which excludes all social affections, and that he is 
decidedly profligate. But it is said (i) that he is 
/ artful and dexter otts to accomplish his ends; (2) that 
he holds no pernicious theories, but is a mere matter- 
of -fact man; (3) that his very selfishness ' is a guard 
against mischievous foreign predilections; (4) that 
his local situation has enabled him to appreciate the 
utility of our commercial and fiscal systems, and the 
same quality of selfishness will lead him to support 
and invigorate them; (5) that he is now disliked by 
the Jacobins; that his elevation will be a mortal 
stab to them, breed an invincible hatred to him, and 
compel him to lead on the Federalists; (6) that 
Burr's ambition will be checked by his good sense, 
by the manifest impossibility of succeeding in any 
scheme of usurpation, and that, if attempted, there 
is nothing to fear from the attempt. These topics 
are, in my judgment, more plausible than solid. As 

^ It is always very dangerous to look at the vices of men for good. 

Private Correspondence 415 

to the first point, the fact must be admitted, but 
those qualities are objections rather than recom- 
mendations, when they are under the direction of 
bad principles. As to the second point, too much is 
taken for granted. If Burr's conversation is to be 
credited, he is not very far from being a visionary. 
He has quoted to me Connecticut as an example of 
the success of the democratic theory, and as au- 
thority, I have serious doubts whether it was not a 
good one. It is ascertained in some instances that 
he has talked perfect Godwinism. I have myself 
heard him speak with applause of the French sys- 
tem, as unshackling the mind and leaving it to its 
natural energies, and I have been present when he 
has contended against banking systems ' with earn- 
estness and with the same arguments that Jefferson 
would use. 

The truth is, that Burr is a man of a very subtle 
imagination, and a mind of this make is rarely free 
from ingenious whimsies. Yet I admit that he has 
no fixed theory, and that his peculiar notions will 
easily give way to his interest. But is it a recom- 
mendation to have no theory? Can that man be a 
systematic or able statesman who has none? I be- 
lieve not. No general principles will hardly work 
much better than erroneous ones. 

As to the third point, it is certain that Burr, 
generally speaking, has been as warm a partisan of 
France as Jefferson; that he has, in some instances, 

^ Yet he has lately, by a trick, established a hank — a perfect monster 
in its principles, but a very convenient instrument of profit and i»- 
fluence. 

) no ^ 

4i6 Alexander Hamilton 

shown himself to be so with passion. But if it was 
from calculation, who will say that his calculations 
will not continue him so? His selfishness,' so far 
from being an obstacle, may be a prompter. If cor- 
rupt as well as selfish, he may be a partisan for gain. 
If ambitious as well as selfish, he may be a partisan 
for the sake of aid to his views. No man has traf- 
ficked more than he in the floating passions of the 
multitude. Hatred to Great Britain and attach- 
ment to France, in the public mind, will naturally 
lead a man of his selfishness, attached to place and 
power, to favor France and oppose Great Britain. 
The Gallicism of many of our patriots is to be thus 
resolved, and, in my opinion, it is morally certain 
that Burr will continue to be influenced by this 
calculation. 

As to the fourth point, the instance I have cited 
with respect to banks, proves that the argument is 
not to be relied on. If there was much in it, why 
does Chancellor Livingston maintain that we ought 
not to cultivate navigation, but ought to let foreign- 
ers be our carriers? France is of the opinion too, 
and Burr, for some reason or other, will be very apt 
to be of the opinion of France. 

As to the fifth point, nothing can be more falla- 
cious. It is demonstrated by recent facts ^ that 
Burr is solicitous to keep upon anti-federal ground, to 
avoid compromitting himself by any engagements,^ 
with the Federalists. With or without such engage- 

^ Unprincipled selfishness is more apt to seek rapid gain in disorderly 
practices than slow advantages from orderly systems. 

2 My letter to Mr. Morris states some of them, 

3 He trusts to their prejudices and hopes for supporb. 

Private Correspondence 417 

ments, he will easily persuade his former friends that 
he does stand on that ground, and after their first 
resentment they will be glad to rally under him. In 
the meantime he will take care not to disoblige them, 
and he will always court those among them who are 
best fitted for tools. He will never choose to lean 
on good men, because he knows that they will never 
support his bad projects; but instead of this he will 
endeavor to disorganize both parties, and to form 
out of them a third, composed of men fitted by their 
characters to be conspirators and instruments of 
such projects. 

That this will be his future conduct may be in- 
ferred from his past plan, and from the admitted 
quality of irregular ambition. Let it be remembered 
that Mr. Burr has never appeared solicitous for fame, 
and that great ambition, unchecked by principle or 
the love of glory, is an imruly tyrant, which never 
can keep long in a course which good men will 
approve. As to the last point, the proposition is 
against the experience of all times. Ambition with- 
out principle never was long under the guidance of 
good sense. Besides that, really, the force of Mr. 
Burr's understanding is much overrated. He is far 
more cunning than wise, far more dextrous than able. 

{Very, very confidential . — In my opinion he is in- 
ferior in real ability to Jefferson. There are also 
facts against the supposition. It is past all doubt 
that he has blamed me for not having improved the 
situation I once was in to change the government. ! 
That when answered that this could not have been 
done without guilt, he replied, "Les grandes ames 

VOL. X.— 27. I 

41 8 Alexander Hamilton 

se soucient pen des petits moratix "; that when told 
the thing was never practicable from the genius and 
situation of the country, he answered, '' That depends 
on the estimate we form of the human passions, and 
of the means of influencing them." Does this prove 
that Mr. Burr would consider a scheme of usurpation 
as visionary?) 

The truth is, with great apparent coldness he is the 
most sanguine man in the world. He thinks every 
thing possible to adventure and perseverance, and, 
though I believe he will fail, I think it almost certain 
he will attempt usurpation, and the attempt will in- 
volve great mischief. But there is one point of view 
which seems to me decisive. If the Anti-federalists 
who prevailed in the election are left to take their 
own man, they remain responsible, and the Federal- 
ists remain free, united, and without stain, in a situa- 
tion to resist, with effect, pernicious measures. If 
the Federalists substitute Burr, they adopt him and 
become answerable for him. Whatever may be the 
theory of the case abroad and at home (for so from 
the beginning will be taught), Mr. Burr will become 
in fact the man of our party; and if he acts ill, we 
must share in the blame and disgrace. By adopting 
him we do all we can to reconcile the minds of the 
Federalists to him, and we prepare them for the 
effectual operation of his arts. He will doubtless 
gain many of them, and the Federalists will become 
a disorganized and contemptible party. Can there 
be any serious question between the policy of leaving 
the Anti-federalists to be answerable for the eleva- 
tion of an exceptionable man, and that of adopting 

Private Correspondence 419 

ourselves and becoming answerable for a man who, 
on all hands, is acknowledged to be a complete 
Catiline? 'T is enough to state the question to in- 
dicate the answer, if reason, not passion, presides in 
the decision. 

You may communicate this, and my former letter, 
to discreet and confidential friends. 

TO GOUVERNEUR MORRIS 

New York, January, 1801. 

Dear Sir: 

I hasten to give you some information which may 
be useful. I know as a fact that overtures have 
been made by leading individuals of the federal 
party to Mr. Burr, who declines to give any assur- 
ances respecting his future intentions and conduct, 
saying that to do it might injure him with his friends, 
and prevent their co-operation ; that all ought to be 
inferred from the necessity of his future situation, as 
it regarded the disappointment and animosity of the 
Anti-federalists; that the Federalists, relying upon 
this, might proceed in the certainty that, upon a 
second ballot. New York and Tennessee would join 
him. It is likewise ascertained that he perfectly 
understands himself with Edward Livingston, who 
will be his agent at the seat of government. 

Thus you see that Mr. Burr is resolved to pre- 
serve himself in a situation to adhere to his former 
friends, engagements, and projects, and to use the 
Federalists as tools of his aggrandizement. 

420 Alexander Hamilton 

The hope that by his election he will be separated 
from the Anti-federalists, is a perfect farce. 

He will satisfy them that he has kept himself free 
to continue his relations with them, and as many of 
them are secretly attached to him, they will all be 
speedily induced to rally under his standard, to 
which he will add the unprincipled of our party, and 
he will laugh at the rest. 

It is a fact that Mr. Burr is now in frequent and 
close conference with a Frenchman, who is suspected 
of being an agent of the French Government, and it 
is not to be doubted that he will be the firm ally of 
Buonaparte. 

You are at liberty to show this letter to such friends 
as you think fit, especially Mr. Bayard, of Delaware, 
in whose principles and soimd sense I have much 
confidence. 

Depend upon it, men never played a more foolish 
game than will do the Federalists if they support 
Burr. 

TO THEODORE SEDGWICK 

Albany, Jan. 21, 1801. 


Being in a hurry to leave New York for this place, 
I compressed, in a letter to Bayard, some observa- 
tions which, had I time, I should have put in a reply 
to your last. I requested him to communicate it to 
you, and I beg of you, as you love your country, 
your friends, and yourself, to reconsider dispas- 
sionately the opinion you have expressed in favor 
of Burr. 

Private Correspondence 421 

I never was so much mistaken as I shall be if our 
friends, in the event of their success, do not rue the 
preference they will give to that Catiline. Adieu. '^- 

TO MRS. HAMILTON 

On the Road to Albany, Feb., 1801. 

The roads are too bad for you to venture in your 
carriage, if you can possibly avoid it. Don't forget 
to visit the Grange. From what I saw there, it is 
very important the drains should be better regulated. 
Leave, in particular charge of Philip, what you can- 
not yourself accomplish. 


February 19, 1801. 

I arrived here, my beloved, about five this after- 
noon. I ought now to be much further advanced. 
But somehow ''Riddle'' sprained the ankle of one 
of his hind legs, which very much retarded my pro- 
gress to-day. By care and indulgence, he is much 
better this evening. I have travelled comfortably, 
and my health is better. Wife, children, and hobby 
are the only things upon which I have permitted my 
thoughts to run. As often as I write, you may ex- 
pect to hear some thing of the latter. Don't lose 
any opportunity which may offer of ploughing up 
the new garden spot, and let the wagon make a tour 

^i 

422 Alexander Hamilton 

of the ground lately purchased. When it is too cold 
to go on with grubbing, our men may be employed in 
cutting and clearing away the underbrush in the 
grove and the other woods; only let the centre of 
the principal wood in the line of the different rocks 
remain rough and wild. 

(Again he writes) : I am less and less pleased with 
the prospect of so long a separation from my beloved 
family, and you may depend shall shorten it as much 
as possible. " Dumphy ' ' had planted the tulip trees 
in a row along the outer fence of the garden in the 
road, and was collecting some hemlock trees to plant 
between them. I desired him to place these in a 
row along the inner fence. But, having attended to 
them in my route, I shall be glad, if white pines are 
not conveniently to be had, that besides those along 
the inner fence, there may be one hemlock between 
every two of the tulip trees along the outer fence. 


POUGHKEEPSIE, Feb. 20, 180I. 

I am in much better health than spirits. The 
Swiss malady grows upon me very fast. In other 
words, I am more and more homesick. This, added 
to some other circumstances that do not give me 
pleasure at the present moment, makes me rather 
heavy-hearted. But we must make the best of 
those ills that cannot be avoided. The occupation 
I shall have at Albany will divert my mind from 

Private Correspondence 423 

painful reflections; and a speedy return to my dear 
family will bring me a cure. Write me often, and 
receive every wish that is due to the best of women. 
Kiss my children for me. Adieu.' 

TO 

Albany, Feb. 22, 1801. 

Dear Sir: 

After my ill success hitherto, I ought, perhaps, in 
prudence, to say nothing further on the subject. 
But, situated as things now are, I certainly have no 
advice to give. Yet I may, without impropriety, 
communicate a fact ; it is this : 

Colonel Burr is taking an active personal part in 
favor of Mr. Clinton against Mr. Rensselaer, as gov- 
ernor of this State. I have, upon my honor, direct 
and indubitable evidence, that between two and 
three weeks past, he wrote a very urgent letter to 
Oliver Phelps, of the western part of this State, to 
induce his exertions in favor of Clinton. Is not this 
an unequivocal confirmation of what I predicted 
that he will, in every event, continue to play the 
Jacobin game? Can any thing else explain his con- 
duct at such a moment, and under such circum- 
stances? I might add several other things to prove 
that he is resolved to adhere to and cultivate his old 
party, who lately, more than ever, have shown the 
cloven foot of rank Jacobinism, 

^ These three letters to Mrs. Hamilton are reprinted from the History 
of the Republic, vii., 488 and ff. 

424 Alexander Hamilton 

TO DR. BENJAMIN RUSH ' 

New York, Feb, 12, 1802. 


I felt all the weight of the obligation which I owed 
to you and your amiable family for the tender con- 
cern they manifested in an event beyond comparison 
the most afflicting of my life, but I was obliged to 
wait for a moment of greater calm to express my 
sense of the kindness. 

My loss is indeed great. The brightest as well as 
the eldest hope of my family has been taken from me. 
You estimated him rightly. He was a fine youth. 
But why should I repine ? It was the will of heaven, 
and he is now out of the reach of the seductions and 
calamities of a world full of folly, fiill of vice, full of 
danger — of least value in proportion as it is best 
known. I firmly trust, also, that he has safely 
reached the haven of eternal repose and felicity. 

You will easily imagine that every memorial of 
the goodness of his heart must be precious to me. 
You allude to one recorded in a letter to your son. 
If no special reasons forbid it, I should be very glad 
to have a copy of that letter. 

Mrs. Hamilton, who has drunk deeply of the cup 
of sorrow, joins me in affectionate thanks to Mrs. 
Rush and yourself; our wishes for your happiness 
will be unceasing. 

' The distinguished physician and patriot of Philadelphia. The 
letter refers to the death of Hamilton's eldest son, Philip, who was 
killed in a duel arising from a political quarrel. 

Private Correspondence 425 

TO GOUVERNEUR MORRIS 

New York, Feb. 27, i8oa. 

My Dear Sir: 

Your letter of the 2 2d is the third favor I am in- 
debted to you since you left New York. 

Your frankness in giving me your opinion as to the 
expediency of an application of our bar to Congress, 
obliged me. But you know we are not readily per- 
suaded to think we have been wrong. Were the 
matter to be done over, I should pursue the same 
course. I did not believe the measure would be use- 
ful as a preventive, and for the people an expres- 
sion of an opinion by letter would be as good as a 
memorial. 

It appeared to be best, because it saved our deli- 
cacy, and because in the abstract, I am not over fond 
of the precedent of the bar addressing Congress. 
But I did what I thought likely to do more good. I 
induced the Chamber of Commerce to send a me- 
morial. As to the rest, I should be a very unhappy 
man, if I left my tranquillity at the mercy of the 
misinterpretations which friends as well as foes are 
fond of giving to miy conduct. 

Mine is an odd destiny. Perhaps no man in the 
United States has sacrificed or done more for the 
present Constitution than myself; and contrary to 
all my anticipations of its fate, as you know from ^ 5^^ 

the very beginning, I am still laboring to prop the 
frail and worthless fabric. Yet I have the murmurs 
of its friends no less than the curses of its foes 
for my reward. What can I do better than with- 
draw from the scene? Every day proves to me 

<1l\\ 

s 

^^■'' 

426 Alexander Hamilton 
" more and more, that this American world was not 

made for me. 

The suggestions with which you close your letter 
suppose a much sounder state of the public mind 
than at present exists. Attempts to make a show 
of a general popular dislike of the pending measures 
of the government, would only serve to manifest the 
direct reverse. Impressions are indeed making, but 
as yet within a very narrow sphere. 

The time may erelong arrive when the minds of 
men will be prepared to make an effort to recover the 
Constitution, but the many cannot now be brought 
to make a stand for its preservation. We must 
wait a while. 

I have read your speeches with great pleasure. 
They are truly worthy of you. Your real friends 
had many sources of satisfaction on account of them. 
A The conspiracy of dulness was at work. It chose to 
misinterpret your moderation in certain transactions 
of a personal reference. 

A public energetic display of your talents and prin- 
ciples was requisite to silence the cavillers. It is 
now done. You, friend Morris, are by birth sl native 
of this country, but by genius an exotic. You mis- 
take, if you fancy that you are more of a favorite 
than myself, or that you are in any sort upon a 
theatre suited to you. 

Private Correspondence 427 

TO GOUVERNEUR MORRIS 

New York, March 4, 1802. 

My Dear Sir: 

You have seen certain resolutions unanimously 
pass our Legislature for amending the Constitution; 
ist, by designating separately the candidates for 
President and Vice-President ; 2d, by having electors 
chosen by the people in districts under the direction \ 
of the national Legislature. ' 

After mature reflection, I was thoroughly con- 
firmed in my full impression, that it is true federal j« 
policy to promote the adoption of these amendments. 

Of the first, not only because it is in itself right, 
that the people should know whom they are choosing, 
and because the present mode gives all possible scope 
to intrigue, and is dangerous (as we have seen) to 
the public tranquillity ; but because in every thing 
which gives opportunity for juggling arts, our ad- 
versaries will nine times out of ten excel us. 

Of the second, because it removes thus far the in- . 
tervention of the State governments, and strengthens X^.-^ 
the connection between the Federal head and the \ 
people, and because it diminishes the means of party 
combination, in which also, the burning zeal of our 
opponents will be generally an overmatch for our 
temperate flame. 

I shall be very happy that our friends may think 
with me, and that no temporary motive may induce 
them to let slip the precious occasion in which per- 
sonal motives induce the other party to forget their 
true policy. 

We are told here, that at the close of your birth- 

428 Alexander Hamilton 

day feast, a strange apparition, which was taken 
for the Vice-President, appeared among you, and 
toasted " the union of all honest men." I often hear 
at the comer of the streets important federal secrets, 
of which I am ignorant. This may be one. 

If the story be true, 't is a good thing, if we use 
it well. As an instrument, the person will be an 
auxiliary of some value; as a chief, he will disgrace 
and destroy the party. 

I suspect, however, the folly of the mass will make 
him the latter, and from the moment it shall appear 
that this is the plan, it may be depended upon much 
more will be lost than gained. I know of no more 
important character, who has a less founded interest 
than the man in question. His talents may do well 
enough for a particular plot, but they are ill suited to 
a great and wise drama. But what has wisdom to 
do with weak men? Adieu. 

TO GENERAL CHARLES COTES WORTH PINCKNEY 

March 15, 1802. 

You will probably have learned before this reaches 
you that the act of last session for the better organi- 
zation of the Judiciary Department has been re- 
pealed, and I take it for granted that you will, with 
me, view this measure as a vital blow to the Con- 
stitution. In my opinion it demands a systematic 
and persevering effort by all constitutional means to 
produce a revocation of the precedent, and to re- 
store the Constitution. For this purpose I deem it 

Private Correspondence 429 

essential that there should be, without delay, a 
meeting and conference of a small number of lead- 
ing Federalists from different States. Unless there 
shall be a plan of conduct proceeding from such a 
source, our measures will be disjointed, discordant, 
and of course ineffectual. There is also a further 
danger which may attend the want of a plan capable 
of fixing opinions and determining objects. There 
are among us incorrect men with very incorrect 
views, which may lead to combinations and projects 
injurious to us as a party and very detrimental to 
the country. These considerations have determined 
me to make an attempt to bring about such a meet- 
ing. And it has occurred that the first Monday of 
May next, at the city of Washington, may be a good 
time and place. A general meeting of the Society 
of the Cincinnati is to be then and there held. I 
have likewise taken the liberty to request the attend- 
ance of Governor Davie, of North Carolina. In the 
event of your concurring in sentiment with me, it 
will be expedient for you to second my invitation to 
him.* 

TO GOUVERNEUR MORRIS 

New York, April 6, 1802. 

Amidst the himiiliating circumstances which at- 
tend our country, all the soimd part of the com- 
munity must find cause of triumph in the brilliant 
display of talents which have been employed, though 
without success, in resisting the follies of an in- 

^ Reprinted from the History of the Republic, vii., 564. 

I 

430 Alexander Hamilton 

fatuated administration; and your personal friends 
will not have much reason for mortification on ac- 
count of the part you have performed in the interest- 
ing scene. But, my dear sir, we must not content 
ourselves with a temporary effort to oppose the ap- 
proach of evil. We must derive instruction from 
the experience before us; and learning to form a 
just estimate of things to which we have been at- 
tached, there must be a systematic and persevering 
endeavor to establish the fortune of a great empire 
on foundations much firmer than have yet been de- 
vised. What will signify a vibration of power if it 
cannot be used with confidence or energy, and must 
be again quickly restored to hands which will pros- 
trate much faster than we shall be able to rear under 
'}^ so frail a system? Nothing will be done until the 

'<'^' structure of our national edifice shall be such as 

naturally to control eccentric passions and views, 
and to keep in check demagogues and knaves in the 
disguise of patriots. Yet I fear a different reasoning 
will prevail, and an eagerness to recover lost power 
will betray us into expedients which will be injurious 
to the country and disgraceful and ruinous to our- 
'tz\ selves. What meant the apparition and the toast 
which made part of the after-piece of the birthday 
festival? Is it possible that some new intrigue is 
V^ about to link the Federalists with a man who can 

never be anything else than the bane of a good cause ? 
I dread more from this than from all the contrivances 
of the bloated and senseless junto of Virginia. 

The Federalists and Anti-federalists of this State 
I united in certain amendments to the Constitution 

Private Correspondence 431 

now before your House, having for objects, ist, to 
discriminate the candidates for the Presidency and 
Vice-Presidency; 2d, to have the electors of these 
officers chosen by the people, in districts, under the 
direction of Congress. Both these appear to me 
points of importance in true federal calculation. 
Surely the scene of last session ought to teach us the 
intrinsic demerits of the existing plan. It proved 
to us how possible it is for a man in whom no party 
had confidence, and who deserved the confidence of 
none, by mere intrigue and accident, to acquire the 
first place in the government of our nation; and it 
also proves to us how^ serious a danger of convulsion 
and disorder is incident to the plan. On this point 
things have come to my knowledge, improper for a 
letter, which would astonish you. Surely, we ought 
by this time to have learnt that whatever multi- 
plies the opportunities and means of cabal, is more 
favorable to our adversaries than to us. They have 
certainly the advantage in the game by greater zeal, 
activity, and subtlety, and especially by an aban- 
donment of principle. On all these accounts it is 
our true policy to abridge the facilities to cabal as 
much as possible in all our public institutions and 
measures. As to the second of the amendments, it 
has ever appeared to me as sound principle to let the 
federal government rest, as much as possible, on the 
shoulders of the people, and as little as possible on 
those of the State Legislatures. The proposition 
accords with this principle, and, in my view, it is 
ftirther recommended by its tendency to exclude 
combinations^ which, I am persuaded, in the general 

432 Alexander Hamilton 

and permanent course of things, will operate more 
against than for us. Colonel Burr, without doubt, 
will resist these amendments; and he may induce 
some of our friends to play into his hands; but this 
will be a very bad calculation, even admitting the 
inadmissible idea that he ought to be adopted as a 
chief of the federal party. We never can have him 
fairly in our power, till we render his situation ab- 
solutely hopeless with his old friends. While the 
indiscriminate voting prevails, he will find it his in- 
terest to play fast and loose, and to keep himself in 
a state to be at the head of the anti-federal party. 
If these hopes are cut off, he will immediately set 
about forming a third party, of which he will be at 
the head; and then, if we think it worth the while, 
we can purchase him with his flying squadron. 

These observations are, of course, hypothetical, 
for, to my mind, the elevation of Mr. Burr, by fed- 
eral means, to the chief magistracy of the United 
States, will be the worst kind of political suicide. 

TO JAMES A. BAYARD 

New York, April, 1802. 

My Dear Sir: 

Your letter of the 12th instant has relieved me 
from some apprehension. Yet it is well that it 
should be perfectly understood by the truly sound 
part of the Federalists that there do, in fact, exist 
intrigues in good earnest between several individuals 
not unimportant, of the federal party, and the per- 
son in question, which are bottomed upon motives 

Private Correspondence 433 

and views by no means auspicious to the real welfare 
of the country. I am glad to find that it is in con- 
templation to adopt a plan of conduct. It is very 
necessary ; and, to be useful, it must be efficient and 
comprehensive in the means which it embraces, at 
the same time that it must meditate none which are 
not really constitutional and patriotic. I will com- 
ply with your invitation by submitting some ideas 
which, from time to time, have passed through my 
mind. Nothing is more fallacious than to expect to 
produce any valuable or permanent results in po- 
litical projects by relying merely on the reason of 1 
men. Men are rather reasoning than reasonable 
animals, for the most part governed by the impulse 
of passion. This is a truth well understood by our 
adversaries, who have practised upon it with no 
small benefit to their cause ; for at the very moment 
they are eulogizing the reason of men, and professing 
to appeal only to that faculty, they are courting the 
strongest and most active passion of the human 
heart, vanity! It is no less true, that the Federalists 
seem not to have attended to the fact sufficiently; 
and that they erred in relying so much on the recti- 
tude and utility of their measures as to have ne- 
glected the cultivation of popular favor, by fair and 
justifiable expedients. The observation has been 
repeatedly made by me to individuals with whom I 
particularly conversed, and expedients suggested for 
gaining good will, which were never adopted. Un- 
luckily, however, for us, in the competition for the 
passions of the people, our opponents have great ad- 
vantages over us; for the plain reason that the 

VOL. X.— 28. 

434 Alexander Hamilton 

vicious are far more active than the good passions; 
and that, to win the former to our side, we must re- 
nounce our principles and our objects, and unite 
in corrupting public opinion till it becomes fit for 
nothing but mischief. Yet, unless we can contrive 
to take hold of, and carry along with us some strong 
feelings of the mind, we shall in vain calculate upon 
any substantial or durable results. Whatever plan 
we may adopt, to be successful, must be founded on 
the truth of this proposition. And perhaps it is not 
very easy for us to give it full effects ; especially not 
without some deviations from what, on other occa- 
sions, we have maintained to be right. But in de- 
termining upon the propriety of the deviations, we 
must consider whether it be possible for us to suc- 
ceed, without, in some degree, employing the weap- 
ons which have been employed against us, and 
whether the actual state and future prospect of 
things be not such as to justify the reciprocal use of 
them. I need not tell you that I do not mean to 
countenance the imitation of things intrinsically un- 
worthy, but only of such as may be denominated 
irregular; such as, in a sound and stable order of 
things, ought not to exist. Neither are you to infer 
that any revolutionary result is contemplated. In 
my opinion, the present Constitution is the standard 
to which we are to cling. Under its banners, bona 
fide, must we combat our political foes, rejecting all 
changes but through the channel itself provides for 
amendments. By these general views of the subject 
have my reflections been guided. I now offer you 
the outline of the plan which they have suggested. 

Private Correspondence 435 

Let an association be formed to be denominated 
'* The Christian Constitutional Society." Its objects 
to be : 

I St. The support of the Christian religion. 

2d. The support of the Constitution of the United 
States. 

Its organization 

I St. A council, consisting of a president and 
twelve members, of whom four and the president to 
be a quorum. 

2d. A sub-directing council in each State, con- \ 
sis ting of a vice-president and twelve members, of 
whom four, with the vice-president, to be a quorum. 

3d. As many societies in each State as local cir- 
cumstances may permit to be formed by the sub- 
directing council. 

The meeting at Washington to nominate the 
president and vice-president, together with four 
members of each of the councils, who are to com- 
plete their own numbers respectively. 

Its means 

I St. The diffusion of information. For this pur- 
pose not only the newspapers, but pamphlets, must 
be largely employed, and to do this a fund must be 
created; five dollars annually, for eight years, to be ' 
contributed by each member who can really afford 
it (taking care not to burthen the less able brethren), 
may afford a competent fund for a competent term. 
It is essential to be able to disseminate gratis useful ' 

%^ 

43^ Alexander Hamilton 

publications. Wherever it can be done, and there 
is a press, clubs should be formed, to meet once 
a week, read the newspapers, and prepare essays, 
paragraphs, etc. 

2d. The use of all lawful means in concert to pro- 
mote the election of fit men ; a lively correspondence 
must be kept up between the different societies. 

3d. The promoting of institutions of a charitable 
and useful nature in the management of Federalists. 
The populous cities ought particularly to be attended 
to; perhaps it would be well to institute in such 

i places — ist, societies for the relief of emigrants; 2d, 
academies, each with one professor, for instructing 
the different classes of mechanics in the principles 
of mechanics and the elements of chemistry. The 
cities have been employed by the Jacobins to give 
an impulse to the country; and it is believed to be 
an alarming fact that, while the question of presi- 
dential election was pending in the House of Re- 
presentatives, parties were organizing in several of 
the cities in the event of there being no election, to 
cut off the leading Federalists and seize the govern- 
ment. 

The foregoing to be the principal engine, and, in 
addition, let measures be adopted to bring as soon as 

.(' possible the repeal of the judiciary law before the 
Supreme Court; afterwards, if not before, let as 
many Legislatures as can be prevailed upon instruct 
their Senators to endeavor to procure a repeal of the 
repealing law. The body of New England, speaking 
the same language, will give a powerful impulse. In 
Congress our friends to propose little, to agree cor- 

Private Correspondence 437 

dially to all good measures, and to resist and expose 
all bad. This is a general sketch of what has occurred 
to me. It is at the service of my friends for so much 
as it may be worth. 

TO RUFUS KING 

New York, June 3, 1802. 

My Dear Sir: 

I have been long very delinquent towards you as 
a correspondent, and am to thank you that you have 
not cast me off altogether as an irretrievable repro- 
bate. But you know how to appreciate the causes, 
and you have made a construction equally just and 
indulgent. 

In your last you ask my opinion about a matter 
delicate and important, both in a public and in a 
personal view. I shall give it with the frankness to 
which you have a right, and I may add that the im- 
pressions of your other friends, so far as they have 
fallen under my observation, do not differ from my 
own. While you were in the midst of a negotiation 
interesting to your country, it was your duty to 
keep your post. You have now accomplished the 
object, and with the good fortune, not very common, 
of having the universal plaudit. This done, it seems ^ 
to me most advisable that you return home. There I 
is little probability that your continuance in your 
present station will be productive of much positive 
good. Nor are circumstances such as to give reason 
to apprehend that the substitute for you, whoever 
he may be, can do much harm. Your stay or return, 
therefore, as it regards our transatlantic concerns, 


is probably not material, while your presence at 
home may be useful in ways which it is not neces- 
sary to particularize. Besides, it is questionable 
whether you can long continue in the service of the 
present administration consistently with what is 
due, as well to your own character as to the common 
cause. I am far from thinking that a man is bound 
to quit a public office merely because the administra- 
tion of the government may have changed hands. 
But when those who have come into power are un- 
disguised persecutors of the party to which he has 
been attached, and study with ostentation to heap 
upon it every indignity and injury, he ought not, in 
my opinion, to permit himself to be made an excep- 
tion, or to lend his talents to the support of such 
characters. If, in addition to this, it be true that 
the principles and plans of the men at the head of 
affairs tend to the degradation of the government, 
and to their own disgrace, it will hardly be possible 
to be in any way connected with them without shar- 
ing in the disrepute which they may be destined to 
experience. 

I wish I had time to give you a comprehensive and 
particular map of our political situation; but more 
than a rude outline is beyond my leisure, devoted as 
I am more than ever to my professional pursuits. 

You have seen the course of the administration 
hitherto, especially during the last session of Con- 
gress, and I am persuaded you will agree with me in 
opinion, that it could hardly have been more dili- 
gent in mischief. What, you will ask, has been and 
is likely to be the effect on the public mind? 

Private Correspondence 439 

Our friends are sanguine that a great change for 
the better has been wrought and is progressive. I 
suppose good has been done — that the Federal- 
ists have been reunited and cemented; have been 
awakened, alarmed. Perhaps, too, there may be 
some sensible and moderate men of the opposite 
party who are beginning to doubt. But I as yet 
discover no satisfactory symptoms of a revolution 
of opinion in the mass — ''informe ingens cui lumen ,,, 
ademptum." Nor do I look with much expecta- • 
tion to any serious alteration until inconveniences 
are extensively felt, or until time has produced a 
disposition to coquet it with new lovers. Vibra- 
tions of power, you are aware, are of the genius of 
our government. 

There is, however a circumstance which may ac- 
celerate the fall of the present party. There is cer- ;,^ 
tainly a most serious schism between the chief and 
his heir-apparent; a schism absolutely incurable, be- 
cause founded in the hearts of both, in the rivalship 
of an insatiable and unprincipled ambition. The 
effects are already apparent, and are ripening into a 
more bitter animosity between the partisans of the 
two men, than ever existed between the Federalists 
and Anti-federalists. 

Unluckily, we are not as neutral to this quarrel as 
we ought to be. You saw, however, how far our 
friends in Congress went in polluting themselves 
with the support of the second personage for the 
Presidency. The cabal did not terminate there. 
Several men of no inconsiderable importance among 
us like the enterprising and adventurous character 

440 Alexander Hamilton 

of this man, and hope to soar with him to power. 
Many more, through hatred to the chief, and through 
an impatience to recover the reins, are linking them- 
selves to the new chief almost without perceiving it, 
and professing to have no other object than to make 
use of him ; while he knows that he is making use of 
them. What this may end in, it is difficult to per- 
ceive. 

Of one thing only I am sure, that in no event will 
I be directly or indirectly implicated in a responsi- 
bility for the elevation or support of either of two 
men who, in different senses, are in my eyes equally 
unworthy of the confidence of intelligent or honest 
men. 

Truly, my dear sir, the prospects of our country 
are not brilliant. The mass is far from sound. At 
headquarters a most visionary theory presides. De- 
pend upon it, this is the fact to a great extreme. No 
army, no navy, no active commerce; national de- 
fence, not by arms, but by embargoes, prohibitions 
of trade, etc. ; as little government as possible within ; 
— these are the pernicious dreams which, as far and 
as fast as possible, will be attempted to be realized. 
Mr. Jefferson is distressed at the codfish having lat- 
terly emigrated to the southern coast, lest the people 
there should be tempted to catch them, and com- 
merce, of which we have already too much, receive 
an accession. Be assured this is no pleasantry, but 
a very sober anecdote. 

Among Federalists old errors are not cured. 
They also continue to dream, though not quite so 
preposterously as their opponents. All will be very 

Private Correspondence 441 

well (say they) when the power once gets back into 
federal hands. The people, convinced by experience 
of their error, will repose a permanent confidence in 
good men. Risum teneatis. 

TO THE EDITOR OF THE "EVENING POST " 

New York, Aug. lo, 1802. 

Sir: 

Finding that a story, long since propagated, under 
circumstances which it was expected would soon con- 
sign it to oblivion (and by which I have been com- 
plimented at the expense of Generals Washington 
and Lafayette), has of late been revived, and has 
acquired a degree of importance by being repeated 
in different publications, as well in Europe as Amer- 
ica, it becomes a duty to counteract its currency and 
influence by an explicit disavowal. The story im- 
ports in substance, that General Lafayette, with the 
approbation or connivance of General Washington, 
ordered me, as the officer who was to command 
the attack on a British redoubt, in the course of the 
siege of York Town, to put to death all those of the 
enemy who should happen to be taken in the redoubt, 
and that, through motives of humanity, I forbore to 
execute the order. Positively and unequivocally I 
declare, that no such nor similar order, nor any in- 
timation nor hint resembling it, was ever by me 
received, or understood to have been given. It is 
needless to enter into an explanation of some occur- 
rences on the occasion alluded to, which may be con- 
jectured to have given rise to the calumny. It is 

442 Alexander Hamilton 

enough to say that they were entirely disconnected 
with any act of either of the generals who have been 
accused. 

With esteem, I am, sir, your most obedient ser- 
vant.' 

TO OLIVER WOLCOTT 

Grange, Aug. 14, 1803. 

My Dear Sir: 

When you were last in town, I proposed to com- 
municate to you the outline of a project, by which I 
think you may enter upon a career of business bene- 
ficial to yourself and friends. My almost constant 
attendance at court ever since you were here, has 
retarded the communication which I shall now make. 

Let a commercial capital be found, to consist of 
100,000 dollars, divided into shares of $100 each. A 
subscriber to pay in cash one tenth of his subscription, 
and for the residue 7 per centum per annum. It 
will then be his interest to pay up as soon as he can. 

The subscribers to form a partnership, under the 
firm of Oliver Wolcott & Co. ; Oliver Wolcott alone 
to have the signature of the firm, and the active 
management of the affairs of the company, with an 
allowance of $1,500 per annum out of the profits 
for the trouble of management, besides his share of 
profits as a partner. 

Oliver Wolcott and two others of the partners to 
form a board of direction, to plan, etc. 

Clerks and all incidental expenses to be paid out 
of the fund. 

' Reprinted from the History of the Republic, ii., 271. 

Private Correspondence 443 

The objects of the company. 

1 . Agencies of purchase and sales of land, stocks, 
etc. 

2. Factorage of cargoes, consigned on commis- 
sion; purchase of goods on commission, etc. ; in brief, 
''the business of a commission merchant merely." 

3. Purchases at auction, and sales of the articles 
purchased. 

4. Loans of money on deposit of goods, with a 
right, if not redeemed in time, to sell on commission, 
perhaps. 

Speculative enterprises in navigation and com- 
merce to be excluded. 

In a company thus formed under your manage- 
ment, I should be willing to become a partner for 
from 5 to 10,000 dollars, and I have no doubt that 
the capital will be readily formed of confidential 
and trustworthy characters, who would insure great 
credit to the house. I am also confident, that when 
it should be known in Europe that certain characters 
were of the company, it would attract a good portion 
of profitable employment. 

I will enter into no further detail. If the project 
impresses you favorably, come to New York, and we 
will give it form, and finish and prepare for execu- 
tion. Do not lightly reject it. 

TO GOUVERNEUR MORRIS 

Grange, Sept. 4, 1802. 

My Dear Sir: 

I fully intended to have dined with you to day, 
but, going to town the two last days, and forgetting 

444 Alexander Hamilton 

that I ought to observe a regimen, I have brought 
back, in some degree, the complaint which lately an- 
noyed me, and which requires to be well watched. 
This must deprive me of the pleasure of seeing you. 

I send schedules of the papers required of Tillier, 
all which have been put into my hands ; the bills to 
remain till the close of the affair; the other docu- 
ments to be delivered to your order. 

I also send a draught of the trust deed. It en- 
deavors to comply with your suggestion, as far as 
can be done without running foul of the danger de- 
sired to be avoided. 

Your guests are invited to dine with us Thursday 
next. 

Will you make one? 

TO GENERAL CHARLES COTESWORTH PINCKNEY 

Grange (New York), Dec. 29, 1802. 


A garden, you know, is a very useful refuge of a 
disappointed politician. Accordingly, I have pur- 
chased a few acres about nine miles from town, have 
built a house, and am cultivating a garden. The 
melons in your country are very fine. Will you have 
the goodness to send me some seed, both of the 
water and musk melons? My daughter adds an- 
other request, which is for three or four of your 
paroquets. She is very fond of birds. If there be 
any thing in this quarter the sending of which can 
give you pleasure, you have only to name them. 

/ 

Private Correspondence 445 

As farmers, a new source of sympathy has arisen 
between us, and I am pleased with every thing in 
which our Hkings and tastes can be approximated. 
Amidst the triumphant reign of democracy, do you V^ 
retain sufficient interest in pubHc affairs to feel any 
curiosity about what is going on? In my opinion, 
the follies and vices of the administration have as 
yet made no material impression to their disadvan- 
tage. On the contrary, I think the malady is rather 
progressive than upon the decline in our Northern j 
quarter. The last lullaby message, instead of in- i_. 
spiring contempt, attracts praise. Mankind are for- ■ f 
ever destined to be the dupes of bold and cunning 
imposture. But a difficult knot has been twisted by 
the incidents of the cession of Louisiana, and the in- \ 
terruption of the deposit of New Orleans. You have 
seen the soft turn given to this in the message. Yet 
we are told that the President, in conversation, is 
very stout. The great embarrassment must be how 
to carry on the war without taxes. The pretty 
scheme of substituting economy to taxation will not 
do here. And a war would be a terrible comment 
upon the abandonment of the internal revenue. Yet 
how is popularity to be preserved with the Western 
partisans if their interests are tamely sacrificed? 
Will the artifice be for the chief to hold a bold lan- 
guage, and the subalterns to act a feeble part? 
Time must explain. You know my general theory 
as to our Western affairs. I have always held that 
the unity of our empire and the best interests of our 
nation require that we shall annex to the United 
States all the territory east of the Mississippi, New i 

44^ Alexander Hamilton 

Orleans included. Of course I infer that, in an 
emergency like the present, energy is wisdom. 

Mrs. Hamilton joins me in affectionate compli- 
ments to Mrs. Pinckney. 

TO TIMOTHY PICKERING * 

New York, Sept. i8, 1803. 

My Dear Sir: 

I will make no apology for my delay in answering 
your inquiry, some time since made, because I could 
offer none which would satisfy myself. I pray you 
only to believe that it proceeded from any thing 
rather than want of respect or regard. I shall now 
comply with your request. The highest- toned pro- 
positions which I made in the convention were for a 
President, Senate, and Judges during good behavior 
— a House of Representatives for three years. 
Though I would have enlarged the legislative power 
of the general government, yet I never contem- 
plated the abolition of the State governments, but 
on the contrary, they were, in some particulars, con- 
stituent parts of my plan. This plan was, in my 
conception, conformable with the strict theory of a 
government purely republican, the essential criteria 
of which are that the principal organs of the execu- 
tive and legislative departments be elected by the 
people, and hold their offices by a responsible and 
temporary or defeasible tenure. A vote was taken 
on the proposition respecting the executive. Five 

^ At this time Senator from Massachusetts. 

Private Correspondence 447 

States were in favor of it, among these Virginia, and 
though, from the manner of voting — by delegations, 
— individuals were not distinguished, it was morally 
certain, from the known situation of the Virginia 
members (six in number, two of them, Mason and 
Randolph, professing popular doctrines), that Madi- 
son must have concurred in the work of Virginia; 
thus, if I sinned against republicanism, Mr. Madison 
was not less guilty. I may truly then say that I 
never proposed either a President or Senate for life, 
and that I neither recommended nor meditated the 
annihilation of the State governments. And I may 
add that, in the course of the discussions in the con- 
vention, neither the propositions thrown out for de- 
bate, nor even those voted in the earlier stages of 
the deliberation, were considered as evidences of a 
definitive opinion in the proposer or voter. ^ It ap- 
peared to me to be in some sort imderstood that, 
with a view to free investigation, experimental propo- 
sitions might be made, which were to be received 
merely as suggestions for consideration. Accord- 
ingly, it is a fact that my final opinion was against 
an Executive during good behavior, on account of 
the increased danger to the public tranquillity inci- 
dent to the election of a magistrate of this degree of 
permanency. In the plan of a constitution which I 
drew up while the convention was sitting, and which 
I communicated to Mr. Madison about the close of 
it, perhaps a day or two after, the office of President 
has no greater duration than for three years.^ This 

* See Madison Papers, ii., 724-762. 
2 Ihid., iii.; Appendix xvi. and xxi. 

i 


plan was predicated upon these bases: i. That the 

political principles of the people of this country 

would endure nothing but republican government. 

2. That in the actual situation of the country, it was 

^ in itself right and proper that the republican theory 

K' should have a fair and full trial. 3. That to such a 

; trial it was essential that the government should be 

\ so constructed as to give all the energy and stability 

^. reconcilable with the principles of that theory. 

These were the genuine sentiments of my heart, 
and upon them I acted. I sincerely hope that it 
may not hereafter be discovered that, through want 
of sufficient attention to the last idea, the experi- 
ment of republican government, even in this country, 
has not been as complete, as satisfactory, and as 
decisive as could be wished. 

TO RUFUS KING 

Albany, Feb. 24, 1804. 


You will have heard before this reaches you of the 
fluctuations and changes which have taken place in 
the measures of the reigning party, as to a candidate 
for governor ; and you will probably have also been 
informed that, pursuant to the opinions professed by 
our friends, before I left New York I had taken an 
active part in favor of Mr. Lansing. 

It is a fact to be regretted, though anticipated, 
that the Federalists very extensively had embarked 
with zeal in the support of Mr. Burr ; yet an impres- 
sion to the contrary, and in favor of Mr. Lansing, had 

Private Correspondence 449 

been made, and there was good ground to hope that 
a proper direction in the main might have been given 
to the current of Federahsm. The substitution of 
Mr. Lewis has essentially varied the prospect, and 
the best informed among us here agree that the 
Federalists, as a body, could not be diverted from 
Mr. Burr to Mr. Lewis, by any efforts of leading 
characters, if they should even deem the support of 
the latter expedient. 

Though I have no reason to think that my original 
calculation was wrong, while the competition was be- 
tween Clinton and Burr, yet from the moment the 
former declined, I began to consider the latter as 
having a chance of success. It was still, however, my 
reliance that Lansing would outrun him; but now 
that Chief -Justice Lewis is the competitor, the prob- 
ability in my judgment inclines to Mr. Burr. 

Thus situated, two questions have arisen; first, 
whether a federal candidate ought not to be run, as 
a means of defeating Mr. Burr, and of keeping the 
Federalists from becoming a personal faction allied 
to him. Second, whether, in the conflict of parties 
as they now stand, the strongest of them discon- 
certed and disjointed, there would not be a consider- 
able hope of success for a federal candidate. 

These questions have received no solution in 
scarcely any one's mind; but it is agreed that, if an 
attempt is to be made, you must be the candidate. | 
There is no other man among us under whose stand- 
ard either fragment of the democratic party could 
as easily rally. It is enough to say, you have been 
absent during the time in which party animosities 

VOL. X.— 2g. 

450 Alexander Hamilton 

have become matured and fixed, and, therefore, are 
much less than any other distinguished FederaHst, 
an object of them. 

To detach the Federalists from Burr, they must 
believe two things: one, that we are in earnest as to 
our candidate, and that it is not a mere diversion; 
the other, that there is some chance of success. All 
believe, and some leading candidates admit, that if 
either of the two democratic rival parties should 
come to expect a defeat, they will range themselves 
under your banner. 

Reflect well on all these things, and make up your 
mind in case you should be invited^ to consent. I 
have not time to enlarge. 

TO GOVERNOR GEORGE CLINTON 

Albany, Feb. 27, 1804. 

Sir: 

It is now a long time since a very odious slander ' 
has been in circulation to the prejudice of my 
character. 

It has come to my ears in more than one way, but 
always, till lately, without the disclosure of any 
source to which I could resort for explanation or 
detection. Within a few days, Mr. Kane, of this 
city, related to me a story as coming from Judge 
Purdy, in substance very similar to the calumny to 

' To the effect that he was the author of a letter proposing a mon- 
archical government, in 1788, with Prince Frederick, Duke of York, 
and titular Bishop of Osnaburg, as king. Clinton finally disclaimed 
all belief in the accusation. 

Private Correspondence 451 

which I have alluded. The amount of his informa- 
tion, and the result of an interview with Judge Purdy, 
are contained in the enclosed paper.^ You will ob- 
serve, sir, that your name is implicated in the trans- 
action. With what warrant, it would be improper 

' The following letter is the paper referred to. It is taken from, the 
Clinton papers, and I owe it to the kindness of Mr. Henry A. Homes, 
State Librarian of New York: 

" Some time in the month of January last I called on the Hon. Jacob 
Snell, a member of the Council of Appointment, where I found the 
Hon. Ebenezer Purdy, together with a Mr. Hughes and one or two other 
gentlemen, whose names I do not recollect. Mr. Purdy immediately 
asked me if I had any objection to hear an oration read that was 
delivered on the Fourth of July by a young Irishman, who, if I mistake 
not, then resided in his family. I replied, Certainly not. It was a 
violent philippic against the Federal administration; the stamp act, 
sedition law, standing army, etc., were represented as the leading 
features of the Federal faction. After some considerable conversation 
on the merits of the oration, between Mr. Purdy and myself, he re- 
marked that he fully believed monarchy was the object of the Federal- 
ists; that there was a person who did not wish to have his name 
mentioned who could prove the fact, and stood ready to make affidavit 
of it. That some time in the year of '98 a negotiation was opened 
between Gen. Hamilton, Mr. Adams, and the King of England, for the 
purpose of introducing monarchy into this country, at the head of 
which was to be placed one of the royal family, and that Canada was 
to be ceded to the States. For the truth of the above, Mr. Purdy 
referred me to Governor Clinton, who he said would not deny it, altho' 
he did not wish to say any thing about it. 

"On the 23d of January, 1804, Gen. Hamilton and myself called 
upon Mr. Purdy for the purpose of investigating the affair. Gen. 
Hamilton introduced the subject to Mr. Purdy by telling him he had 
received information from Mr. Kane of certain declarations [of] a 
nature very interesting to his character, which he was determined to 
have explained and investigated. I then related to Mr. Purdy the 
conversation he had with me, as above stated. Mr. Purdy replied: 
'What you have said, Mr. Kane, is pretty nearly correct [or words to 
that effect], with this difference: I did not mention Mr. Adams' name, 
and that affair which I spoke of to you did not happen in '98, but some 
time previous to the convention which formed the present Constitution 
of the United States. What I told you was nearly this: That some- 
body in England had made proposals to somebody at the Eastward 

452 Alexander Hamilton 

for me to prejudge. But the very mention of your 
name adds importance to the affair, and increases 
the motives to investigation. 

The charge, even in the mitigated form to which 
it is reduced by Judge Purdy's admission, is of a na- 
ture too derogatory to permit me to pass it Hghtly 
over. It is essential that its origin and progress 
should be traced as fully as may be practicable, in 
order to the thorough exposure of its falsehood and 
malignity. 

The assertions of Judge Purdy authorize me to 
appeal to you for a frank and candid explanation of 
so much of the matter as relates to yourself. This 
explanation I request as speedily as may be. 

for establishing a monarchy in this country, and placing at the head 
of it a son of the King of Great Britain; that some letters or papers 
containing these proposals were sent to Gen. Hamilton, copies of which 
were made in his office to be distributed amongst certain persons.' 
Mr. Purdy then asked me if this was not the substance of what he had 
told me. I said that the difference was between that and what I had 
before stated, and recapitulated what I have before said. I also 
pressed upon Mr. Purdy what I had before stated respecting Gov. 
Clinton, and questioned him whether he had not made such an appeal 
to Gov. Clinton, and also whether he had not affirmed that there 
was a person who could attest the truth of the story. Mr. Purdy per- 
sisted in the statement which he had just made. As to Gov. Clinton, 
he admitted that he had mentioned to the Governor the story he had 
heard, and that the Governor had replied that he had had one of the 
letters. On being interrogated by Gen. Hamilton, whether he had 
mentioned his name to Gov. Clinton, he answered he was not sure 
whether he had done it or not. On being further interrogated as to his 
having said there was a person ready to prove the transaction he had 
stated, he answered there was a person who had assured him of his 
knowledge of the transaction as it was now stated by him. A variety 
of other conversation passed, but the above comprises the most 
material particulars. 

(Signed) *' James Kane." 

Private Correspondence 453 

TO GOVERNOR GEORGE CLINTON 

Albany, March 2, 1804. 

Sir: 

If our correspondence does not terminate with 
your letter of the 29th February, received yesterday, 
I wish it to be understood that it proceeds merely 
from the desire of removing all ambiguity from a 
transaction in which my character may be materially 
interested. 

It is perhaps the natural inference from what you 
have stated, that nothing took place on your part to 
sanction or corroborate the story related to you by 
Judge Purdy, in reference to any agency or co-opera- 
tion of mine in the supposed project. Yet some of 
the circumstances are such, that a different inference 
might possibly be drawn. 

I therefore trust that you will be sensible of the 
propriety of dissipating all obscurity on this point. 

If the letter, which you mention to have been put 
in your hands by General Malcolm, was not with- 
drawn by him, or if any copy was retained by you, 
it would be satisfactory to me to have an inspection 
of the one or the other, with leave to take a copy, in 
order that I may have an additional clue to the 
source of a story, which I verily believe originated 
entirely in a fabrication. 

3jr; Albany, March 7, 1804. 

On Saturday last I sent you a letter, of which the 
foregoing is a copy, to which, as yet, I have received 
no reply. 

454 Alexander Hamilton 

Intending to leave this place for New York on 
Saturday next, it is important that I should receive 
an answer before that day. 


Albany, March 9, 1804. 


I had the honor of receiving yesterday your Ex- 
cellency's letter of the 6th instant. It is agreeable 
to me to find in it a confirmation of the inference 
that you had given no countenance to the supposi- 
tion of my agency or co-operation in the project to 
which the story of Judge Purdy relates ; and it only 
remains for me to regret that it is not in your power 
to furnish the additional clue, of which I was de- 
sirous, to aid me in tracing the fabrication to its 
source. 

I shall not only rely on the assurance which you 
give as to the future communication of the copy of 
the letter in question, should it hereafter come to 
your hands, but I will take the liberty to add a re- 
quest, that you will be pleased to make known to 
me any other circumstances, if any should reach you, 
which may serve to throw light upon the affair. I 
feel an anxiety that it should be thoroughly sifted, 
not merely on my own account, but from a convic- 
tion that the pretended existence of such a project, 
long travelling about in whispers, has had no in- 
considerable influence in exciting false alarms, and 
unjust suspicions to the prejudice of a number of 

Private Correspondence 455 

individuals, every way worthy of public confidence, 
who have always faithfully supported the existing 
institutions of the country, and who would disdain 
to be concerned in an intrigue with any foreign power, 
or its agents, either for introducing monarchy, or for 
promoting or upholding any other scheme of govern- 
ment within the United States. 

TO TALLEYRAND 

New York, March 25, 1804. 

Sir: 

Presuming on the acquaintance, from which I 
derived so much pleasure during your stay in this 
country, I am going to take a very great liberty. It 
concerns a near relation of mine, Mr. Alexander 
Hamilton, now a prisoner of war on parole at Paris. 

His brother, from whom I have just received a let- 
ter, informs me that, being on a visit to the continent 
as a traveller, he was overtaken by the war between 
France and Great Britain, and has been since that 
time in the situation which I have mentioned. He 
is a Scotch gentleman of education and literary ac- 
quirements, who, having amassed a pretty hand- 
some fortune in the East Indies, had returned to his 
own country to devote himself to the pursuits of 
knowledge, and was induced to pass over to the con- 
tinent to indulge his curiosity, with a particular eye 
to the very interesting monuments of the arts, of 
which Paris is now the depository. 

I will ask nothing specific for him, because I know 
not what could with propriety be done, contenting 

\ 

45^ Alexander Hamilton 

myself with merely saying, that if your interposition 
can procure for him any facility, indulgence, or favor, 
it will confer a personal obligation on one who has 
the honor to remain, etc. 

TO 

New York, April 12, 1804. 

Dear Sir: 

The post of to-day brought me a letter from you, 

and another from Mr. . I have no doubt but 

the latter would serve you if he could ; but he cannot 
at this time. 

On the whole, I would advise you to return to 
New York, and accept any respectable employment 
in your way, till an opportunity of something better 
shall occur. T is by practice and perseverance 
that we can expect to vanquish difficulties, and 
better an unpleasant condition. 

Arraign not the dispensations of Providence, they 
must be founded in wisdom and goodness ; and when 
they do not suit us, it must be because there is some 
fault in ourselves which deserves chastisement; or 
because there is a kind intent, to correct in us some 
vice or failing, of which, perhaps, we may not be 
conscious ; or because the general plan requires that 
we should suffer partial ill. 

In this situation it is our duty to cultivate resigna- 
tion, and even humility, bearing in mind, in the lan- 
guage of the poet, " that it was pride which lost the 
blest abodes." ' 

^ Now first printed from the Hamilton papers in the State Depart- 
ment. 

Private Correspondence 457 

TO PHILIP J. SCHUYLER ' 

April 20, 1804. 

My Dear Sir: 

I did not write to you on the subject of the awards, 
because I was in correspondence with Mr. Jacob Van 
Rensselaer respecting the matter. 

He has sent me the draughts of deeds which I 
shall in a few days inspect, and return with such 
suggestions as may be requisite. 

The things most urgent are — i. The completion of 
the survey, which Mr. R. writes me is in train. — 2. 
The appointment of a guardian for Mr. Kane's 
daughter at Schenectady. On both objects, I have 
written particularly to Mr. J. Van Rensselaer. 

I say nothing on politics, with the course of which 
I am too much disgusted to give myself any futtire 
concern about them.* 

TO JAMES A. HAMILTON 

1804. 

My Dear James: 

I have prepared for you a Thesis on Discretion. 
You may need it. God bless you. 

Your affectionate father.^ 

TO THEODORE SEDGWICK 

New York, Jiily lo, 1804. 

My Dear Sir: 

1 have received two letters from you since we last 
saw each other, that of the latest date being the 24th 

' Hamilton's brother-in-law. 

2 This letter, now first printed, I owe to the kindness of Mr. Henry A. 
Homes, State Librarian at Albany. 

3 Reprinted from the Reminiscences of James A. Hamilton, p. 40. 

'iY 

45^ Alexander Hamilton 

of May. I have had on hand for some time a long 
letter to you, explaining my view of the course and 
tendency of our politics, and my intentions as to my 
own future conduct. But my plan embraced so 
large a range that, owing to much avocation, some 
indifferent health, and a growing distaste to politics, 
the letter is still considerably short of being finished. 
I write this now to satisfy you that want of regard 
for you has not been the cause of my silence. 
I I will here express but one sentiment, which is, 
'' that dismemberment of our empire will be a clear 
sacrifice of great positive advantages without any 
counterbalancing good, administering no relief to 
-\l! our real disease, which is democracy, the poison of 
which, by a subdivision, will only be the more con- 
centrated in each part, and consequently the more 
virulent. King is on his way for Boston, where you 
may chance to see him, and hear from himself his 
sentiments. God bless you.' 

[This letter and the next were omitted by an over- 
sight, and are therefore given here.] 

TO GENERAL JOHN SULLIVAN 

Headquarters, 1778. 

Sir: 

His Excellency has received your two last favors 
to-day. In the first you hint the want of a rein- 
forcement, but as the intention of your body is 
chiefly for observation and skirmishing, and not to 

' The day after this letter was written Hamilton was killed by Burr. 

Private Correspondence 459 

make any serious stands, it is the less necessary it 
should be powerful in numbers. It will, however, 
depend upon circumstances how far it will be ex- 
pedient to reinforce; and as soon as anything can 
be determined from them, you shall have whatever 
addition of strength you may stand in need of. 

The information contained in your last, of the 
enemy's being encamped on the road leading from 
New Brunswick to Princeton, about the Third Mile 
Run, is not well founded. We have had parties and 
officers, reconnoitring as far as the Mile Run, and 
there is no sign of an encampment. They seem to 
be taking their old position with their right at Am- 
boy , their left at Brunswick ; but how long they will 
remain so it is hard to tell. His Excellency desires 
you will engage some trusty person at South Amboy, 
on whom you can depend for faithful and early in- 
telligence of the appearance of shipping in the river, 
or any preparation for a movement by water, that 
we may be in time prepared to counteract them. 

TO WASHINGTON 

Amboy, March 17, 1780. 

Dear Sir: 

I duly received your letter of the fourteenth, and 
shall not fail, in conjunction with General St. Clair, 
to attend to the military object of it. I am much 
obliged to your Excellency for the communication 
of your Southern advices. The enemy are still in 
the dark about their fleet and army gone that way, 
as we gather from the commissioners. They pre- 

460 Alexander Hamilton 

tend to have little European news, though a vessel 
arrived two or three days since from England, after 
ten weeks' passage. We send you some late New 
York papers. 

The commission has been several days at an end. 
The enemy, as was supposed, had no idea of treating 
on national ground. We are now in private con- 
versation, and so far not without hopes that the 
liberation of our prisoners will be effected on ad- 
missible terms. Two or three days more will prob- 
ably put an end to the interview. General St. Clair 
and Colonel Carrington beg their respects may be 
presented to your Excellency. 

[Correspondence relating to the duel with Burr. 
Reprinted from the History of the Republic, vii., 805, 
et seq.'\ 

A. BURR TO GENERAL HAMILTON 

New York, J\me 18, 1804. 

Sir: 

I send you for your perusal a letter signed Charles 
D. Cooper, which, though apparently published 
some time ago, has but very recently come to my 
knowledge. Mr. Van Ness, who does me the honor 
to deliver this, will point out to you that clause of 
the letter to which I particularly request yoiir at- 
tention. You must perceive, sir, the necessity of a 
prompt, unqualified acknowledgment or denial of 
the use of any expressions which would warrant the 
assertions of Dr. Cooper. 

Private Correspondence 461 

HAMILTON TO BURR 

New York, Jtine 20, 1804. 


I have maturely reflected on the subject of your 
letter of the eighteenth instant, and the more I have 
reflected, the more I have become convinced that I 
could not, without manifest impropriety, make the 
avowal or disavowal which you seem to think neces- 
sary. The clause pointed out by Mr. Van Ness is 
in these terms: ''I could detail to you a still more 
despicable opinion which General Hamilton has ex- \ 
pressed of Mr. Burr." To endeavor to discover the 
meaning of this declaration, I was obliged to seek in 
the antecedent part of this letter for the opinion to 
which it referred, as having been already disclosed. 
I foimd it in these words: '* General Hamilton and 
Judge Kent have declared in substance that they 
looked upon Mr. Burr to be a dangerous m.an, and 
one who ought not to be trusted with the reins of 
government." 

The language of Dr. Cooper plainly implies that he 
considered this opinion of you, which he attributes 
to me, as a despicable one; but he affirms that I 
have expressed some other, more despicable, without, 
however, mentioning to whom, when, or where. 
'T is evident that the phrase '' still more despicable" 
admits of infinite shades, from very light to very 
dark. How am I to judge of the degree intended, 
or how shall I annex any precise idea to language so 
indefinite ? 

Between gentlemen, despicable and more despica- 
ble are not worth the pains of distinction; when, 

462 Alexander Hamilton 

therefore, you do not interrogate me as to the opinion 
which is specifically ascribed to me, I must conclude 
that you view it as within the limits to which the 
animadversions of political opponents upon each 
other may justifiably extend, and consequently as 
not warranting the idea of it which Dr. Cooper ap- 
pears to entertain. If so, what precise inference 
could you draw as a guide for your conduct, were I 
to acknowledge that I had expressed an opinion of 
you still more despicable than the one which is par- 
ticularized? How could you be sure that even this 
opinion had exceeded the bounds which you yourself 
deem admissible between political opponents .f* 

But I forbear further comment on the emibarrass- 
ment to which the requisition you have made natu- 
rally leads. The occasion forbids a more ample 
illustration, though nothing could be more easy than 
to pursue it. Repeating, that I cannot reconcile it 
with propriety to make the acknowledgment you 
desire, I will add that I deem it inadmissible, on 
principle, to consent to be interrogated as to the 
justness of the inferences which may be drawn by 
others from what I may have said of a political op- 
ponent in the course of fifteen years' competition. 
If there were no other objection to it, this is suf- 
ficient, that it would tend to expose my sincerity and 
delicacy to injurious imputation from every person 
who may at any time have conceived the import of 
my expressions differently from what I may then 
have intended or may afterwards recollect. I stand 
ready to avow or disavow, promptly and explicitly, 
any precise or definite opinion which I may be 

Private Correspondence 463 

charged with having declared of any gentleman. 
More than this cannot fitly be expected from me, 
and especially it cannot be reasonably expected 
that I shall enter into an explanation upon a basis so 
vague as that which you have adopted. I trust, on 
mature reflection, you will see the matter in the same 
light with me. If not, I can only regret the circimi- | 
stance, and must abide the consequences. I ^i h(>9 

The publication of Dr. Cooper was never seen by 
me until after the receipt of your letter. 

BURR TO HAMILTON 

New York, Jiine 21, 1804. 

Sir: 

Your letter of the 20th inst. has been this day re- 
ceived. Having considered it attentively, I regret 
to find in it nothing of that sincerity and delicacy 
which you profess to value. 

Political opposition can never absolve gentlemen 
from the necessity of a rigid adherence to the laws 
of honor and the rules of decorum. I neither claim 
such privilege nor indulge it in others. 

The common-sense of mankind affixes to the 
epithet adopted by Dr. Cooper, the idea of dishonor. 
It has been publicly applied to me under the sanc- 
tion of your name. The question is not whether he 
has understood the meaning of the word, or has 
used it according to syntax and with grammatical 
accuracy, but whether you have authorized this 
application, either directly or by uttering expres- 
sions or opinions derogatory to my honor. The 
time "when" is in your own knowledge, but no way 

464 Alexander Hamilton 

material to me, as the calumny has now first been 
disclosed, so as to become the subject of my notice, 
and as the effect is present and palpable. Your 
letter has furnished me with new reasons for re- 
quiring a definite reply. 

HAMILTON TO BURR 

New York, June 22, 1804. 


Your first letter, in a style too peremptory, made 
a demand, in my opinion, unprecedented and un- 
warrantable. My answer, pointing out the em- 
barrassment, gave you an opportunity of taking a 
less exceptionable course. You have not chosen to 
do it ; but by your last letter, received this day, con- 
taining expressions indecorous and improper, you 
have increased the difhculties to explanation in- 
trinsically incident to the nature of your applica- 
tion. If by a " definite reply," you mean the direct 
avowal or disavowal required in your first letter, I 
have no other answer to give, than that which has 
already been given. If you mean any thing differ- 
ent, admitting of greater latitude, it is requisite you 
should explain. 

W. p. VAN NESS ' TO HAMILTON 

Jtine 23, 1804. 


In the afternoon of yesterday, I reported to Col. 
Burr the result of my last interview with you and 

^ Burr's second in the duel. 

Private Correspondence 465 

appointed the evening to receive his further instruc- 
tions. Some private engagements, however, pre- 
vented me from calHng on him till morning. On 
my return to the city, I found upon inquiry, both 
at your office and house, that you had returned to 
your residence in the country. 

Lest an interview there might be less agreeable to 
you than elsewhere, I have taken the liberty of ad- 
dressing you this note to inquire when and where it 
will be most convenient to you to receive a com- 
munication. 

VAN NESS TO MAJOR NATHANIEL PENDLETON ' 

June 26, 1804. 

Sir: 

The letter which you yesterday delivered me, and 
your subsequent communication, in Col. Burr's opin- 
ion, evince no disposition on the part of General 
Hamilton to come to a satisfactory accommoda- 
tion. The injury complained of and the repara- 
tion expected are so definitely expressed in Col. 
Burr's letter of the 21st instant, that there is not 
perceived a necessity for further explanation on his 
part. The difficulty that would result from con- 
fining the inquiry to any particular times and occa- 
sions must be manifest. The denial of a specified 
conversation only, would leave strong implication 
that on other occasions improper language had been 
used. When and where injurious opinions and ex- 
pressions have been uttered by General Hamilton 

^ Pendleton was Hamilton's second in the duel. 

VOL. X, — 30. 

466 Alexander Hamilton 

must be best known to him, and of him only will 
Col. Burr inquire. No denial or declaration will be 
satisfactory, unless it be general, so as to wholly 
exclude the ideas that rumors derogatory to Col. 
Burr's honor have originated with General Hamil- 
ton, or have been fairly inferred from any thing he 
has said. A definite reply to a requisition of this 
nature was demanded by Col. Burr's letter of the 
twenty-first inst. This being refused, invites the 
alternative referred to in General Hamilton's letter 
of the 2oth. It was required by the position in 
which the controversy was placed by General Ham- 
ilton on Friday last, and I was immediately fur- 
nished with a communication demanding a personal 
interview. The necessity of this measure has not, 
in the opinion of Col. Burr, been diminished by the 
General's last letter, or any commimication which 
has since been received. I am consequently again 
instructed to deliver to you a message, as soon as it 
may be convenient for you to receive it. I beg, 
therefore, you will be so good as to inform me at 
what hour I can have the pleasure of seeing you. 

PENDLETON TO VAN NESS 



I have communicated the letter which you did me 
the honor to write to me of this date, to General 
Hamilton. The expectations now disclosed on the 
part of Col. Burr appear to him to have greatly ex- 
tended the original ground of inquiry, and instead 

Private Correspondence 467 

of presenting a particular and definite case for 
explanation, seem to aim at nothing less than an 
inquisition into his most confidential conversations, 
as v^ell as others, through the whole period of his ac- 
quaintance with Col. Burr. While he was prepared 
to meet the particular case fairly and fully, he thinks 
it inadmissible that he should be expected to answer 
at large as to every thing that he may possibly have 
said, in relation to the character of Col. Burr, at any 
time, or upon any occasion. Though he is not con- 
scious that any charges which are in circulation to 
the prejudice of Col. Burr have originated with him, 
except one which may have been so considered, and 
which has long since been fully explained between 
Col. Burr and himself, yet he cannot consent to be 
questioned generally as to any rumors which may 
be afloat derogatory to the character of Col. Buit, 
without specification of the several rumors, many of 
them probably unknown to him. He does not, how- 
ever, mean to authorize any conclusion as to the real 
nature of his conduct in relation to Col. Burr, by 
his declining so loose and vague a basis of explana- 
tion, and he disavows an unwillingness to come to 
a satisfactory, provided it be an honorable, accom- 
modation. 

His objection is, the very indefinite ground which 
Col. Burr has assumed, in which he is sorry to be 
able to discern nothing short of premeditated hos- 
tility. Presuming, therefore, that it will be ad- 
hered to, he has instructed me to receive the 
message which you have it in charge to deliver. 
For this purpose I shall be at home and at your 

4^8 Alexander Hamilton 

accommodation to-morrow morning, from eight to 
ten o'clock.' 

VAN NESS TO PENDLETON 

June 27, 1804. 


The letter which I had the honor to receive from 
you, under date of yesterday, states, among other 
things, that in General Hamilton's opinion, Col. 
Burr has taken a very indefinite ground, in which 
he evinces nothing short of pre-determined hostility, 
and that General Hamilton thinks it inadmissible 
that the inquiry should extend to his confidential as 
well as other conversations. In this Col. Burr can 
only reply, that secret whispers, traducing his fame 
and impeaching his honor, are, at least, equally in- 
jurious with slanders publicly uttered ; that General 
Hamilton had at no time and in no place a right to 
use any such injurious expressions, and the partial 
negative he is disposed to give, with the reservation 
he wishes to make, are proofs that he has done the 
injury specified. 

Col. Burr's request was, in the first instance, pro- 
posed in a form the most simple, in order that Gen- 

^ Note from the History of the Republic, vii,, 812. — 'T is not unworthy 
of notice, that on the very day of this communication, Hamilton, who 
had been consulted by a poor, illiterate man, in the humblest walk of 
life, wrote this note: " Dear Sir: I should like to see you on the sub- 
ject of a poor fellow, Peter Drinker, who says he has been employed by 
you, and appears unfortunate, which is his title to my attention. Yours 
truly, A. H. June 26, 1804. P. G. Stuyvesant, Esq." This much- 
respected gentleman relates: "I reproved the man for the freedom in 
which he had indulged, and undertook to convince him of the impro- 
priety of troubling General Hamilton with his concerns." His reply 
was: "Oh, no, sir, he treated me very kindly." 

Private Correspondence 469 

eral Hamilton might give to the affair that course 
to which he might be induced by his temper and 
his knowledge of facts. Col. Burr trusted with con- 
fidence that, from the frankness of a soldier and the 
candor of a gentleman, he might expect an ingenuous 
declaration. That if, as he had reason to believe, 
General Hamilton had used expressions derogatory 
to his honor, he would have had the magnanimity 
to retract them; and that if, from his language, in- 
jurious inferences had been improperly drawn, he 
would have perceived the propriety of correcting 
errors which might thus have been widely diffused. 
With these impressions, Col. Burr was greatly sur- 
prised at receiving a letter which he considered as 
evasive, and which in manner he deemed not alto- 
gether decorous. In one expectation, however, he 
was not wholly deceived, for the close of General 
Hamilton's letter contained an intimation that if 
Col. Burr should dislike his refusal to acknowledge 
or deny, he was ready to meet the consequences. 
This Col. Burr deemed a sort of defiance, and would 
have felt justified in making it the basis of an im- 
mediate message. But as the communication con- 
tained something concerning the indefiniteness of 
the request, as he believed it rather the offspring of 
false pride than of reflection, and as he felt the ut- 
most reluctance to proceed to extremities while any 
other hope remained, his request was repeated in 
terms more explicit. The replies and propositions 
on the part of Gen. Hamilton have, in Col. Burr's 
opinion, been constantly in substance the same. 
Col. Burr disavows all motives of premeditated 

470 Alexander Hamilton 

hostility, a charge by which he thinks insult added 
to injury. He feels as a gentleman should feel when 
his honor is impeached or assailed ; and without sen- 
sations of hostility or wishes of revenge, he is deter- 
mined to vindicate that honor at such hazard as the 
nature of the case demands. 

The length to which this correspondence has ex- 
tended, only tending to prove that the satisfactory 
redress, earnestly desired, cannot be obtained, he 
deems it useless to offer any proposition, except the 
simple message, which I shall now have the honor to 
dehver. 

REMARKS BY HAMILTON ON THE LETTER OF JUNE 27, 
Whether the observations on this letter are de- 
signed merely to justify the result which is indicated 
in the close of the letter, or may be intended to give 
an opening for rendering any thing explicit which 
may have been deemed vague heretofore, can only 
be judged of by the sequel. At any rate, it appears 
to me necessary not to be misunderstood. Mr. 
Pendleton is therefore authorized to say, that in the 
course of the present discussion, written or verbal, 
there has been no intention to evade, defy, or in- 
sult, but a sincere disposition to avoid extremities, 
if it could be done with propriety. With this view, 
Gen. Hamilton has been ready to enter into a frank 
and free explanation on any and every object of a 
specific nature, but not to answer a general and 
abstract inquiry embracing a period too long for any 

Private Correspondence 471 

accurate recollection, and exposing him to unpleas- 
ant criticisms from, or unpleasant discussions with, 
any and every person who may have understood him 
in an unfavorable sense. This (admitting that he 
could answer in a manner the most satisfactory to 
Col. Burr) he should deem inadmissible in principle 
and precedent, and humiliating in practice. To 
this therefore he can never submit. Frequent allu- 
sion has been made to slanders said to be in circula- 
tion. Whether they are openly or in whispers, they 
have a form and shape and might be specified. If 
the alternative alluded to in the close of the letter is 
definitely tendered, it must be accepted; the time, 
place, and manner to be afterwards regulated. I 
should not think it right in the midst of a Circuit 
Court to withdraw my services from those who may 
have confided important interests to me and expose 
them to the embarrassment of seeking other coimsel, 
who may not have time to be sufficiently instructed 
in their case. I shall also want a little time to make 
some arrangements respecting my own affairs. 

STATEMENT BY HAMILTON AS TO HIS MOTIVES IN 

MEETING BURR 

On my expected interview with Col. Burr, I think 
it proper to make some remarks explanatory of my 
conduct, motives, and views. I was certainly de- 
sirous of avoiding this interview for the most cogent 
reasons : 

(i) My religious and moral principles are strongly 
opposed to the practice of duelling, and it would 

472 Alexander Hamilton 

ever give me pain to be obliged to shed the blood of 
a fellow-creature in a private combat forbidden by 
the laws. 

(2) My wife and children are extremely dear to 
me, and my life is of the utmost importance to them 
in various views. 

(3) I feel a sense of obligation towards my credit- 
ors; who, in case of accident to me by the forced 
sale of my property, may be in some degree sufferers. 
I did not think myself at liberty as a man of probity 
lightly to expose them to this hazard. 

(4) I am conscious of no ill-will to Col. Burr, dis- 
tinct from political opposition, which, as I trust, has 
proceeded from pure and upright motives. 

Lastly, I shall hazard much and can possibly gain 
nothing by the issue of the interview. 

But it was, as I conceive, impossible for me to 
avoid it. There were intrinsic difficulties in the 
thing and artificial embarrassments, from the man- 
ner of proceeding on the part of Col. Burr. 

Intrinsic, because it is not to be denied that my 
animadversions on the political principles, character, 
and views of Col. Burr have been extremely severe; 
and on different occasions I, in common with many 
others, have made very unfavorable criticisms on 
particular instances of the private conduct of this 
gentleman. In proportion as these impressions were 
entertained with sincerity and uttered with motives 
and for purposes which might appear to me com- 
mendable, would be the difficulty (until they could 
be removed by evidence of their being erroneous) of 
explanation or apology. The disavowal required of 

Private Correspondence 473 

me by Col. Butt in a general and indefinite form was 
out of my power, if it had really been proper for me 
to submit to be questioned, but I was sincerely of 
opinion that this could not be, and in this opinion I 
was confirmed by that of a very moderate and p^^^^ ^ 
judicious friend whom I consulted. Besides that, 
Col. Burr appeared to me to assume, in the first in- 
stance, a tone imnecessarily peremptory and men- 
acing, and, in the second, positively offensive. Yet 
I wished, as far as might be practicable, to leave a 
door open to accommodation. This, I think, will be 
inferred from the written communication made by 
me and by my directions, and would be confirmed 
by the conversations between Mr. Van Ness and my- 
self which arose out of the subject. I am not sure 
whether, under all the circumstances, I did not go 
further in the attempt to accommodate than a 
pimctilious delicacy will justify. If so, I hope the 
motives I have stated will excuse me. It is not my 
design, by what I have said, to affix any odiimi on 
the conduct of Col. Burr in this case. He doubtless 
has heard of animadversions of mine which bore , 

very hard upon him, and it is probable that as usual 
they were accompanied with some falsehoods. He 
may have supposed himself under a necessity of 
acting as he has done. I hope the grounds of his 
proceeding have been such as ought to satisfy his 
own conscience. I trust, at the same time, that the 
world will do me the justice to believe that I have 
not censured him on light grounds nor from tm- 
worthy inducements. I certainly have had strong 
reasons for what I have said, though it is possible 

474 Alexander Hamilton 

that in some partictilars I may have been influenced 
by misconstruction or misinformation. It is also my 
ardent wish that I may have been more mistaken 
than I think I have been ; and that he, by his future 
conduct, may show himself worthy of all confidence 
and esteem and prove an ornament and a blessing 
to the country. As well, because it is possible that 
I may have injured Col. Burr, however convinced 
myself that my opinions and declarations have been 
well-founded, as from my general principles and 
temper in relation to similar affairs, I have resolved, 
if our interview is conducted in the usual manner, 
and it pleases God to give me the opportunity, to 
reserve and throw away my first fire, and I have 
thoughts even of reserving my second fire, and thus 
giving a double opportunity to Col. Burr to pause 
and reflect. It is not, however, my intention to 
enter into any explanations on the ground. Apology 
from principle, I hope, rather than pride, is out of the 
question. To those who, with me, abhorring the 
practice of duelling, may think that I ought on no 
account to have added to the number of bad exam- 
ples, I answer that my relative situation, as well in 
public as private, enforcing all the considerations 
which constitute what men of the world denominate 
honor, imposed on me (as I thought) a peculiar 
necessity not to decline the call. The ability to be 
in future useful, whether in resisting mischief or in 
effecting good, in those crises of our public affairs 
which seem likely to happen, would probably be in- 
separable from a conformity with public prejudice 
in this particular. 

Private Correspondence 475 

TO MRS. HAMILTON 

J\ily 10, 1804. 

This letter, my dear Eliza, will not be delivered to 
you, unless I shall first have terminated my earthly 
career, to begin, as I humbly hope, from redeeming 
grace and divine mercy, a happy immortality. If 
it had been possible for me to have avoided the 
interview, my love for you and my precious children 
would have been alone a decisive motive. But it 
was not possible, without sacrifices which would have 
rendered me unworthy of your esteem. I need not 
tell you of the pangs I feel from the idea of quitting 
you, and exposing you to the anguish I know you 
would feel. Nor could I dwell on the topic, lest it 
should unman me. The consolations of religion, my 
beloved, can alone support you ; and these you have 
a right to enjoy. Fly to the bosom of your God, and 
be comforted. With my last idea I shall cherish the 
sweet hope of meeting you in a better world. Adieu, 
best of wives — best of women. Embrace all my 
darling children for me. 


Tuesday evening, lo o'clock. 

My Beloved Eliza: 

Mrs. Mitchell ' is the person in the world to whom, 
as a friend, I am imder the greatest obligation. I 
have not hitherto done my duty to her. But 
resolved to repair my omission to her as much as 

^ The sister of Mr. Peter Lytton and of Hamilton's mother, accord- 
ing to the statements in J. C. Hamilton's imfinished life of his father. 

47^ Alexander Hamilton 

possible, I have encouraged her to come to this coim- 
try, and intend, if it shall be in my power, to render 
the evening of her days comfortable. But if it shall 
please God to put this out of my power, and to en- 
able you hereafter to be of service to her, I entreat 
you to do it, and to treat her with the tenderness of 
a sister. This is my second letter. The scruples of 
a Christian have determined me to expose my own 
life to any extent, rather than subject myself to the 
guilt of taking the life of another. This much in- 
creases my hazards, and redoubles my pangs for you. 
But you had rather I should die innocent than live 
guilty. Heaven can preserve me, and I humbly 
hope will; but, in the contrary event, I charge you 
to remember that you are a Christian. God's will 
be done ! The will of a merciful God must be good. 
Once more, 

Adieu, my darling, darling wife. 

[This interesting paper or letter, now first printed, 
is unaddressed and undated, but it must have been 
written after 1800, and perhaps not long before the 
writer's death. I owe it to the kindness of the gen- 
tleman in New York, whose letter I am so unfortu- 
nate as to have lost. See page 231 of Vol. IX.] 

Herewith is a general statement of my pecuniary 
f^ affairs, in which there can be no material error. 

The result is that calculating my property at what 
it stands me in, I am now worth about ;^ 10,000, and 
that estimating according to what my lands are now 

/, 

Private Correspondence 477 

selling for and are likely to fetch, the surplus beyond 
my debts may fairly be stated at nearly double that 
sum; yet I am pained to be obliged to entertain 
doubts, whether, if an accident should happen to 
me, by v/hich the sales of my property should come 
to be forced, it would even be sufficient to pay my 
debts. In a situation like this, it is perhaps due to 
my reputation to explain why I have made so con- 
siderable an establishment in the country. This ex- 
planation shall be submitted. 

To men who have been so much harassed in the 
base world as myself, it is natural to look forward 
to a comfortable retirement, in the sequel of life, as 
a principal desideratum. This desire I have felt in 
the strongest manner, and to prepare for it has 
latterly been a favorite object. I thought I might 
not only expect to accomplish the object, but might 
reasonably aim at it and pursue the preparatory 
measures, from the following considerations: 

It has been for some time past pretty well ascer- 
tained to my mind, that the emoluments of my pro- 
fession would prove equal to the maintenance of my 
family and the gradual discharge of my debts, within 
a period to the end of which my faculties for business 
might be expected to extend in full energy. I think 
myself warranted to estimate the annual product of 
those emoluments at twelve thousand dollars at the 
least. My expenses while the first improvements of 
my coimtry establishment were going on have been 
great, but they would this summer and fall reach the 
point at which, it is my intention they should stop, 
at least till I should be better able than at present 

478 Alexander Hamilton 

to add to them ; and after a fair examination founded 
upon an actual account of my expenditures, I am 
persuaded that a plan I have contemplated for the 
next and succeeding years would bring my expenses 
of every kind within the compass of four thousand 
dollars yearly, exclusive of the interest of my country 
establishment. To this limit I have been resolved 
to reduce them, even though it should be necessary 
to lease that establishment for a few years. In the 
meantime, my lands now in a couirse of sale and set- 
tlement would accelerate the extinguishment of my 
debts, and in the end leave me a handsome clear 
property. It was also allowable for me to take into 
view collaterally the expectations of my wife : which 
have been of late partly realized. She is now en- 
titled to a property of between 2,000 and 3,000 
pounds (as I compute), by descent from her mother, 
and her father is understood to possess a large estate. 
I feel all the delicacy of this allusion, but the occasion, 
I trust, will plead my excuses, and that venerable 
father, I am sure, will pardon. He knows well all 
the nicety of my past conduct. 

Viewing the matter in these different aspects, I 
trust the opinion of candid men will be that there 
has been no impropriety in my conduct, especially 
when it is taken into the calculation, that my country 
establishment, though costly, promises, by the pro- 
gressive rise of property on this island and the 
felicity of its situation, to become more and more 
valuable. My chief apology is to those friends who 
have from mere kindness endorsed my paper dis- 
counted at the banks. On mature reflection I have 

Private Correspondence 479 

thought it justifiable to secure them in preference 
to other creditors, lest perchance there should be a 
deficit. Yet, while this may save them from even- 
tual loss, it will not exempt them from present in- 
convenience. As to this I can only throw myself 
upon their kindness and entreat the indulgence of 
the banks for them. Perhaps the request may be 
supposed entitled to some regard. In the event 
which would bring this paper to the public eye, one 
thing at least would be put beyond doubt. This is 
that my public labors have amounted to an absolute 
sacrifice of the interests of my family, and that in 
all pecuniary concerns the delicacy no less than the 
probity of conduct in public stations has been such 
as to defy even the shadow of a question. 

Indeed, I have not enjoyed the ordinary advan- 
tages incident to my military services. Being a 
member of Congress while the question of the com- 
mutation of the half pay of the army for a sum in 
gross was in debate, delicacy and a desire to be use- 
ful to the army by removing the idea of my having 
an interest in the question, induced me to write to 
the Secretary of War and relinquish my claim to 
half pay, which or the equivalent I have never re- 
ceived. Neither have I even applied for the lands 
allowed by the United States to officers of my rank. 
Nor did I ever obtain from this State the allowance 
of lands made to officers of similar rank. It is true 
that having served through the latter periods of the 
war on the general staff of the United States and not 
in the line of this State, I could not claim the allow- 
ance as a matter of course; but having before the 

480 Alexander Hamilton 

war resided in this State, and having entered the 
military career at the head of a company of artillery 
raised for the particular defence of this State, I had 
better pretensions to the allowance than others to 
whom it was actually made, yet it has not been 
extended to me. 

A. H. 

RULES FOR MR. PHILIP HAMILTON 

From the first of April to the first of October he 
is to rise not later than six o'clock; the rest of the 
year not later than seven. If earlier, he will de- 
serve commendation. Ten will be his hour of going 
to bed throughout the year. 

From the time he is dressed in the morning till 
nine o'clock (the time for breakfast excepted), he 
is to read law. At nine he goes to the office, and 
continues there till dinner time. He will be occu- 
pied partly in writing and partly in reading law. 

After dinner he reads law at home till five o'clock. 
From this time till seven he disposes of his time as 
he pleases. From seven to ten he reads and studies 
whatever he pleases. 

From twelve on Saturday he is at liberty to amuse 
himself. 

On Sunday he will attend the morning church. 
The rest of the day may be applied to innocent 
recreations. 

He must not depart from any of these rules with- 
out my permission. 

Private Correspondence 481 

LAST WILL AND TESTAMENT OF ALEXANDER HAMILTON 

In the name of God, Amen! 

I, Alexander Hamilton, of the State of New York, 
counsellor at law, do make this my last will and 
testament, as follows: First, I appoint John B. 
Church, Nicholas Fish, and Nathaniel Pendleton, of 
the city aforesaid, esquires, to be executors and 
trustees of this my will, and I devise to them, their 
heirs and assigns, as joint tenants, and not as ten- 
ants in common, all my estate, real and personal, 
whatsoever and wheresoever upon trust, at their 
discretion to sell and dispose of the same at such 
time and times, in such manner, and upon such 
terms as they the survivors and survivor shall think 
fit, and out of the proceeds to pay all the debts 
which I shall owe at the time of my decease, in 
whole, if the fund shall be sufficient, proportionally, 
if it shall be insufficient, and the residue, if any there 
shall be, to pay and deliver to my excellent and dear 
wife, Elizabeth Hamilton. 

Though, if it please God to spare my life, I may 
look for a considerable surplus out of my present 
property; yet if he should speedily call me to the 
eternal world, a forced sale, as is usual, may pos- 
sibly render it insufficient to satisfy my debts. I 
pray God that something may remain for the main- 
tenance and education of my dear wife and children. 
But should it on the contrary happen that there is 
not enough for the payment of my debts, I entreat 
my dear children, if they or any of them shall 
ever be able, to make up the deficiency. I without 

VOL. X. — 31. 

4^2 Alexander Hamilton 

hesitation commit to their delicacy a wish which is 
dictated by my own. Though conscious that I have 
too far sacrificed the interests of my family to pub- 
lic avocations, and on this account have the less 
elaim to burthen my children, yet I trust in their 
magnanimity to appreciate, as they ought, this 
my request. In so imfavorable an event of things, 
the support of their dear mother, with the most 
respectful and tender attention, is a duty all the 
sacredness of which they will feel. Probably her 
own patrimonial resources will preserve her from in- 
digence. But in all situations they are charged to 
bear in mind that she has been to them the most de- 
voted and best of mothers. In testimony whereof, 
I have hereunto subscribed my hand, the ninth day 
of July, in the year of our Lord one thousand eight 
hundred and four. 

Alexander Hamilton. 

Signed, sealed, published, and as and for his last 
will and testament in our presence, who have sub- 
scribed owl names in his presence. 

DoMiNiCK T. Blake. 

Graham Newell. 

Inez B. Valleau. 

Epitaph on a Tablet, by the Society of the Cincin- 
nati, IN Trinity Church, New York 

This Tablet 
does not profess to perpetuate 

the memory of a man, 

to whom the age has produced 

no superior ; 

nor to emblazon worth, 

eminently conspicuous in every feature 

of his country's greatness ; 

nor to anticipate posterity in their 

judgment of the loss which she has 

sustained by his premature death ; 

but to attest, 

in the simplicity of grief, 

the veneration and anguish which fill 

the hearts of the members of the 

New York State Society of 

Cincinnati 

on every recollection 

of their illustrious brother, 

Major-General 

Alexander Hamilton. 
INDEX TO 
PRIVATE CORRESPONDENCE 

Hamilton, Alex., to — 

Adams, John (1792), x., 15, 28; 

(1800) 382, 390 
Allison, William (1777), ix., 45 
Auldjo (1787), ix., 421 
Bayard, James Ashton (1800), 

x., 384, 402; (1801) 412; 

(1802) 432 
Bond, Phineas (1796), x., 191 
Boudinot, Elias (1778), ix., 147, 

149; (1792) 541; X., 14; 

(1796), 182 
Bradford, William (1795), x., 
Brooks, Colonel John (1779), 

ix., 168, 172 
Broome, Samuel (1788), ix.,442 
Burke, ^danus (1790), ix., 467 
Burr, Aaron (1804), x., 46 1,464 
Carrington,Col. Edward (1792), 

ix., 513; X., 5 
Carroll, Charles (1800), x., 378 
de Chastellux, Francois Jean 

(1785), ix., 403 
Chipman, Nathaniel (1788), 

ix., 438, 447 
Church, John Barker (1784), 

ix., 396 
Clinton, Gov. George (1778), 

ix., 122, 127; (1782) 263, 

266, 281, 308, 313, 339, 342, 

382, 388; (1804) 450-454 
Cruger, Tileman (1771), ix., 38 
Dayton, General Elias (1798), 

X., 305 
Dayton, Jonathan (1799), x., 
Dexter, Samuel (1800), x., 380 
Dickinson, John (1783), ix., 350 
Duane, James (1779), ix., 169, 

171, 176, 178; (1780) 192, 

204, 225 

Duer, William (1777), ix., 63; 

(1778) 132; (1790) 466; 

(1791) 493; (1792) 502, 510 
Duportail, General (1798), x., 
Editor of Evening Post (1802), 

.X., 441 
Fitzsimmons, Thomas (1784), 

ix., 399; (1794) X., 78 
Gates, General (lyTj), ix., 109, 
Goodhue, Benjamin (1791), ix., 
Gordon, Dr. Wm. (1779), ix., 

169, 188 
Gouvemet, Coimt (1798), x., 
Gouvemeur, Nicholas (1791), 

ix., 500 
Greene, General (1780), ix., 

194, 237; (1782) 301 
Greene, Mrs. General (1793), x., 

^54 

Greene, William, Governor of 
Rhode Island (1782), ix., 306 
Greenleaf (1796), x., 187 
Hamilton, Angelica (1793), x., 

57. 
Hamilton, James (1785), ix., 405 
Hamilton, James A. (1804), x., 

T.457 

Hamilton, Mrs. (Eliz. Schuyler), 
(1781), ix., 243-247; (1782) 
250,380; (1801) X., 421, 422, 

Hamilton, Philip (1791), ix., 

499; X., 480 
Hamilton (1797 ), x., 257 
Hancock, John (1777), ix., loi, 
Harrison, Col. R. H. (1789), ix., 

464; (1793) X., 30 
486 Index to Private Correspondence 

Hamilton, Alex., to — 

Hazard, Nathaniel (1786), ix., 
Henley, Colonel David (1779), 

ix., 167 
Heth, Colonel and others 

(1792), ix., 539; x.,324 
Hoffman, Josiah O. (1799), x., 
Izard, Captain George (1800), 

X., 361 
Jay, John, Pres. of Continental 

Congress (1779), ix., 159; 

(1783) 381; (1790) 473; 

(1792) x., 18, 29; (1793) 38, 

39; (1794) 66; (1800) 371 
Jefferson, Thomas (1793), x., 40 
King, Rufus (1787), ix., 423, 

457; (1791)485; (1792) 540; 

x.,3,6,20; (1793)33,40,46, 

50. 53; (1794) 69, 70, 77; 

(1795)89,91,98, 101,103,135; 

(1796) 141, 149, 161, 163, 

215. 237; (1797) 254, 266; 

(1798) 274, 283, 291, 321; 

(1800) 357; (1802) 437; 

(1804) 448 
Knox, General (1782), ix., 256; 

(1791) 497; (1799) X., 348 
Kjiox, Hugh (1777), ix., 82 
Lafayette, Marquis (1778), ix., 

137; (1781) 247; (1782) 303; 

(1789) 459; (1799) X., 336 
Laurens, Colonel (1778), ix., 

156; (1779) 176, 184; (1780) 

209; (1782) 280 
Lear, Tobias (1800), x., 356 
Lee, Henry (1789), ix., 465; 

(1800) X., 363 
Lee, Major (1779), ix., 166 
Livingston, Miss (1779), ix., 163 
Livingston, Robert (1777), ix., 

45. 77. 95 
Livingston, Wm. (1777), ix., 

59, 61; (1788) 422 
Madison, James, Jr. (1783), ix., 

377. 379; (1788), 427. 428, 

430. 432-437. 440, 453. 462 
Matthews, George, Gov. of 

Georgia (1794), x., 71 
McHenry, James (1796), x., 

171; (1797) 241; (1798) 281, 

307. 309. 317. 320; (1799) 

349; (1800) 388 
Meade, Richard K. (1782), ix., 

253, 282 

Mifflin, Thomas (1783), ix., 394 
Miranda, Francisco (1798), x., 

315 ^ 
Morris, Gouvemeur (1777), ix., 
45. 47. 54. 65, 68, 71, 74, 86, 
89, 99; (1784) 399, 402; 
(1788) 428; (1792) 537; 

(1800) X., 398, 401; (1801) 
407, 408, 419; (1802) 425, 
427, 429, 443 

Morris, Robert (1782), ix., 255, 
259, 262, 264, 282, 284, 286, 
288, 289, 292, 294, 295, 302 

Noailles, Vicomte de (1782), ix., 
Olney, Colonel (1793), x., 59 

Otis, Harrison Gray (1799), x,, 
Pickering, Timothy (1782), ix., 
287; (1789) 464; (1790) 468; 

(1791) 487; (1795) X., 133, 
139, 164, 184, 194; (1797) 
236, 237, 243, 246, 250, 261, 
266, 272; (1798) 275, 279, 
280,292,294, 297, 319; (1799) 
342, 343. 350; (1800) 366, 
369. 376, 391; (1803) 446 

Pinckney, Gen. Chas. Cotes- 
worth (1792), X., 22; (1800) 
368; (1802) 428, 444 
Putnam, General (1777), ix.,120 
Ross, James (1801), x., 405 
Rush, Dr. Benj. (1802), x., 424 
Rutledge, John (1800), x., 404 
Sands, Comfort (1782), ix., 261 
Schuyler, Elizabeth (1780), ix., 

202, 206, 208 
Schuyler, Philip (1781), ix., 

232; X., 457 
Sears, Isaac (1780), ix., 224 
Sedgwick, Theodore (1788), ix., 
446, 451; (1795) X., 89; 
(1797) 231, 239, 278; (1798) 
318, 327; (1799) 345; (1800) 
362, 371, 374, 375. 397; 

(1801) 420; (1804) 457 
Semphill, Messrs., & Co. (1786), 

ix., 415 
Seton, William (17 91), ix., 476, 
490, 491, 495, 496, 498; 

(1792) 501, 503, 506, 507, 509, 
512, 540; X., 16 

Short, William (1792), x., 31 
Smith, William (1796), x., 147; 

(1797) 224, 230, 253, 256; 

(1800) 364 

Index to Private Correspondence 487 

Hamilton, Alex., 

Steele, John (1792), x., 25 
Steuben, Baron (1778), ix., 155; 

(1779) 165, 170; (1780) 191, 

195. 199-201 
Stevens, Edward (1769), ix., 37 
Stirling, Lord (1778), ix., 142 
Stoddert, Benjamin (1798), x., 
Stillivan, John, Pres. of New 
Hampshire (1778), x., 458; 
(1788), ix., 432 
Talleyrand (1804), x., 455 
Taylor, Colonel (1799), x., 353 
Temay, Chevalier de (1780), 

ix., 196 
Thomas, John, Sheriff of West- 
chester (1786), ix., 416 
Troup, Robert (1795), x., 107 
Verplanck, Gulian (1792), ix., 
Wadsworth, Jeremiah (1787), 

ix., 422; (i'793) x., 56 
Walker, Martha (1791), ix., 484 
Washington, George (1777), 

ix., 103, III, 115, 119; (1778) 

138, 139. 144, 146, 179; 

(1780) 189, 195, 205, 226, 
228, 459; (1781) 238, 240, 
243; (1782) 251; (1783) 310, 
322-338, 385, 386; (1785) 
412; (1787) 417, 423. 425; 
(1788) 441, 444, 452; (1789) 
463; (1790) 469, 470, 472, 

474; (1791) 478, 479. 482, 
497; (1792) 542; x., 11; 

(1793) 36, 37; (1794) 63, 65, 
67. 79; (1795) 82, 84, 86, 87, 
122, 124, 129, 132, 137, 140; 
(1796) 142, 143, 145, 151, 
152, 155. 165, 171, 177, 180, 

186, 189-191, 198, 200, 204, 
206, 208, 229; (1797) 233, 
272; (1798) 284, 286, 295, 
299, 310, 320; (1799) 343. 
352, 356 

Washington, Mrs. Martha 

(1800), X., 360 
Wayne, Gen, Anthony (1780), 

ix., 200 
Wilkes, Israel (1785), ix., 406 
Williams, Gen. Otho H. (1779), 

ix., 166; (1792) 536 
Willink, Van Staphorst & Hub* 

bard (i795)> x., 84 
Winn (1790), ix., 468 
Wolcott, Oliver (1789), ix., 459; 

(1794) X., 76; (1795) 92, 102, 
104, 106, 107, 112— 117, 125, 
126; (1796) 145, 161, 170, 
173-176, 179, 182, 183, 185, 

187, 188, 196, 197, 201, 209, 
213, 218, 224; (1797) 238, 
248, 251, 256, 267, 270, 273, 
274; (1798) 288, 295, 304, 
312, 316; (1799) 346, 349. 
351; (1800) 365, 368, 377, 
383. 389. 392, 393; (1802) 442 

MISCELLANEOUS 

Burr, Aaron, to Hamilton, x., 460, 
Hamilton, Alex., to — 

, (1781), ix., 230; (1787) 

419; (1791) 477; (1793) X., 

58; (1796) 195; (1797) 227; 

(1801) 423 
County Treasurers (1782), ix., 

268, 285 
Creditor of William Duer 

(1793), X., 49 
Friend in Europe (1794), x., 78 

N. Y. Bank (1792), ix., 508 
N. Y. Congress (1776), ix., 40, 

42, 44, 56, 58 
U. S. Senate (1794), x., 60 
Pendleton, Major Nathan, to W. 

P. Van Ness, x., 466 
Statements concerning duel with 

Burr, X., 470, 471 
Van Ness, Maj. W. P., to Major 

Pendleton, x., 465, 468 
Washington to Hamilton (1795), 
X., 8s 

GENERAL INDEX 

VOLS. I.-X., INCLUSIVE 

(The index for Vols. XI. and XII., containing the Federalist, will 
be found at the close of Vol. XII.) 

Achaian League, ii., 223 

Adams, John, quarrel with Hamil- 
ton, vii., 309; administration 
of, 309, et seq.; opinion on 
British troops in U. S., iv., 313 ; 
slandered by Croswell, viii., 387 

Adams controversy (John Adams) 
vii., 309-365; Hamilton's at- 
tack on Adams, 309; letters to 
Adams, 364 

Additional supplies for 1792, com- 
munication to Congress, ii., 408 

Addresses, at Annapolis Conven- 
tion (1786), i., 335 ; on Clinton, 
candidate for N. Y. governor 
(1789), ii., 103, 113; (1801) 
viii., 223; to public creditors 
(1790), ii., 472 

Adet, French minister to U. S., vi., 
206, 213, 215, 217 

Aix-la-Chapelle, treaty of, v., 465 

Albany, representation from, ii., 
30; supervisors of, 103 

Alexander, practice regarding pri- 
vate debts in war time, v., 430 

Allegorical Device by Hamilton, 
vi., 332 

Allen, Ira, viii., 53 

America, British rule in, i., 3, et 
seq. {See Colonies and United 
States.) 

Americans, example to France, 
iv., 466; manufactures of, i.. 
144; property of, iv., 215; 
supplies, v., 78; uniformity of, 
ii., 38 

" Americanus," papers on U. S. 

obligations to France (1794), 

v., 74; vi., 215 
Amsterdam, bills, iii., 68, 71, 119; 

loans from, 93, 174 
Annapolis, Convention at, i., 243, 
"Answer, paper signed " Ameri- 
canus," in MtWriia (Dec, 1 796), 
on French decree against neu- 
trals, vi., 215 

An ti- Federalists, address of can- 
didates of (1801), viii., 223; 
character of, 224; sympathy 
with France, 225; charges 
against administration of U. S., 
231; administration of N. Y. 
by, 242 

Arrears of pay (1790), Hamilton 
to Washington on soldiers' pe- 
tition (Cabinet paper), ii., 327 

Atlantic States, commerce of, iv., 

327 ... 

Augustus, policy of, iv., 248 

Austria, i., 259; iii., 322; iv.,482; 

v., 258 
Austria, Empress of, result of 

death of, i., 259 
d'Autun, Bishop {see Talleyrand), 

iv., 3 

Bacon's insurrection in Virginia, 

i., 112 
Baldwin, Abraham, vi , 184 
Baltic, flax-seed from, i., 26 
Banks, essential to government, 
iii., 167; examples in other 
countries, i., 234; iii., 428; of 
490 

General Index 

Banks (Continued) 

North America, iii., no, 119, 
140; State, no, 140. (See Na- 
tional Bank and State names.) 

Barbeyrac cited, iv., 316, 397; v., 
Barre, i., 132 
Barthelemy, vi., 287 
Beaumarchais (de), supplies ftir- 

nishedby,iv., 430; vi., 322, 323 
Beckwith, Major, iv., 296, 298, et 

seq., 343 

Bellegarde, Marquis, right to hold 

Georgia land, v., 400 
Benson, Egbert, ii., 139 
Biddle, Charles, v., 4; vi., 351, 
Blackstone cited, i., 62, 89, 146, 
412; viii., 394 

Bland, Colonel, i., 300 

Blockade runners, v., 120 

Boston, i., 37, 38, 133, 140, 142; 
v., 370 

Bournonville, secretary of French 
legation, v., 67, 73 

Bradford, Wm., ii., 179 

Bradley, Major, vii., 162 

Breckenridge in Whiskey Rebel- 
lion, vi., 456 

British, colonization, v., 336; 
Courts of Admiralty, 369; 
creditors, compensation stipu- 
lated in Jay's treaty, 347. 
350; debts, proposition for 
sequestration of, 106; domin- 
ions defined, i., 85 ; evacuation, 
terms of, v., 146; Government, 
fallacious comparison with U. 
S., ii., 33; manufactures and 
shipping, i., 144, 148; protec- 
tion of industries, vi., 54; trade, 
colonial and coasting, 32; 
treaties, v., iSg, etseq.; vi., 72, 
73; viii., 238; troops in Amer- 
ica, iv., 313, 329, et seq. 

Buel, Major, vii., 162 

Building-tax, plan submitted to 
Sec. of Treasury, 1797, iii., 312 

Burbeck, Colonel, vii., 91 

Burgoyne, General, vi., 206 

Burke, Edmund, i., 132 

Burlemaqui, i., 61; iv., 397, 448 

Burlington, i., 276 
Burr, Aaron, published Hamil- 
ton's attack on Adams, vii., 
309; nomination for Gov. of 

N. Y., 1804, viii., 373; op- 
posed by Lansing, defeated 
(note), personal character and 
ancestry, 373 

Bussy, French minister to Lon- 
don, v., 464 

Butler, Major, vi., 408 

Butler, Col. R., letter from, i., 

304, 314 
Bynkerschoeck cited, v., 29, 36, 

41, 383, 41 1, 427, 429 ;vi., 87.131 

Caesar, ii., 461; iii., 5; v., 77 
Caldwell, John, deputy quarter- 
master, iii., 23 
Calhoun, J. C, free-trader, iv., 200 
Callendar, James, accused of 

slander, viii., 388 
Calonne (de), M., French Minister 

of Finance, iv., 421 
"Camillus" papers: Defence of 
Jay's treaty with England 
(1795), v., 189; state of affairs 
in U. S., 198; English breaches 
of treaty, 210; U. S. breaches, 
224; objects to be gained, 238; 
compromise, 241; Jay's bear- 
ing in England, 242 ; surrender 
of western posts, 251; reason 
for delay in evacuation, 264; 
indemnification, 273; citizen- 
ship, 284; peace of Utrecht, 
289; stipulations on trade and 
commerce, 292; fur trade, 305, 
320; Mississippi River, 327, 
338; compensation to British 
creditors, 347, 377; compen- 
sation to U. S. citizens, 361; 
seizure of U. S. vessels (1793), 
372; law of nations on restitu- 
tion, 382; commissioners ap- 
pointed, 388; right of British 
to hold land in U. S., 389; 
authorities quoted, 395; pri- 
vate debts in war, 404; opinion 
of jurist on confiscation, 421; 
necessity of protecting for- 
eigners in commerce, 442 ; other 
treaties, 456; articles relative 
to intercourse, commerce, and 
navigation^ 474 ; colonial laws in 
wartime, vi., 4; Genet's negoti- 
ations, 11; U. S. owes no debt 
to France, iv., 478; articles on 
trade , vi . , 2 1 , 5 9 ; import and ton - 
nage duties, 27,61; navigation, 

General Index 
"Camillus " papers (Continued) 
32, 59; East India trade, 39; 
relations between U. S. and Gt. 
Britain, 47 ; other commercial 
treaties, 56; consuls, 76; law of 
nations, 88 ; principles of armed 
neutrality, 94, 100; contraband 
articles, 114, 127; maritime 
regulations, 140, 150; enlist- 
ment in foreign service, 144; 
reception of ships of war, 148; 
foreign residents, 156; criminal 
refugees, 158; duration of arti- 
cles, 159; constitutionality of 
treaty, 160; Gerry's objection 
to Constitution, 184; consular 
convention of France, 195; 
authorship of papers, v., 189; 
vi., 3, 140 

Campo Formio, treaty of, vii., 91 

Canada, boundaries of, v., 321, 
322; communication with the 
sea, 310; through Champlain, 
331 ; criminal law, jury, i., 185, 
186; French law in, 181; fur 
trade, v., 273; legislature of, i., 
186; population of, 28; power 
of Catholic Church in, 187, 191 ; 
situation of, 37; tithes, 188, 
viceroy of, viii., 55 

Carriage tax, 1795, fragment of 
brief, viii., 378 

Cass, Major, vii., 162 

Catherine of Russia, vi., loi 

Cato attacks Jay's treaty, v., 273, 
307; vi., 59 

Chalmers's collection of treaties, 
vi., 92 

Champlain, Lake, i., 154; v., 331 

Charlemagne, i., 385 

Charles II., i., 106 

Charleston, evacuation of, viii., 81 

Charters, history of the various, i., 

93-113 
Chauvelin, M., note to Lord Gren- 

ville, iv., 403 
Chester County, indictment in, 

vi., 346 
Childs' newspaper, i., 424 
China, gold and silver in, iv., 18 
Cincinnati, Society of the, viii., 63 
" Civis to Mercator " : Letters on 

the public debt (1792), iii., 28 
Clarkson, Mayor, vi., 351 
Clavidre, Minister of Finance, iv,, 
Clay compromise, iv., 200 

Clingman connection with Rey- 
nolds affair, vii., 369-413, 417- 
Clinton, George, Governor of New 
York (1787^, viii., 5; candidate 
for re-election, 1789, ii., 103; 
addresses against, 103-130; let- 
ters of H. G. against, 133-175 
{see also Addresses and Letters 
of H. G.); candidate for N. Y. 
governor (1801), viii., 223; ad- 
ministration of, 242 ; antipathy 
to U. S. Constitution, 245 ; late 
Governor of N. Y. (1795), v., 
Clinton, Sir Henry, iv., 259 

Cochran, Wm., vi., 377 

Coinage and the Mint: Hamil- 
ton's report to Jefferson on 
establishment of mint (1790), 
iv., 3; suggestion of examina- 
tion of foreign coinage, 58 ; Ham- 
ilton to Washington (1795), 59 

Coke, Lord, quoted, i., 68; v., 
319, 391; viii., 29, 395, 406, 407 

Collectors of customs, instruc- 
tions to, regarding foreign ves- 
sels, v., 49 

Colonies, controversy with Eng- 
land, i., 7; independent, 64; 
declared by James I. not sub- 
ject to Parliament, 100; danger 
of variance among, 129; pre- 
parations for war, 167; act of 
General Assembly (1691), 172 

Commercial relations with Great 
Britain and France: Hamil- 
ton's draft of Smith's speech, 
(1794), iv., 205, 222-224 

Commercial treaties, vi., 72, 73 

Commissioners of Trade and 
Plantation, i., 107; appointed 
by the States, 336, 339 

Confederation, defects of, i., 215, 
223, 262, 303, 343, 381; ii., 
Congress, Speeches and resolu- 
tions in (1783), revenue, i., 299; 
State funds, 300; interest of 
creditors, 303; mutiny of 
troops, 303, 314, et seq.; resolu- 
tion for general convention, 
305; special session of, v., 54; 
treaty papers, demand for, viii., 
161. {See United States.) 
General Index 

Connecticut, charter of, i., io6, 
1 08; connection with sea, 276; 
excise duties in, ii., 344; legisla- 
ture of, 410 ; payments to U. S., 
211, 218; population in, 17; 
delegates fearexpenseofU. S.,40 

Continental Congress (1774), at- 
tacks on, i., 3; vindication of 
(see ' ' F-ull Vindication ' ' and 
"Farmer Refuted"), 3, 53 

Continental conventions, i., 123; 
money, 329; treasury, 222 

Continentalist: Series of papers on 
State matters (1781), i., 243; 
necessity for central power, 
245; situation of U. S., 253; 
evils to be apprehended, 254; 
provision for revenue, 262, 263 ; 
imports as a source of revenue, 
272; necessity of central regu- 
lation of trade, 277 

Contraband articles, v., 169 

Contracts, obligations of, ii., 332 

Convening Congress: Hamilton 
to Washington (1793), viii., no 

Convention of New York (see New 
York), ii., 3 (see also Annapolis 
and Federal) 

Cook, Edward, petitioner from 
Penn. concerning excise duty, 

ii-, 394 

Cornwallis, Lord, i., 255 

Corsica, i., 163 

Cortland, Lieutenant-Governor, 
ii., no 

Cotton, i., 157 

Court-martials, vii., 114 

Craig, in Penn. insurrection, vi., 
" Crassus, Lucius," Hamilton's sig- 
nature, viii., 252 

Croft, Sir James, case of, v., 319 

Croswell, Harry, indicted for libel- 
ling Jefferson, U. S. Pres., 
Hamilton's defence of (see also 
Libel) (1804), viii., 387; liberty 
of press, 389; definitions of 
libel, 394; common law and 
U. S. Constitution, 421 

Dallas, Alex. James, Secretary of 

Penn., iv., 200; v., 8 
Davis, Brigadier-General, vii., 8 
Deane, Silas, v., 459 
Debts, private, in time of war, v., 

145. 155. 162, 404 

"Decius," misstatement of, on Jay 
treaty, v., 307, 401 

Declaration of Independence, ii., 
De la Foret, M., iv., 365 

Delaware, commissioners to An- 
napolis Convention, i., 336; 
member from, in convention, 
413-415; number of repre- 
sentatives, ii., 17, 23; pay- 
ments to U. S., 211; river, i., 
276; v., 3 

Democrats, viii., 374 

Denmark, i., 231; iii., 322; v., 
201, 365 

" Detector" : Answer to "X. Y. Z." 
on French affairs (1798), vi., 
De Wolf, G., iii., 84 

Dollars, value of, iv., 7, et seq. 

Dorchester, Lord (Sir Guy Carle- 
ton), iv., 296, 299, et seq., 313, 
Douglass quoted, v., 29 

Doyer, Hendrick, ii., 385 

Drapier's letter, style compared 
to Hamilton's, i., 33 

Duane, James, letter to, i., 213; 
member of committee, 239 

Dumourier, vi., 287 

Dunlap, Wm., vii., 302 

Dunmore, Lord, iv., 259 

Du Plaine, M., French Consul at 
Boston, v., 58 

Durival, M., letter on French pay- 
ments, iv., 428 

Dutch company, proposition to 
buy U. S. paper, iv., 421 

Dutch republics, ii., 10 

Dutchess Coiuity, member from 
(Smith), ii., 30, 34 

Duties, general and special (sec 
Taxation), i., 126, 127; effect 
of, on commerce, 279; on im- 
ports, communication to Con- 
gress (1790), ii., 291; on vessels 
(see Improvement of revenue), 
v., 165 

Duties on imports, operation of 
act, communication to Congress 
(1790), ii., 291 

East India, goods in Canada, v., 
311; U. S. trade with, 311 

East India Company, i., 38, 47, 
132, 204 

General Index 
Egg Harbor, i., 276 

Election addresses (see Addresses) , 
ii., 103 

Elections, disadvantage of fre- 
quent, i., 407 

Electors, appointment of, left to 
State legislatures, ii., 168 

Elizabeth, charters given by, i.,93 

Ellery, Captain, vii., 218 

Elliot's Debates, ii., 39, 59, 73, 74, 
Ellsworth, Oliver, i., 300, 314, 318 

Emigrants from Catholic coun- 
tries, i., 195 

Emmett, act drawn up by, in 
1691, i., 172 

England, restricts exportations of 
com to France (1792), iv., 401; 
withdraws her minister, 400; 
dismissal of French minister, 
407. (See Great Britain.) 

English (see British) 

English common law, v., 429; re- 
publican societies, iv., 402 

Enlistment of foreign citizens, iv., 
Ephori, check on Senate in 
Sparta, ii., 22 

Esopus, biu-ning of, ii., 137 

Excise laws (see Taxation and 
Whiskey Rebellion) 

Explanation of treasury expendi- 
tures, viii., 122 

' ' Fact ' ' : article in National Gazette 
(1792), defence of funding pub- 
lic debt, iii., 40 

"Farmer Refuted": Advertise- 
ment, i., 53; second paper in 
defence of Congress (1775), 55; 
allegiance owed to British king, 
67; Parliament, 75; charters of 
colonies, 92, 100, 104; stamp 
act and revenue act, 131; 
British national debt, 146; re- 
sources and imports of America, 
157, 161; imports from France 
and Holland, 162 

Fauchet, successor to Genet, vi., 
14, 212 

Faulkner, William, house of, vi., 

Fay, of Vermont, viii., 53 
Federal Convention (1787), pro- 
positions for a constitution of 
government, i., 347; brief of 

speech on plan, 370; govern- 
ment, paper on, 335 
Federalist, quoted, vi., 186 
Federalist party, i., 243; v., 98; 
vii., 318; viii., 224, 229, 246, 
Fenno, editor of Gazette of United 
States, v., 74; vi., 32; vii., 230 
Finance, ii., 227; papers on (see 
Additional Supplies for 1792, 
Arrears of Pay, Building Tax, 
Civis, Coinage and the Mint, 
Ftinding System, Hamilton's 
Writings, Import Duty, Im- 
provement of Revenue, Loans, 
National Bank, Public Credit, 
Public Debt, Taxation, Vindi- 
cation of Funding System) 
Finance under Confederation, i., 

225, 231, 254; plans for, 301 
Findlay, James, vi., 375 
Fisheries, iv., 67, 205 
Fitzsimmons, Mr., ii., 179 
Florida, i., 26; iv., 326, 360 
Foreign fimd, bills upon, iii., 171 
Foreign influence, danger of, to a 

republic, iv., 481 
Foreign policy, v., 348; vi., 201 
Foreign relations: Speech on the 
treaty of Paris (1783), iv., 227; 
letters from "Phocion," discus- 
sion of treaty with England 
(1784), 230; right of Tories to 
hold land in the U. S., 231; 
danger of general descriptions, 
233; position of Tory citizens 
in N. Y., 236; alienism of in- 
habitants of N. Y., southern 
district, 266; Gt. Britain 
forced to make peace with 
U. S., 281; treaty of Paris, 
speech on, in N. Y. Legislature 
(1787), 291 
Foreigners, danger of investment 

in U. S. funds, viii., 454 
Fort Fayette, troops at, vii., 119, 
122; Wayne, 119, 122; Massac, 
119, 122; Knox, 119, 123; 
Pickering, 119, 123; Adams, 
Loftus Height, 119, 123; Stod- 
dard, 119, 123, 165; Niagara, 
120; Presque Isle, 125 
Fort Harman, treaty of, iv., 299 
Fort Montgomery, ii., 137 
Fox, Charles James, iv., 343; bill 
of libel, viii., 416 
General Index 

Fox, Joseph, deputy; marshal of 
Penn., report of, vi., 362 

France, aid in Am. Revolution, iv., 
359; vi., 206; action on private 
debts, v., 440; and Am. 
colonies (1775), i., 146, et seq., 
265, 270, 386; annexation of 
territory, iv., 405, 453, et seq.; 
attacks British commerce, vi., 
229; bills on, ii., 356; coinage 
in, iv., 32; colonial policy of, 
vi., 3; consular convention of, 
195; debt of, iii., 322; debt 
of U. S. to, 90, 103, 106, 
128, 163, 169; iv., 395; v., 
62; efforts to control U. S. 
election, vi., 206; endeavors to 
excite revolution in Eng., 207, 
281; excesses of, v., 103; ex- 
ecutive council charges to 
Genet, vi., 15, et seq.; and Gt. 
Britain, iv., 400; and Holland, 
399; ingratitude towards, 460; 
national convention, 401, et 
seq.; position of, in 1793, 466; 
relations with European nations, 
vi., 269; rate of exchange, iv., 
310; trade with, 346, 358; 
tables of U. S. commerce with, 
222-224; treaties of U. S. with, 
v., 14, 385, 456; war with Spain 
and Portugal, iv., 407; viola- 
tion of neutrality, vi., 249-253; 
wealth of, iii., 345 

France, papers on {see "America- 
nus," "Answer," " Detector," 
Foreign Relations, France, 
French, "No Jacobin," " Paci- 
ficus," "Pericles," "Stand," 
Warning) 

Franklin, Benjamin, iv., 349, 429; 
v., 460, 478; ix., 46 

Franklin, new State of, ii., 16 

Fraunces, A. G., vii., 376 

Frederick the Great, v., 439 

Freneau, Philip, iii., 28; vii., 
French, affairs in 1793 (Cabinet 
opinion on), iv., 369; faction, 
paper on France (1798), vi., 
328; king, suspension of, iv., 
363, 370; laws revised in Can- 
ada, i., 183; privateers, iv., 
414; vi., 217; Revolution, frag- 
ment on, viii., 425; opinion on, 
v., 75; uncertainty of success, 

iv., 386; 'an offensive war, 397; 
vessels, 346; sympathizers in 
U. S. Rev., vi., 328 

" Full Vindication," papers in de- 
fence of Congress (1774), i., 3; 
attacks on Congress by West- 
chester Farmer (Dr. Seabury), 
5, 20, 39, 43; American re- 
sources, 18; address to N. Y. 
farmers, 33 

Funding system, ii., 443, 444; 
vindication of (1791), iii., 3; 
defended, viii., 232, 240; de- 
fence of (1795), note, 430; gov- 
ernment debts after Revolu- 
tion, 430; advantages of fund- 
ing, 450; assumption of State 
debts, 467; Hamilton's plan, 
474; federal taxation essential, 
Ftmds, investment of, iii., 172, et 
seq. 

Fur trade, v., 309 

Gallatin, Albert, report on na- 
tional bank (181 1), iii., 493; 
Sec. of Treasury, viii., 288 

Gates, General, misfortune of, 
viii., 69 

Gazette of United States, letters in, 
iv., 432 

General Advertiser, v., 17 

Genet, M. Edm. Charles, ap- 
pointed minister to U. S.. iv., 
479; arrival of, 408, et seq.; be- 
havior, v., 45; declaration to 
Dallas, 8; excitement regard- 
ing, iv., 432; irregular meas- 
ures, v., 70; letters, report on, 
62; proposes treaty with U. S., 
vi., 11; refuses to promise 
about privateers, v., 3; refer- 
ence to affair of, vi., 102, 103, 
210, 291; threatens appeal to 
people of U. S., v., 17 

Genoa, vi., 240, 278 

Georgia, i., 26, 336; ii., 34; debt 
of, viii., 482, et seq.; ix., 16; 
laws on money, v., 350; pay- 
ments to U. S,, ii., 211; tax- 
ation in, iii., ^52 

German, Diet, 1., 252, 255, 382, 
394, 397; Confederacy, lesson, 
of, 385; ii., 10; elections in, 

i-, 392 
Germanic corps, i., 218 

General Index 
Gerry, Elbridge, member of Con- 
gress, ii., 463; moves amend- 
ments to U. S. Constitution, i., 
419; refuses to sign Constitu- 
tion, 421 ; vi., 184 

Giles, tool of Madison and Jeffer- 
son, iii., 62; viii., 353 

Gilleland, James, ix., 44 

Glaubeck (de), Baron, pension of, 
vii., 376 

Gloucester, i., 276 

Gore, letter to Lear, v., 58 

Government and the Constitution, 
letter to James Duane (1780), 
i., 213; result of letter, 239 

Grain, consumption of, in 
America, i., 153 

Grand, Ferdinand, iv., 429 

Grange, an English vessel, v., 19 

Graves, Rufus, vii., 91 

Great Britain, action on private 
debt, v., 440; aggressions of, 
vi., 246; coinage in, iv., 31; 
colonial system of, v., 292; vi., 
4; debt of, i., 146; iii., 322; 
detention of U. S. posts, viii., 
376; disadvantage in conquer- 
ing America, i., 165; excivSe 
duties in, ii., 344; extent and 
population of, v., 332; interest 
in America, 90; instructions to 
ships of war, 59; Jay treaty 
with U. S. {see Camillus) ; ju- 
diciary of, viii., 360; national 
bank of, iii., 362; Parliament 
of, i., 4, et seq., 119, et seq., 389; 
policy in Canada, 195; princi- 
ples of navigation act, vi., 25; 
privateers of , v. , 3 7 8 ; resources, 
85; state of, iv., 246, 281 ; steps 
to satisfy U. S., v.j 366; system 
of credit, viii., 446; trade with 
America, i., 116, et seq.; iv., 
220; treaty with France (1786), 
vi., 92, 142; with other coun- 
tries, v., 454, 462; vi., 92; 
with U. S. {see Camillus and 
Message), viii., 155, 161; and 
Vermont, 53, et seq.; violation 
of neutral rights, vi., 250; and 
West Indies, i., 156 

Greece, leagues among republics 
of, i,, 217; commonwealth of, 
246; Amphictyonic Council of, 
251, et seq.; not an example for 
U. S., 282 

Greene, Major-General, eulogium 
on, delivered before the Society 
of the Cincinnati (1789), viii., 

63 . 

Grenville, Lord, iv., 404; v., 136, 
Grotius, quoted, i., 61; v., 383, 

426; vi., 87, 117, 132 
Guilder, value of a, iii., 108 
Guildford Court-House, battle of, 

viii., 75, etseq. 

H. G., letters of, on Clinton, ii., 

133-175 
Habeas Corpus Act, i., 72 
Hait, Captain, iv., 299 
Haldimand, General, viii., 53 
Halloway on libel, viii., 405 
Hamilton, Colonel, implicated in 
Whiskey Rebellion, vi., 457, 458 
Hamilton, Alexander, chronology, 
i., xvii. ; drafts of Washington's 
speeches {see Washington) ; in- 
fluence on establishment of 
gov., 239; opposed to State 
sovereignty, 381; plan for 
national bank adopted, iii., 493 ; 
views on protection, iv., 67; 
effect on U. S. tariff, note, 198. 
{Writings arranged chronologi- 
cally, private correspondence ex- 
cepted): 1774 (in college). Vin- 
dication of Congress, i., 3 ; 1775, 
"Farmer Refuted," 55; Quebec 
bill, 181; 1780 (Washing- 
ton's aide-de-camp), Letters on 
government, 213; letter on 
national bank, iii., 319; 1781 
(quarrel with Washington) , 
Papers on system of gov., the 
Continentalist, i., 243; letter on 
national bank, iii., 342; 1782 
(admitted to N. Y. bar, ap- 
pointed Receiver of Taxes, en- 
tered Continental Congress) , 
Resolutions in N, Y. legislature 
for convention of States, i., 291 ; 
report on impost duty, ii., 179; 
1783 (in Congress), Speeches on 
revenue, i., 299; inefficacy of 
State funds, 300; public credit, 
301; appropriation of impost 
to army, 302; mutiny of 
troops, 303, 314, 318; resolu- 
tions for general convention, 
305 ; speech on treaty of Paris, 
General Index 

Hamilton, Alexander (Continued) 
iv., 227; report to Congress on 
military peace establishment, 
vi., 463; 1784 (in private life 
and practice), "Phocion" let- 
ters on treaty with England, iv., 
230; 1786 (delegate to Annapo- 
lis, elected to N. Y. legislature). 
Address at Annapolis, i., 335; 
order of Cincinnati, viii., 3, 63; 
1787 (member of N. Y. legisla- 
ture and delegate to federal 
convention) , Resolutions and 
speeches in N. Y. leg., i., 343; 
ii., 192; iv., 291; viii., 5-42; 
proposition for Constitution, i., 
347; draft of, 350; speeches on 
gov., 381; 1788 (delegate to 
N. Y. con.), Speech on Constitu- 
tion, ii., 3; draft of proposed 
ratification, 95; 1789 (ap- 
pointed Sec. of Treasury), Ad- 
dresses on election of N. Y. 
governor, ii., 103, 113; letters 
of H. G. on Clinton as governor, 
133-175; eulogium on Maj.- 
Gen. Greene, viii., 63; to Wm. 
Short, at Paris, iv., 294; 1790 
(Sec. of Treasury), Reports, ii., 
227,291; viii., 87; to Washing- 
ton, on back pay to army, ii., 
327; march of foreign troops 
through U. S., iv., 341; on 
Morris's mission, 297, 299; to 
Goodhue, on U. S. fisheries, 67; 
to Wm. Short, on loans, 302; 
1 791 (Sec. of Treasury), Vindi- 
cation of funding system, iii., 3 ; 
bank of U. S., 445 ; reports and 
letters on mint, iv., 3, 59; on 
manufactures, 70; to Jefferson, 
on French treaty, 345, 347, 
351 > 352; to Washington, on 
French payments, 354; 1792 
(Jefferson's hostility to Hamil- 
ton), Reports as Sec. of Treas., 
ii-. 353. 368, 408, 423, 426; iii., 
24, 28, 40, 46; to Washington 
on apportionment of repre- 
sentations, viii., 96; on Indian 
affairs, 100; explaining Treas- 
ury management, ii., 425; 1793 
(war between France and Eng- 
land), Loans, reports to House 
of Rep., iii., 61, 82, 126, 137, 
139, 178; defence of Sec. of 

Treas., 178; to Washington on 
relations with France, iv., 369, 
418; v., 61, 62; reception of 
French minister, iv, 408, 426; 
convening Congress, viii., no; 
Indian affairs, 109; to Jefferson 
on Henfield's sentence, iv., 417 ; 
on contracts with France, 428; 
on neutrality laws, v., 12; 
privateers, 46, 58; letters on 
Genet, " Pacificus," iv,, 432- 
489; "No Jacobin," v., 17-49; 
instructions to customs collec- 
tors, 49; 1794 (Jay treaty, 
Whiskey Rebellion), Loans, re- 
ports to House of Rep., iii., 179, 
180, 185, 187; papers on rela- 
tions with France, v., 74, 86; 
to Washington on Treasury 
affairs, iii., 183, 190, 194; on 
possible war with Great Britain, 
v., 97; Jay treaty, 115, 121, 
123, 129, 138; captured vessels, 
131-133; to Randolph, Secre- 
tary of State, 119, 135, 136; 
letters and papers on Whiskey 
Rebellion, vi., 339-460; resigna- 
tion, iii., 199; 1795 (resigns 
Sec. of Treas. and resumes law 
practice). Reports as Sec. of 
Treas., 199, 200, 259, 301; 
to Washington on Jay treaty, 
v., 138; defence of Jay treaty, 
"Horatius," 181; "Camillus," 
189-vi., 197; explanation of 
Treas. methods, viii., 122; on 
carriage tax, 378; defence of 
the funding system, 429; 1796 
(in private life), Papers on 
France, vi., 206, 215; 1797, 
Papers on France, 229-259; 
Reynolds pamphlet, defence of 
himself, vii., 369; 1798 (ap- 
pointed Inspector-General of 
Army), Papers on France, vi., 
2 5 9-3 1 8 ; military matters, 
483-vii., 45; 1799 (Washing- 
ton's death), On military 
matters, 45-194; paper on 
war in Europe, vi., 330; alle- 
gorical device, 332; 1800 (re- 
tires from army), Letters and 
papers on military matters, 
vii., 196-224; paper on John 
Adams, 309; letters to John 
Adams, 364, 365 

General Index 
Hamilton, J. C, History of the Re- 
public, i., 301; vi., 140 

Hammond, letter from, on com- 
pensation to vessels, v., 131 

Hand, Gen. Edw., vi., 351 

Harper in N. Y. Assembly, viii., 
18, 21 

Harrison, Col. R. H., vii., no 

Heinecius, quoted, vi., 87, 117,131 

Helvetic league, i., 252 

' ' Helvidius, ' ' letter signed, iv. , 43 2 

Henfield, Gideon, case of, iv., 418; 
v., 56 

Henry, Patrick, vii., 255 

Heth, William, balance of U. S. 
money in hands of, iii., 172 

High sea, limits of, v., 27 

Highways, viii., 262 

Hill, coast siu-vey, vii., 44 

Hobbes, i., 61 

Holcroff, John, vi., 459 

Holland, i., 26, 152, 169, 259; iv., 
310, 483; v., 259; vi., 278; and 
her colonies, v., 485; debt to, 
iii., 197; interest in America, 
v., 90; loans from, iii., 90; 
national debt of, ii., 428, 442, 
449 {see also United Nether- 
lands); iv., 399; v., 53 

Holt, Lord, on libel, viii., 403, 405, 
Holt's Journal, i., 181, 199 

Homes, H. A., State Librarian of 
N. Y., ii., 113 

Hoops, Major, vi., 486 

" Horatius" on Jay treaty, v., 181 

House of Representatives, order 
of, ii., 337; resolution of, 227. 
{See Congress and United 
States.) 

Howe, Major-General, i., 314 

Howell, member from R. I., vii., 
Hubbard, banker, iv., 302 
Hudson Bay territories, boun- 
daries of, v., 321 
Hudson River, foreign vessels not 
allowed above New York, v., 
Hume, quoted, i., 73, 81, 269, 409; 

iii., 346 
Hunt, Richard, sentence of, vii., 

76, 100 
Hunter, Governor, vii., 221 
Huntingdon, General, vii., 47 
Hylton vs. United States, viii., 378 

VOL. X.— 32. 

Ignardi, consul at Cadiz, vi., 231 
Import duty {see Taxation), ii., 

291; v., 129 
Imports, registry of, ii., 306 
Impost duty, report on, ii., 17^; 
eligible mode of taxation, 1., 
271; not unfavorable to com- 
merce, ii., 189; officers for col- 
lecting, 182; product of, 214; 
rate of, 186. {See Taxation.) 
Improvement of revenue, com- 
munication to Congress (1795), 
iii., 301 
Independence of Vermont {see 

Vermont), viii., 42 
Indian affairs, viii., 100, 154 
Indians, attack of, threatened, 
vi., 408; depredations of, iv., 
298; liberty to trade, v., 289; 
war with, iii., 46, 105 
Industry and commerce {see also 
Taxation) : fisheries, Hamilton 
to Goodhue (1790), iv., 67; 
manufactures, report to Con- 
gress (1791), expediency of 
protection, 70; methods of 
protection, 143; articles to be 
protected specified, 164 
Inspectors of customs, ii., 308, 323 
Iredell, James, associate justice, 

v., 12 
Ireland, i., 23, 151 
Italy, commerce of, vi., 86 

Jackson, Major, instructions to, i., 
317; vii., 198 

Jackson, Andrew, attack on na- 
tional bank (1836), iii., 494 

Jacobin club in Paris, iv., 372 

James I., charters given by, i., 94 

Jane of Dublin, vessel taken by 
French privateer, v., 380 

Jay, John, character of mission to 
England, iv., 229; v., 121, 134, 
138, 189; vii., 359; treaty of 
{see Camillus) 

Jefferson, Thomas, iii., 28, 191; 
iv., 302; v., 460, 478; vi., 106; 
viii., 232, 237 ; answer to Belle- 
garde and Meziere case, v., 400; 
arr^t of, iv., 219; attacked by 
Hamilton (1792), vii., 229; 
communication with Fraunces, 
376; commercial report, v., 
74; efforts to discredit Hamil- 
ton, iii., 62; free trader, iv.. 
General Index 

Jefferson (Continued) 

199; on Genet, 421, 425; v., 
54; vi., 13; Jay treaty, v., 387; 
message to Congress (1801) ex- 
amined, viii., 246; letter to 
Hammond, v., 379; on Rey- 
nolds, vii., 471; trade with 
Spain, iv., 358; retires to 
Monticello, v., 119 

Jenkins, Leoline, life and papers, 
v., 29, 41, 43 

Johnson, Robert, assault on, vi., 
Johnston, Governor, i., 202 

Jones in N. Y. Assembly, viii., 18, 
19, 22, 25, 26 

Joseph, Emperor, and the Nether- 
lands, iv., 399 

"Juba," v., 18 

Kent, Duke of, visit to America, 

vii., 221 
Kentucky, ii., 16, 400; viii., 107 
Kiddoe, James, vi., 378 
King, Charles I., i., 100, 104, 105; 
Charles II., bill framed by, 112 ; 
makes Carolina a principality, 
109; James's answer to Parlia- 
ment, 100; council at Ply- 
mouth, 103; arbitrary power 
of, in Canada, 186; William, 
no; of Prussia, ii., 11 
King, Rufus, author of eight 

"Camillus" papers, v., 476 
King vs. Home, viii., 414 
King vs. Tutchin, viii., 414 
Kirkpatrick, Major, vi., 383 
Knox, Maj.-Gen., vi.,484; viii., 96 
Knyphausen at Springfield, viii., 
La Fayette, Marquis, iv., 296, 472 
Lake of the Woods, v., 340 
Lancaster, meeting at, i., 303, 

^ 315-317 

Lands, disposal of unoccupied, i., 
Lansdowne, Lord, on libel, viii., 
Lansing refuses to sign U. S. Con- 
stitution, i., 421 

Lansing or Burr, viii., 373; sup- 

Sort of Lansing in election for 
\. Y. governor (1804), Burr 
democrat from policy, 374; 
effect of election by aid of 

Federalists, 374; Lansing's per- 
sonal character, 376 
Laurens, case of, vi., 254 <ioS'-6 

Law, John, Mississippi scheme, i., 

233; iii-, 332. 

Law briefs, validity of British de- 
tention of U. S. Western posts, 
viii., 376 

Lear, Mr., iii., 192; viii., 150 

Ledyard, Isaac, letter of, iv., 250 

Lee, on captures, v., 29 

Lee, Arthur, i., 300; v., 459 

Leeds, Duke of, relations with the 
Pinckneys, vii., 323 

Le Grand, Monsieur, banker, ii., 
Lennox, Major, vi., 351, 352 
Lewis, Morgan, elected governor 

of N. Y. (1804) note, viii., 373 
Lexington, Greene at, viii., 66 
Libel, law of (see Croswell) , brief in 

Croswell case (1804), viii., 383; 

Hamilton's speech on, 387; 

definitions of, 394; province of 

judge and jury in, 397 
Little Democrat, privateer, v., 47, 

Little Sarah, French privateer, v., 

^ 3. 5. 39 

Loans, i., 265; (i) report to Con- 
gress (1792), U. S. finances, ii., 
353; money owed to foreign 
officers, 365; funding of West- 
em lands, 366; (2) resolutions 
on, in Congress (1793), report of 
Sec. of Treas., iii., 61; re- 
sponsibility of Sec, 83; Dutch 
loan, Wm. Short, 83, 130; pay- 
ments to France, 85; terms of 
foreign loans, 98 ; documents 
of Sec. of Treasury, 126; acts of 
Washington relative to Treas- 
ury, 129, 130; (3) report to 
Congress (1793), 139; rela- 
tions between banks and U. S. 
Treasury, 140, 159; foreign and 
domestic loans, 138, 148, 154; 
import duties, 165; sinking 
fund, 170; (4) "Observer's" 
defence of Sec. of Treas., 178; 
Hamilton's request for investi- 
gation, 179; report on request, 
180; Hamilton to Washington 
on loans, 183, 190, 194; Hamil- 
ton to Congress, 185, 187; acts 
of legislature regarding, iv., 302 

General Index 
Local governments, ii., 207 
Locke, John, i,, 61 
Loftus Height, vii., 154, 163 
London, N. Y. Packet Company, 

i-. 243 
Loughborough, Lord, on libel, 

viii., 396, 400, 415 
Louis XIV., edicts of, i., 270 
Louis XVL, iv., 385, 474 
Louisiana, iv.. 199, 326; vi., 284 
Lovely Lass, ship captured by- 
French privateer, v., 380 
Lynde, Cornelius, vii., 91 
Lyons, Lord, asked permission to 
march troops through Maine, 
iv., 3^3 

McCulloch, John, vi., 382 

McDougall, General, i., 226 

McHenry, Sec. of War, letters to 
(see Military papers), vi., 483; 
dismissed by Adams, vii., 349 

McPherson, General, vii., 45 

Madeira wine, i., 43 

Madison, James, ii., 179, 463, 469, 
iii., 191; iv., 199; vi., 184; vii., 
255; viii., 232, 237; aid to 
Freneau, vii., 237 ; answers " Pa- 
cificus," iv., 432; author of 
Federalist, viii., 337; debates, 
i., 299; efforts to discredit 
Hamilton, iii., 62; reports, i., 
370, 393, 404, e^ 5^9-; resolu- 
tions in Congress, iv., 205, 220; 
v., 74 

Magna Charta, i., 69, 112 

Malmedi, ix., 63 

Malsherbes, M. de, counsel of 
French king, iv., 371 

Mansfield, Lord, on libel, viii., 
392, 399, 408, 425 

Manufactures, encouragement of, 
in U. S. (see Industry and Com- 
merce, also Taxation), iv., 70- 
Marat, fate of, v., 76 

Marblehead, i., 168 

Marius, v., 77 

Marshy Lake, v., 340 

Martin, quoted, v., 28 

Martin, Luther, of Maryland, i., 
Maryland, bank of, iii., 141; 
charter of, i., 100, 104; com- 
missioners to Annapolis con- 
vention, 336; member from, 

390; representatives from, ii., 
17; legislature, 53; payments 
to U. S. Treasury, 211 

Mason, Col. Geo., ii., 426; refused 
to sign Constitution, vi., 184 

Massachusetts, i., 124, 336, 384; 
Assembly of, ii., i6; bank of, iii., 
141; charter of, i., 100, no; 
debt of, ii., 440; viii., 482, 485; 
excise duties in, ii., 344; pay- 
ments to United States Treas- 
■ury, 211, 215; taxation in, iii., 
352; viii., 487 

Massachusetts Bay, petition of, 
i., 9 

Maury, Isaac, v., 59 

Mediterranean, i., 146, 150 

"Mentor," answer to " Phocion," 
iv., 250 

Mercator, letters of Hamilton to, 
iii., 28 

Mercer, John Francis, dread of 
coalition between France and 
England, iv., 228 

Merchandise, ii., 306, 315 

Meredith, Samuel, iii., 117 

Mexican War, iv.. 201 

Meziere, Chevalier, right to hold 
Georgia land, v., 400 

Mifflin, governor of Pennsylvania 
(1794), vi., 394, 427; vii., 353 

Military defences, viii., 261 

Military papers: Military peace 
establishment (note), vi., 463; 
detailed plan for (1783), 467- 
472; comments on plan, 472- 
482; letters on military mat- 
ters (Hamilton, Inspector and 
Major- General) : To McHenry, 
Sec. of War (1798), vi., 483, 
485; vii., 3, 42, 44, 47, 50; 
(1799) 53. 58, 59. 62, 69, 76, 77, 
80, 85, 87, 88, 94, 95. 97. 98, 
100, 103, 105, 107, III, 113, 
125, 134, 141, 144, 149, 170, 
179, 187-189, 194; (1800) 197, 
203, 206, 208, 215, 221, 224; 
Adams, John (1800), 216; Jay, 
John (1798), vi., 486; De No- 
ailles (1800), vii., 207, 212; 
Gibbs, Caleb (1799), 159; Gunn 
(1798), 41, 45; Hamtranck 
(1799), 82, 89; Harrison, Col. 
R. H. (1799), no; Moore, Col. 
(1799), 140, 147, 148; Pinckneyj 
Gen. (1800), 190, 213; Rivardi 
General Index 

Military papers (Continued) 

(1800), 221; Smith, Col. (1799), 
170; (1800) 196, 211; Stevens, 
Col. (1799), 86; Stoddert, Sec. 
of Navy (1799), 102; Swan, 
Caleb (1800), 218; Washing- 
ton (1798), vi., 486; (1799) 
vii., 67, 77, 90, 92, 117, 174; 
Wilkinson (1799), 64, 67, 75, 
154; circulars, 61, 83, 102, iii, 

116; to ^ — , 92; regtila- 

tions respecting supplies and 
extra expense, 135; paper on 
military step, 200 
Miller, Colonel Henry, vi., 351 
Minerva, "Camillus" papers pub- 
lished in, vi., 32 
Mississippi, i., 26, et seq., 155; 
navigation of, iv., 334; v., 127", 
negotiations on, iv., 359; posi- 
tion of, v., 338; trade on, 325 
Molasses, price of, ii., 384 
Monarchy, dangers of, in United 

States, v., 91 
Monmouth, battle of, viii., 69 
Monroe, James, connection with 
Reynolds affair, vii., 369, 397; 
documents from, on Reynolds 
affair, 413, 417, 452, 455. 462, 
464, 473, 475. 477 ^ ., 
Montague, James, Hamilton s 

nom-de-plume, iii., 341 
Montesquieu, i., 61, 185, 374 
Montgomery County, ii., 35 
Monticello, Jefferson retires to, v., 

"9 . , . 

Montmonn, quoted, vi., 16 
Montreal, navigation to, from 

Quebec, v., 299 
Morgan, General, viii,, 73, ^t seq. 
Morocco, Emperor of, viii., 154 
Morris, Chief-Justice, ii., no 
Morris, Gouverneur, ii., 289, 426; 

iii., 81, 128; iv.,343; v., 56,60; 

vi., 348 
Morris, Robert, i., 226, 239, 266; 

iii., 319 
Moustier, Count de, iv., 296 
Muhlenberg, F. A., connection 

with Reynolds affair, vii., 369, 

397, 413; documents from, on 

Reynolds affair, 412, 417, 452, 

453. 455 
Murray nommated envoy to 

France, vii., 337 

Mutiny of troops, i., 303, 314 

National bank, necessity of, ii., 
314; proposed, i., 267; estab- 
lished (1781), iii., 493; subse- 
quent history of, 493, 494; pre- 
sent system, 495 

National bank, papers on: (i) 
Hamilton to Robert Morris 
(1780), critical position of gov- 
ernment, iii., 319; necessity for 
a foreign loan, 325. (2) To 
Robert Morris (1781), 342; 
Morris, appointment, 343; pro- 
portion of cash to revenue, 
347; taxes of year 1780, 354; 
annual expense of civil and 
military establishments, 355; 
institution of national bank, 
360; plan for bank submitted, 
367; solvency of States, 385. 

(3) ToCongress(i79o),national 
banks, 388 ; answer to charge of 
usury, 397; banks in U. S., 415; 
presidents of banks in foreign 
cities, 428; plan for national 
bank of U. S. submitted, 431. 

(4) Washington to Hamilton, 
on constitutionality of national 
bank, 443. (5) Hamilton to 
Washington (1791), constitu- 
tionality of national bank, 445 

National credit must be retrieved, 
ii., 231 

National Gazette, iii., 28; v., 18; 
vii., 229, 236, 239 

Naturalization of foreigners, viii., 
Naughton, Sir Robert, protects 
Puritans, i., loi 

Neckar, M., praises British Con- 
stitution, i., 389 '.: 

Negroes, representation for, ii., 14 

Netherlands {see Holland), i., 218; 

iv., 399 
Neutral nation, power to trade, 

iv., 416 
Neutrality, definition of, iv,, 434 
Neville, General, vi., 363 
Neville, Colonel Presley, vi., 385, 
New England, settlement of, 1., 

loi; intolerance of, 196; pro- 
tection in, iv,, 200 
New Hampshire, i., 336; ii., 7, 40, 

359; viii., 48 
New Jersey, i., 336, 381, 385; n., 

212, 218; v., 349 

General Index 
New London, i., 276 

Newspaper letters on public mat- 
ters, i., 141 

Newton, Sir Isaac, estimate of 
proportion between gold and 
silver, iv., 20 

New York, Convention of, on U. 
S. Constitution (1788), ii., 3; 
speech on compromises of Con- 
stitution, radical defects of 
Confederation, 3 ; confederacies 
liable to wars, 10; State in- 
terests, 12; check on increase 
of representation, 19; advan- 
tages of large districts of elec- 
tion, 26; powers of national 
government and State legisla- 
tion, 34; speech on U. S. 
Senate (1788), 40; stability- 
essential to government, 41; 
relation between senators and 
State legislatures, 48 ; danger 
of factions, State of Rhode 
Island, 53 ; ratio of representa- 
tion, 62; leading objects of 
federal government, 63 ; State 
governments, 68 ; brief of argu- 
ment on U. S. Constitution, 91 

New York, foreign vessels in, v., 
297; governor of, ii., 103; v., 
194; viii., 242; legislature, 
speeches in, i., 291, 343 ; iv., 291 ; 
viii., 5, 42; payments to U. S. 
Treasury, ii., 211; State debt, 
215; iii., 21; southern dis- 
trict of, iv., 254; Tories in, 230, 
et seq.; and Vermont, viii., 42, 
et seq. 

Nichols, Colonel Francis, vi., 351, 
"No Jacobin" articles by Hamil- 
ton in Daily Advertiser (1793), 
on career of Genet, minister 
from France, in U. S., v., 17 

North Carolina, i., 336; ii., 7; vi., 
342; currency of, ii., 211, 215, 
216; laws on money, v., 350; 
officers of, ii., 328; opposition 
to excise duties, vi., 339, et seq. 

Oaths, dangers of, ii., 343 
"Observer," reply to Mr. Find- 
ley's accusations, iii., 177 
Officers on half-pay, i., 228 
Ohio River, importance of, vii., 
157, 166 

Osgood, Mr., iv., 229 
Otto, Mr., iv., 422 

"Pacificus," letters of Hamilton 
in U. S. Gazette (1793), defence 
of neutrality proclamation, iv., 
432; power of President to 
issue it, 439; proclamation in- 
consistent with French treaty, 
445; French aggressions, 450; 
France engaged in war with all 
Europe, 456; U. S. debt to 
France, 460; state of French 
affairs, U. S. influence, 465; 
Louis XVI. and France, 472; 
necessity for U. S. to avoid war, 
484; papers under Hamilton's 
signature, vii., 369 

Pennsylvania, affairs in, vi., 394, 
429; commerce of, i., 276; 
compared with N. C, 386; con- 
tribution to government, ii., 7; 
excise duties in, 344; vi., 339, et 
seq.; Farmer, i., 126; insur- 
rection (see Whiskey Rebellion) , 
vii., 351; payments to U. S. 
Treasury, ii., 211, 218 

Pereizius, viii., 403 

" Pericles," paper by Hamilton on 
cession of Louisiana to France, 

vi., 333 

Peters, Richard, Judge, commit- 
tee concerning mutiny, i., 314; 
vi., 448 

Petition presented by officers to 
Washington, asking for back 
pay, ii., 327 

Petitions, futility of, i., 9-14; 
from London and Massachu- 
setts, 9, 10; Continental Con- 
gress, 29 

Philadelphia, charter, i., no; 
mutiny at, 303; convention at, 
339; ii., 95", yellow fever in, 
viii., no 

Philip of Macedon, i., 385; ii., 10 

"Phocion," letters on relations 
with England (1784), iv., 230; 
disfranchisement of tories, 230; 
dangers of disqualifications, 
247 ; inhabitants of southern 
N. Y., 254; British subjects, 
258; breaches of treaty, 264; 
danger of British supremacy in 
America absurd, 281; effect of 
letters, 250 

C> y>w*'^'x-s^ 

)C w^o 
General Index 

Phocian war, i., 385 

Pichegru, vi., 287 

Pinckney, Charles, vii., 325 

Pinckney, General Charles Cotes- 
worth, vii., 6, 8, 65, et seq., 159, 
174, 187, 213, 309, 323, 329, 362 

Pinckney, Thomas, v., 59; vii., 
318, et seq., 362 

Pitt, William, i., 128 

Pittsburgh, meeting in, vi., 341 

Pittsburgh Gazette, vi., 359, 368, 
Platasans, incident of, iv., 238 

Plymouth, original constitution 
of, i., 102 

Poland, i., 392; iv., 241; v., 90; 
vi., 216 

Portugal, i., 145, 147; iv., 358, 
407; v., 485; vi., 148, 283, 320 

Postlethwait quoted, i., 144, 148 

Postmaster-General, new plan, ii., 
Presbyterians, i., 190 

Presidential etiquette, Hamilton 
to Washington (1789), Wash- 
ington to Hamilton in reply, 
viii., 87 

Price, Dr., quoted, iii., 346 

Prince William Henry, vessel 
taken by French privateer, v., 
Prince's Bay, i., 276 

Princeton, Congress at, i., 323 

Privateering, Cabinet meeting on, 
v., 3 

Privateers, v., $, et seq., 19, 380; 
vi., 140 

Proclamation of neutrality, ob- 
jections to, iv., 433, et seq. 

Property tax contrary to princi- 
ples of public credit, ii., 353 

Providence, Bank of, iii., 141 

Prussia, i., 231 ; iii., 322; iv.,482; 

v., 458 
Public credit {see also Loans), i., 
301 ; report on, by Hamilton as 
Sec. of Treasury (1790), ii., 
227; nature of U. S. debt, 231; 
classes of creditors, 236; rates 
of interest, 257, 258; proposi- 
tion for loan, 260; interest to 
be paid from duties, 272; as- 
sumption of State debts, 286; 
importance of this report, 289; 
schedules, 290; report to Con- 
gress (1790), deficit for 1791, 

337; plan of supplying deficit, 
337; duty on spirits, 338; ex- 
cise versus other duties, 340; 
to Supervisors of Boston on 
inspection of U. S. Treasiury, 
352; report to Senate (1795), 
iii., 199 ; plan for redemption of 
debt, 201; duties, 202, et seq.; 
Bank of U. S., 203 ; U. S. Post- 
Office, 207 ; provisions for fimd- 
ing debt, 211; application of 
revenues, 216; proceeds of 
Western lands, 219; loans, 221; 
propositions for completing sys- 
tem of public credit, 237; dis- 
cussion of propositions, 247 

Public debt (see Public credit), 
iii., 28; v., 419; viii., 235, 239; 
report of Sec. of Treasury to 
Congress (1792), iii., 46; meas- 
ures for regular redemption of 
public debt, 46 

Public lands, report to U. S. 
Senate, objects of disposition, 
viii., 87 

"Publius," letters (1778) incited 
by the feebleness and laxity of 
Congress, i., 199; to member of 
Congress, personal attack, 201 

Puff endorf quoted, i., 61 ; iv., 315, 
382, 398, 459; vi., 218 

Puritans in Holland, arrival in 
America, i., loi 

Quartermaster-General, i., 231 

Quebec, navigation to, from Mon- 
treal, v., 299 

Quebec bill, remarks on (1775), 
Canada under the French, i., 
181; Roman Catholic religion 
established, 193; dangers to 
New England from Quebec 
bill, 196 

Questions and answers {see 
United States), ii., 427 

Randolph, Edmund, i., 335, 382, 
393,421; iii., 191; v., 119; vi., 
184, 408,445; viii., 96 x>ii'\'^3 '5-. 

Rawle, William, v., 131; vi., 448 

Raymond, Lord, on libel, viii., 
405, 408 

Red Lake, v., 340 

Red Stone Old Fort, meeting at, 
vi., 359 

General Index 
Religion, difference between, tol- 
erated and established, i., 190 

Report on public credit, ii., 227; 
schedules to, 290 

Representatives, apportionment 
of: Hamilton to Washington 
(1792), answer to President's 
request for opinion on constitu- 
tionality of act of apportion- 
ment, viii., 96 

Republican, sloop, v., 57 

Resolutions for a general conven- 
tion of the States, passed by 
N. Y. legislature, July, 1782, i., 
Revenue {see Taxation and Public 
credit); i., 131, 139; ii., 341, 
Revenue system, speech on a 
grant of impost to U. S. for 
twenty- five years, in N. Y. 
legislature (1787), ii., 192 

Reynolds pamphlet, Hamilton's 
refutation of charges of specu- 
lation, vii., 369; public and 
private accounts, 374; his real 
crime in the Reynolds case, 
378; Reynolds' letters, 391; 
History of U. S. for 1796, 369, 
443 ; Clingman's evidence, 403 ; 
Hamilton's desire to avoid ex- 
posure; affidavits: Muhlen- 
berg's, 412; Monroe and Ven- 
able's, 413; Mary Williams's, 
467; Noah Webster, Jun's, 469; 
letters: to Hamilton from Mon- 
roe, 452, 455, 461, 462, 464, 473, 
476, 478; from Muhlenberg, 
451, 452, 456; from Mrs. Rey- 
nolds, 423, 429-431, 433, 438; 
from James Reynolds, 423, 425- 
428, 431, 434-441; from Vena- 
ble, 453; from Hamilton to 
Monroe, 451, 458, 461-463, 471, 
475, 477, 478; from Clingman 
to Wolcott, 448; Reynolds to 
Wolcott, 467; from Jefferson, 
471; statements: from Seckel, 
442 ; from Wolcott, 443 

Rhode Island, charter, i., 106; 
debt of, ii., 359;^ v., 349; viii., 
482, et seq.; objections to im- 
posts, i., 302; ii., 148, 179; 
commissioners to Annapolis, i., 
336; representation from, ii., 
17; legislature of, 53; objec- 

tion to U. S. appointing inter- 
nal officers, 182; payments to 
U. S. Treasury, 211, 215 

Rives's Life of Madison, i., 301 

Robespierre, v., 76 

Roland, privateer, v., 58 

Roman law, v., 424; viii., 403 

Rome, example of, i., 15, 87, 282; 
ii., 223 ; vi., 285 

Rutgers and Waddington, suit of, 
v., 227 

Rutherforth, Institutes of Natural 
Law, quoted, vi., 134 

Rutledge, John, motion and reso- 
lution, i., 302 

Russia, i., 145, 147, 167, 231; iii., 
St. Clair, General, i., 323; ii., 155; 

letter from, iii., 105 
St. Domingo, iii., 95, 107, 122, 

163, 169, et seq.; iv., 362 
St. Lawrence, i., 26 
Salem, petition from, ii., 384 
Salt tax, ii., 54 
Sans Culottes, privateer, v., 6 
Savannah, evacuation of, viii., 81 
Schuyler, General Philip, i., 226; 

ii., 135, 138 
Scotland, trade in, i., 146 
Seckel, Henry, vii., 385, 442 
Secretary of Treasury, report of, 

iii., 41, 187 
Sedgwick, Theodore, on loans, iii.. 
Senate {see New York conven- 
tion) 
Senates, i., 390 
Senators, term of, ii., 47, 48 
Seward's policy in 1862, iv., 313 
Shawhan, Robert, vi., 377 
Sherman, Roger, member of con- 
vention, i., 410, 411 
Shipley, speech of, i., 172 
Ships, unlading of, ii., 306 
Short, William, correspondence 
with U. S., ii., 423; iii., 80, 81, 
106, 121, 123, 126, 130, 136; 
Charge d' Affaires, Paris, iv., 
296, 302; mission to Holland, 
303; limitations of power, 311 
Sieyes, Abb6, vi., 288 
Silesian loan, confiscation of, v., 

437. 447 
Skip with, letter of, to Monroe, 
vi., 258 
General Index 

Slaves not considered altogether 

as property, ii., 14 
Smilie, Robert, vi., 382 
Smith, Adam, Wealth of Nations, 

ii., 450; iv., 198 
Smith, Melanctnon, opinion on 

presidential term, ii., 124 
Smith, Col. W. S., negotiations on 

payment to France, iv., 419 
Smith, William, ii., 133; iv., 220 
Smith, Col. William, application 

of, vii., 216 
Smuggling lawful in war- time, i., 
Soldiers petition for back pay, ii., 
South Carolma, act of (1784), v., 

228; Assembly, ii., 16; com- 
missioners to Annapolis, i., 336; 
currency of, ii., 211, 216; debt 
of, vii., 498, et seq. 
Spain, i., 146, 150, 169, 266; iv., 
483; v., 207; viii., 155; amity 
towards, iv., 335, et seq.; cap- 
ture of American ships, vi., 96; 
and colonies, v., 485; conduct 
of, iv., 322; connection with 
U. S., 298, 313; debt of, iii., 
127, 322; and Great Britain, 
iv., 325; v., 258; interest in 
America, 90 ; loans to America, 
iii., 358; trade with America, 
iv., 358; trade with Indians, 
v., 289; war with France, iv,, 

Spaniards on Mississippi, v., 327 

Sparta, i., 252; ii., 22 

Spencer, Attorney- General, viii., 
Spinoza, i., ^;^ 

Spirits, report to Congress on 
(1792), ii., 368; consumption 
of in U. S., 435 {see also Taxa- 
tion) 

Stamp acts, i., 9, 127, 131, 133, 

137. 138, 139. 143. 148 

"Stand" letters published in 
Commercial A dvertiser (1798) 
on U. S. relations with France, 
vi., 259; treaty of Pilnitz, 268; 
necessity of preparing for war, 
309; design of France to make 
war between U. S. and Great 
Britain, 315 

State constitutions, i., 214; ii., 
46; debts, 248, 337, 358, 

362, 429, 439; iii., 18; funds, 
mefficacy of, i., 300; interests, 
383,396,405; ii., 12,44; inter- 
ference, 326, 332; papers, 
368; representatives, 44; rights, 
viii., 295; securities, ii., 477 

States, creation of new, ii., 16, 
fearful of federal encroach- 
ments, 17, 56; sovereignty 
of, 100, 104, 195, 196 

Stevens, Edward, friend of A. H., 
yii., 198; _ix., 37 _ 

Stile, Captain, affair of, vii., 223 

Strong, Colonel, vii., 77 

Suffrage, equality impossible, i., 
Sugar-cane, i., 152 

Swallow and other vessels, v., 58 

Sweden, i., 167,231, 391; debt 
of, iii., 322; example of, v., 
44, 201; terms with English, 
Swiss cantons, i., 217, 252, 385, 

397; vi., 280 
Sylla, v., 77 

Talleyrand, comment on Hamil- 
ton, i., 169 
Tarleton, Colonel, viii., 74 
Tarling, Timothy, vii., 91 
Taxation, amount proposed, iii., 
56; best modes of, i., 271, 272, 
279, 283; colonial, act relative 
to (1691), 172; British demands 
(lyy^), y, etseq.; plans for, 1 1 9 ; 
constitutional provision for 
(1787). 364; ii-, 245; direct, 
219; during the Revolution , v. , 
78; excise duties, ii., 221, 341, 
368, et seq., 400; iii., 204, et seq.; 
in different States, ii., 439; re- 
sult of imposition in Penn. {see 
Whiskey Rebellion) ; import 
duties (impost), 179-192, 272, 
291, 306, 346, 414; iii., 202, 
208, 226, 265, 276; v., 129, 
308, 320; ad valorem, ii., 416, 
419; iii., 202, 301; iv., 164- 
198; discrimination by Great 
Britain, 206, 207; federal and 
State interests conflicting, ii., 
54, et seq.; history of, in U. S. 
(note), iv., 198; in British col- 
onies, vi., 6, 21, 202; et seq.; 
French colonies, 4, 23, et seq.; 
limit of time for paying, ii.. 

General Index 
Taxation {Continued) 

349; on manufactured arti- 
cles, 378; iv., 164-198; on 
miscellaneous articles, ii., 293, 
415, et seq.; on raw materials, 
293, 295; v., 328; on salt, 
ii., 54, 418; iv., 68; on snuff, 
sugar, etc., iii., 208, 226, 308; 
on spirits, ii., 282, 293,338,368- 
408, 415; iii., 216, 2 21, 226, 265, 
305; on wines, spirits, tea, and 
coffee, ii., 276, 349, 415; on re- 
ciprocity with Great Britain, 
vi., 32-76; in Europe, iii., 349, 
357; in Mass., 352; in New 
York, viii., 40; ix., 270, e/ seq.; 
miscellaneous taxes: of auc- 
tions, iii., 209, 226, 307; of 
buildings, 312; of horses, con- 
veyances, etc., 58, 207, 226, 
309; viii., 378; of land, ii., 380; 
of licenses, iii., 207, 226, 306; 
of patents, 226; of peltry, v., 
320, 328, et seq.; of postage, 
iii., 226; poll tax, ii., 80; iv., 
161; protective duties, policy 
due to Hamilton, tonnage 
duties, ii., 298, 301, 321; iii., 
202, 226, 265; v., 166; vi., 18, 
51, 61, 202; under Confedera- 
tion: inability to enforce 
(1780), i., 214; plan for, 231, 
239, 306; unpopular methods 
of, in U. S., ii., 179, 434; iii., 
349, iv., 161; U. S. ftmds, ii., 
352,. 353; U. _S. military, 
special tax for, i., 302; vii., 
45, 49; U. S., and States, ix., 
3, et seq.; U. S. tariff, history 
of (note), iv., 198 
Taylor, Colonel, vii., 91, 208 
Tazewell, act drawn up by, i., 172 
Tea, duty on, i., 7; arrival in 

Boston, 132 
Ternant, application of, xv., 362 
Territory, examples of cession, 

viii., 49 
Thompson, Thomas, ix., 43 
Thurlow, Lord, on libel, viii., 396 
Ticonderoga, viii., 53 
"Titus Manlius," signature to 
"Stand" letters, vi., 267, 274, 
281, 289 
Toussard, Major, vii., 198 
Trade, between Gt. Britain and 
America, i., 12, 116; iv., 220; 

loss of, to Gt. Britain, i., 22; il- 
licit, 47; regulations, 114, 118, 
129, 261, 278; rise in England, 
270; centres, lack of, in U. S., 
276; promoted by public credit, 
ii-. 233 

Transportation, difficulty of, in 
America, i., 160 

Treasury {see United States), ii., 
227; iii., 30 

Treaties, Executive's power to 
make, iv., 436; force of, under 
political changes, 374; w4th 
various powers, v., 29 

Treaty, commercial, with France, 
v., 19, 26; of Fontainebleau, 
iv., 399; with Great Britain, 
Jay's (1795), {see "Camillus"); 
Great Britain (1796), viii., 161; 
of Munster, iv., 241; of Paris 
{see Foreign relations), 227, 
325; of Utrecht, vi., 222 

Trenton, i., 276, 304 

Tribunes in Rome, ii., 23 

Tripoli, war with, viii., 247 

Trumbull, Speaker of House, iii., 

77 ^ 
Tryon, Governor, iv., 259 

"Tully," papers on Whiskey Re- 
bellion, vi., 410 
Turkey, i., 145 

United Netherlands {see Holland) , 
ii., 437; iii., 322, et seq., 345, 

359; v., 429, 457; IX., 29 

United States (see Conttnental- 
ist, and Government and the 
Constitution) , admission of 
British shipping into waters of, 
v., 141; army {see Military 
papers), i., 221, 308; ii., 100, 
and {see Arrears of pay), vii., 
224; viii., 239; assumed debts 
of Confederation, ii., 243, 263, 
286; arsenals and magazines, 
vii., 130; Bank of {see National 
bank), ii., 456; iii., 34, 46, no, 
157, 203, 223, 333; v., 471; bill 
for regulating trade of, ii., 205; 
capital of, viii., 232; citizens on 
foreign privateers, v., 16; coin- 
age, viii., 107; condition of 
(1795). 155; Congress, conven- 
ing of (1793), no; defects of 
(5^^ " Publius"), i., 199; reme- 
dies for {see Government) ,213, 

5o6 

General Index 

United States (Continued) 

(see Continentalist) , 243; de- 
mands papers on treaty, viii., 
161; journals of, ii., 100; 
federal functions of, 200; 
legislative power of, 194; na- 
ture of two branches, 52, (?i seq.; 
power to declare war, viii., 249, 
et seq.; power of legislating 
on judiciary, 314, 322, 329; 
ratio of representation (see New 
York convention), ii., 14, 98; 
resolution of, 356; regarding 
neutral ships, vi., 96 ; special ses- 
sion, v., 54; credit of {see Public 
credit), ii., 227; iii., 247, 257; 
communication with sea, v., 
310; Constitution {see Federal 
convention and New York con- 
vention) ; sketch of , i . , 224, 225; 
draft of, by Hamilton, 350; 
ratified, ii., 103; adopted by 
ten States, 162; amendments 
to, 166; in relation to Jay 
treaty, v., 359; vi., 161, et 
seq. {see "Camillus"); militia, 
436; court-martial, extra pay 
in, vii., 114; courts, viii., 277; 
customs officers, compensation 
to, ii., 292, 310; dangers of 
war to (1794), v., 86; danger 
of responsibility without power, 
ii., 191, 204; debt of {see Public 
credit, Loans): 188, 211, 337, 
356, 427 ; foreign and domestic, 
366; iii., 30; in France (1793), 
iv., 422, 429; Hamilton's treat- 
ment of, ii., 289 ; plan for fund- 
ing of, 256, 444; iii., 228, 237; 
iv., 118; purchased by, iii., 220; 
payable in Western lands, ii., 
366 {see also Finance, vol. ii.) ; 
diplomatic services, viii., 297; 
duties {see Taxation), iii., 176; 
Executive: duties of, iv., 437, 
et seq.; necessary, i., 390; for 
life, 391, 392 ; extent and popu- 
lation of, iv., 117; v., 332; vi., 
260, 332, 333; viii., 284; and 
France {see France), iv., 227, 
366,^^5^(7., 432, 472; v., 17,75; 
vi., 229; federal courts, defence 
of, viii., 271, 276; government, 
collection of taxes, ii., 185; 
forts, disposition of troops at, 
vii., 119, 151, 161; fund, ii., 

185; Government not responsi- 
ble for State governments, iii., 
37; History for 1796, vii., 369, 
44^ ; importance of, to Gt. 
Britain, v., 126; impost benefit 
of {see Taxation), ii., 181, 379; 
internal revenue, viii., 252, 258; 
Judicial authority of, i., 349; 
li., 100; judges, teniire of 
office, 100; viii., 314, 323, 330, 
341, 349, 353; lack of coin in, 
iii., 100; legislatures. State and 
federal interests not identical, 
i., 349, 407 ; ratio of representa- 
tion, ii., 1^ , et seq.; branches of, 
170; legislative, executive, and 
judiciary departments of, viii., 
333. 338, 347. 353; loan-office 
certificate, ii., 355; map of 
(1793), v., 339; maxims of free 
intercourse, 291; military sup- 
plies, vii., 128; naval agents, 
viii., 300; navy, i., 308; viii., 
160, 218; officers, impeachment 
of, i., 349; office, rotation of, ii., 
124; parties in, v., 97; people 
of, inclined to State sovereignty, 
i., 383 ; powers of: to lay taxes, 
ii., 198, 295, 395; to erect cor- 
porations, iii., 459; to regulate 
trade, 390; President: forms, 
viii., 83; charges against 
(1795), 122; message on 
treaty, 161; protection for 
frontiers, ii., 409; representa- 
tives, apportionment of (1791), 
viii., 96; revenue: from duties 
on spirits {see Taxation): ii., 
340; and appropriations in 
1792, iii., 174; system (1789), 
198, 202; inspectors of, viii., 
301; right to alienate ter- 
ritory, iv., 360; Senate, i., 347, 
405, 411; ii., 56, 103; and 
Spain, vii., 168; viii., 155; and 
State debts, 467; stock, ii., 
354, 432; tariff, history of 
(note) {see Taxation), iv., 198; 
Treasury {see Public credit, 
etc.): ii., 210; iii., 145. 207; 
bills used as cash, 159; ex- 
penditures, explanation of {see 
Explanation), viii., 122; Jef- 
ferson's proposition to specify 
appropriations, 304; Sec. of 
Treasury, 150; surplus in 

General Index 
United States (Continued) 

(1790), iii., 170; treaty with 
Gt. Britain (see " Camillas "), 
papers of (1796), viii., 161; 
with Portugal, 298 ; with Spain, 
vi., 247; various nations, v., 
38,457; vi., 56; reciprocity in 
treaties, 67; troops, organiza- 
tion of {see Military papers), 
vii., 6, 77, 149; war of, 76; 
Western posts of {see "Camil- 
lus"), v., 139; viii., 376; ves- 
sels, seizure of, v., 372 

Utrecht, treaty of, v., 327, 465 

Valin quoted, v., 28, 41, 42; vi., 
218, 224 

Van Rensselaer, Jeremiah, viii., 
223 ; Stephen, 223 

Van Staphorst & Hubbard, bank- 
ers, correspondence with U. S., 
iii., 81, 83, 126; agents of U. S., 
^33^ }34; iv., 302, 305 

Vatel cited, iv., 315, et seq., 355, 
380, 410, 435, 436, 451, 458; v., 
29, 36, 41, 44, 372, 383, 430- 
436, 438, 442, 477; VI., 87, no, 
117, 131, 224; vni., 50 

Venable, Abraham, documents 
from, on Reynolds affair, vii., 

369. 39.7 
Venice, vi., 278-280, 302 
Vergennes quoted, vi., 16 
Vermont, speech on independence 
of J in N. Y. Assembly (1787), 
viii., 42; separation from N. Y., 
constitutionality of, 48, 51, 58; 
affair of Fay and Allen, 53 
Vindication of Congress, frag- 
ment of paper defending Con- 
gress for incurring debts, i., 

.327-331 

Vindication of the Funding Sys- 
tem, iii., 3 

Vinnius, viii., 404 

Virginia, acts of, v., 211, 229; ac- 
counts, i., 168; aids Gates, viii., 
77; charters, i., 94; com- 
missioners to Annapolis, 335; 
convention of, ii., 157; vii., 
253, 274; debt of, ix., 22; ex- 
cise duties in, vi., 339; legis- 
lature of, ii., 53; opposes 
Constitution, 165; payments 
to U. S. Treasury, 211, 215; 
representatives in federal con- 

vention, i,, 382, 393; riots in, 
vi., 357 

Wadsworth, General, i., 204 

Warning papers, attempt to rouse 
Americans from French influ- 
ence (1797), vi., 229; power of 
France, 235; French excesses, 
240; national convention, 249; 
neutral ships, 254 

Wascowitch, vi., 321 

Washington, George, accepts Jef- 
ferson's advice on back pay, 
ii., 327; Brigadier-General, vii., 
8; desire for federal city, viii., 
232; distress at quarrel be- 
tween Jefferson and Hamilton, 
vii., 303; farewell address 
(draft by A. H.) (authorship 
of, see note), viii., 187; to 
Hamilton, on loans to U. S., 
iii., 129, 190; on national bank, 
443 ; adopts plan, 493 ; on 
French affairs, iv., 366; on 
presidential etiquette, vi., 439; 
to Jay and justices of Supreme 
Court, on legality of French 
privateers, v., 12; to heads of 
deps. (draft by A. H.), 17; in- 
structions to Jay (draft by 
A. H.), 121; message on 
British treaty (draft by A. H.), 
viii., 161; on Genet (1793) 
(draft by A. H.), 119; to Penn. 
and Carolina gov. (draft by 
A. H.), vi., 349; position, de- 
fence of, v., 98; to President of 
French Assembly (draft by A. 
H.), iv., 349; president of 
Cincinnati Society, viii., 3; 
proclamation for Thanksgiving, 
120; on Whiskey Rebellion, 
vi,, 389, 442 (drafts by A. H.) ; 
speeches to Congress, (drafts by 
A. H.), viii., 102, 116, 153, 214; 
slandered, 122 ; to McHenry, on 
raising troops, vii., 6; death 
and funeral of, 190, 191 

Wasp, viii., 388, 402 

Watson, James, viii., 223 

Webster, Daniel, protectionist, 
iv., 200 

Wells, John, vi., 379 

West Indies, supplies, i., 26, 27, 
152-154, 170 

5o8 

General Index 

"Westchester Farmer " answered, 

i-' 3 

Western islands, wine from, i., 43 

Western lands, ii., 261 

Western posts, iv., 334 

Whigs, iv., 231 

Whiskey Rebellion, resistance to 
excise laws in Penn., vi., 339; 
Hamilton's letters on, to Wash- 
ington (1792), 339, 341, 342, 

345. 347. 349-351 (1794), 353. 
358, 388, 408, 409, 441; from 
Penn., 451-460; to Craig, 
410, 426; to Maj.-Gen. Lee, 
445; Sec. of State to Mifflin, 
Gov. of Penn., 394; proclama- 
tions (Hamilton's drafts), 389, 
442 ; Tully papers, to inform 
public of facts, 410 
White Bear Lake, v., 340 
Wilkinson, General, vii., 14, 67, 

93. 95. 117. 141, 151. 160, 171 
Wtlham, ship, v., 27, 35, 57 
William and Mary, i., no, 135, 
Williams, Mary, affidavit m Rey- 
nolds aifair, vii., 467 

Williamson, motion to increase 

number of Representatives, i , 
Willink, Wilhelm and Jan, cor- 
respondence with U. S., iii., 83, 
126; agents of U. S., 134; iv., 
302, 305, 312 

Wilson outrage in Pennsylvania, 

vi., 365 
Wilson, of Pennsylvania, i., 404 
Wilson, James, associate-justice, 

v., 12 
Wolcott, Oliver, iii., 312; vii., 

399, 443; viii., 151, 238 
Woodeson's lectures, v., 29 
Wool, i., 157 

"X. Y. Z." letters, vi., 259 

Yates, reports, i., 393, 403, et seq.; 
hostile to Hamilton, 417; re- 
fuses to sign Constitution, 421; 
withdraws from convention, 
424; proposed for Governor of 
N. Y., ii., no; character of, 
no, 118, 128 

Yeardley, Sir George, arrival in 
Virginia, i., 99 

Yellow fever, v., 49; viii., no 

List of letters and other papers written by Hamil- 
ton and printed in the John C. Hamilton edition of 
1850, which are omitted in this edition. 

(The page and voltune references are to the edition of 1850.) 

VOLUME I 
private correspondence 

Page. 

3 Letter to Capt. William Newton, November 16, 1771. 

3 Routine busmess letter for house in which Hamilton was clerk. 

4 Pay-book of artillery company, and memoranda of books read. 
12 Convention, March 17, 1777. 

60 Letter from Hamilton to General Sullivan, 1778. 
60 Routine letter written for Washington, and conveying Washing- 
ton's orders. 

VOLUME II 

139 Reorganization of the Army. Supposed to have been addressed 
by Washington to committee of Congress, January 28, 1778. 
From two rough drafts in Hamilton's handwriting. 

153 Inspector- General. Report by Washington. Draft by Hamil- 
ton, May 5, 1778. 

164 Military Remarks and Queries. Submitted by Washington to 
committee of Congress. Draft by Hamilton. 

168 Inspector-General. Report of Washington and committee, 
January 28, 1779. Draft by Hamilton. 

171 Mission to France. Washington to Laurens. Draft by Hamil- 
ton. 

176 Military Regulations. Submitted to Washington. Draft by 
Hamilton. 

183 Discipline. Submitted by Washington to Congress, February 3, 
1 78 1. Draft by Hamilton. 
These papers did not seem to merit reprinting. In those which 
were used substantially as Hamilton drafted them, it is 
obvious that they embodied Washington's ideas, and 
Hamilton's part was merely clerical; and, moreover, they 
can all be found in Washington's writings, or elsewhere. 
Those not used, like the first and fourth, are also shown by 
comparison with Washington's writings to be merely at- 
tempts by Hamilton to embody the General's views. They 
have no independent value. 
5IO Omitted Letters 

Page. 

204 Plan of specific taxation for the State of New York. Merely a 
list of articles and tax proposed for each. 

212 to 283 inclusive. Resolutions and committee reports in Congress. 
These can all be found in the journals of Congress, and are 
— not therefore reprinted in this edition. Moreover, it is im- 
possible to say how much in each case was Hamilton's, or 
how far he was mouthpiece of his committee, or his peti- 
tioners. The appropriate place for these papers seemed to be 
in the published journals, etc. Three only of these papers 
have been retained: one is on public credit; the second, 
open debate; third, on a plan for a military peace estab- 
lishment— an important part of Hamilton's scheme for a 
new system of government. 

330 Constitution of Bank of New York. 

333 Petition as to Revenue System. 

341 Act to institute University of New York. Mr. Proctor, the 
editor of the forthcoming edition of Hammond's Political 
History of New York, has, I think, shown conclusively that 
this act was the work of Ezra L'Hommedieu. 

374 Act to ratify independence of Vermont. 

426 Resolutions in Congress — I., to admit Kentucky. 

471 Resolutions in Congress — II., as to ratification of new constitu- 

tion. 

472 Resolutions in Congress — III., as to fugitive slaves. 

473 Resolutions in Congress — IV., as to free navigation of Mississippi. 

VOLUME III 

46 Report, Treasury — revision of forfeitures. 

48 Additional estimates, 1790. 

50 Tax scheme for interest on State debts. 

80 Report accompanying abstract of tonnage duties, May 11, 1790; 

account of money received from or paid to the States, May 

II, 1790. 
82 Ref)ort on taking West Point by Government, June 10, 1790. 
89 Estimates, August 7, 1790. 
93 Renewal of final settlement certificates, August 7, 1790. 

146 Estimates for 1791, Jan. 6, 1791. 

147 Duties on imports, Jan. 7, 1791. 

188 Trade with India and China, Feb, 10, 1791. 

190 Dutch loan; statement of terms, etc., Feb. 25, 1791. 

192 Spirits — draft of an act, March 3 , 1 7 9 1 , and Executive order, Oct. 

^ .31. 1791- 
284 Estimates, 1791-1792. 
337 Remission of duties in the case of Eliphalet Ladd, April 20, 1792. 

350 Loans, drafts of resolutions for, Dec. 24 and 27, 1792. 

351 Loans, transmitting statement of, Jan. 10, 1793. 

352 Bank deposits, transmitting statement of, Jan, 16, 1793. 

441 Spirits, revenue from — statement of March i and 2, 1793. 

442 Spirits, revenue from — statement of Jan. 20, 1794. 
444 Balance in Treasury, and domestic loans, Feb. 4, 1794. 

446 Public debt, receipts and expenditures, statement of, Feb. 6, 

1794. 
451 Loan and contract with bank, April 25, 1794. 
529 to 574 Revenue circulars. 

Omitted Letters 511 

Page. 

578 Interest on claims of South Carolina line, March i8, 1790. 

580 to 590 Reports on private claims. 

All the above papers from Vol. III. (ed. 1850), omitted in this 
edition, are purely of a routine nature and of no historical 
value. They can all be found also in State Papers, Finance, 
Vol. I. 

VOLUME IV 

CABINET PAPERS 

12 Hamilton to Willink & Co., May 7, 1790. Business letter as to 

loans. 

13 Hamilton to Washington, — 1790. Communicating letters from 

Amsterdam bankers, and discussing the loans and the acts 
authorizing them. 

22 Hamilton to W. Short, May 29, 1790. As to loans. 

23 Hamilton to Washington, June 18, 1790. Report as to light- 

houses. 
30 Hamilton to Washington, June 18, 1790. Submitting contract 

with a light-house keeper. 
30 Hamilton to Washington, Jtme 21, 1790. Submitting contract 

for lumber, etc. 
37 Hamilton to Washington, August 28, 1790. 
37 Hamilton to W. Short, August 29, 1790. Routine letter as to 

46 Hamilton to Washington, Sept. 10, 1790. As to revenue matters. 
75 Hamilton to Benj. Lincoln, Oct. 4, 1790. As to light-house at 

Portland. 
81 Hamilton to Washington, Nov. 4, 1790. As to frauds in old 

certificates. 
93 Hamilton to W. Seton, Dec. 7, 1790. As to assay of coins. 

93 Hamilton to Washington, Dec. 13, 1790. Transmitting report 

on national bank. 

94 Hamilton to Washington, Dec. 15, 1790. Transmitting request 

of collector of Boston. 

95 Hamilton to Washington, Dec. 22, 1790. Transmitting report 

on post- office. 
147 Hamilton to W. Duer, April 7, 1791. As to government con- 
tract. 

149 Hamilton to Washington, April 10, 1791. As to Dutch loans. 

150 Hamilton to Washington, April 11, 1 7 9 1 . Giving an extract from 

a letter of R. King. 

152 Hamilton to W. Short, April 13, 1791. As to Dutch loans. 

154 Hamilton to Washington, April 14, 1 791. As to Dutch loans. 

157 Hamilton to W. Short, May 9, 1791. As to Dutch loans. 

157 Hamilton to W. Short, May 24, 1 791. As to Dutch loans. 

162 Hamilton to W. Short, June 25, 1791. Loans. 

162 Hamilton to W. Short, June 30, 1791. Loans. 

167 Hamilton to Washington, July 29, 1791. Foreign loans. 

168 Hamilton to W. Short, Aug. i, 1791. Loans. 

170 Hamilton to Jefferson, Aug. 26, 1791. Transmitting drafts of 

powers. 
170 Hamilton to W. Short, Sept. 2, 1791. Loans. 
174 Hamilton to Washington, Sept. 16, 1791. Enclosing letter. 
176 Hamilton to W. Short, Oct. 3, 1791. Loans. 

512 Omitted Letters 

176 Hamilton to Messrs. Willink, Oct. 3, 1791. Loans. 

177 Hamilton to Washington, Oct. 6, 17 91. Giving extract from 

letter of Church. 

180 Hamilton to W. Short, Nov. i, 1791. Loans. 

181 Hamilton to W. Short, Nov. 30, 1791. Loans. 

183 Hamilton to Thos. Mifflin, Dec. 21, 1791. As to certificates of 

State debts. 

184 Heads of topics for President's speech, Dec. 25, 1791. 

185 Hamilton to W. Short, Jan. 28, 1792. Loans. 

186 Hamilton to W. Short, Feb. 14, 1792. Loans. 

187 Hamilton to Willink, Feb. 14, 1792. Loans. 

188 Hamilton to Washington, March i, 1792. Submitting report on 

excise. 
188 Hamilton to W. Short, March 5, 1792. Loans. 
193 Hamilton to Washington, March 8, 1792. Transmitting draft of 

letter to French Minister. 
193 Hamilton to Washington, March 16, 1792. Transmitting draft 

of report on ways and means. 

193 Hamilton to W. Short, March 21, 1792. Loans. 

194 Hamilton to W. Short, April 2, 1792. Loans. 

216 Hamilton to W. Short, April 10, 1792. Loans. 

217 Hamilton to Washington, April 12, 1792. Transmitting resolve 

as to sinking fund. 
217 Hamilton to W. Short, May 7, 1792. Loans. 

220 Hamilton to Washington, May 9, 1792, Adjustment of warrants. 

221 Hamilton to W. Short, June 14, 1792. Loans. 

222 Hamilton to Washington, June 19, 1792. As to a light-house. 

223 Hamilton to W. Short, June 23, 1792. Loans. 

225 Hamilton to W Short, June 30, 1792. Loans. 

226 Hamilton to W. Short, Jtily 25, 1792. Loans. 

239 Hamilton to Washington, Aug. 3, 1792. As to supply of a light- 
house. 

239 Hamilton to W. Short, Aug. 4, 1792. Loans. 

240 Hamilton to Jefferson, Aug. — , 1792, Suggesting a change of a 

sentence in a report. 
279 Hamilton to W. Short, Aug. 16, 1792. Loans. 

282 Hamilton to Washington, Aug. 27, 1792. As to mode of paying 

foreign debt. 

283 Hamilton to W. Short, Aug. 28, 1792. Loans. 

307 Hamilton to W. Short, Sept. 13, 1792. Loans. 

308 Hamilton to G. Morris, Sept. 13, 1792. Loans. 

318 Hamilton to W. Short, Oct. i, 1792. Loans. 

319 Hamilton to W. Short, Oct. 16, 1792. Loans. 

319 Hamilton to Washington, Oct. 31, 1792. Enclosing statement 
of pay of revenue officers. 

319 Hamilton to Washington, Oct. 31,1792. Enclosing loan contract. 

320 Hamilton to W. Short, Nov. 5, 1792. Loans. 

331 Hamilton to W. Short, Nov. 26, 1792. Loans. 

332 Hamilton to Jefferson, Dec. 26, 1792. As to information from 

consuls. 

333 Hamilton to W. Short, Dec. 31, 1792. Loans. 

337 Hamilton to Washington, Jan. 24, 1793. Enclosing statement 

of account. 
337 Hamilton to W. Short, Feb. i, 1793. Loans. 
339 Cabinet opinion of four heads of departments as to payments of 

French debt. Feb. 25, 1793. 

Omitted Letters 513 

Page. 

340 Cabinet opinions as to treaty with Indians. Feb, 25, 1793. 

342 Cabinet opinions as to President qualifying. Feb. 27, and 

March i, 1793. 

343 Cabinet opinions as to French debt. March 2, 1793. 

343 Cabinet opinions as to Kentucky expeditions. March 10, 1793. 

345 Hamilton to W. Short, March 15, 1793. Loans. 

346 Hamilton to Willink and others, March 15, 1793. Loans. 

347 Hamilton to Washington, March 18, 1793. Loans. 

392 Hamilton to Washington, May 4, 1793. Enclosing draft of 

circular. 

394 Hamilton to Jefferson, May 9, 1793. As to passports. 

406 Hamilton to Washington, May 25, 1793. 

411 Hamilton to Washington, Jime 3, 1793. Loans. 

424 Cabinet opinion as to seizure of sloop Polly. June 12, 1793. 

426 Hamilton to Washington, June 15, 1793. Statement of account. 

434 Cabinet opinion as to French privateers. Jime 20, 1793. 

435 Hamilton to Washington, June 24, 1793. Statement of account. 

448 Hamilton to Washington, July 19, 1793. Enclosing a letter. 

449 Hamilton to Washington, July 24, 1793. Loans. 

462 Cabinet opinion as to French privateers. Aug. 5, 1793. 

465 Hamilton to W. Short, Aug. 12, 1793. Loans. 

466 Hamilton to Willink, etc., Aug. 12, 1793. Loans. 

467 Hamilton to Washington, Aug. 14, 1793. Enclosing a letter. 
467 Cabinet opinion as to French prizes. Aug. 15, 1793. 

467 Cabinet opinion as to Genet's correspondence. Aug. 23, 1793. 

490 Hamilton to Jefferson, Nov. 30, 1793. As to case of St. Domingo 

vessel. 

49 1 Hamilton to Washington, Dec. 2 , 1 7 93 . Payments of French debt. 
506 Hamilton to Washington, Feb. 10, 1794. Case of defaulting 

collector. 

508 Cabinet opinion as to payment of French debt. Mar. 11, 1794- 

509 Hamilton to Washington, March 21, 1794. Enclosing statement 

of accounts. 

532 Hamilton to Washington, April 19, 1794. Transmitting two 

letters. 

533 Hamilton to Washington, April 21, 1794. As to foreign loans. 

534 Hamilton to Washington, April 23, 1794. Loans. 
546 Hamilton to Washington, April 28, 1794. Loans, 

546 Hamilton to Washington, April 30, 1794. Sending translation of 

letter and as to payments to France. 

547 Hamilton to Washington, May 3, 1794. Enclosing letter from 

Attorney- General . 

560 Hamilton to Washington, May 27, 1794. Loans. 

562 Hamilton to Washington, June 4, 1794- Loans. 

568 Hamilton to Washington, June 22, 1794. As to case of a col- 
lector. 

VOLUME V 

14 Hamilton to Washington, Aug. 18, 1794. Transmitting letter. 
14 Hamilton to Washington, Aug. 21, 1794. Explaining delay in 

sending certain papers. 
60 Hamilton to Washington, Dec. 23, 1794. Loans. 
63 Hamilton to Washington, Jan. 12, 1795. As to commissioner of 

loans in New York. 

VOL. X.— 33. 

514 Omitted Letters 

Page. 
63 Hamilton to Washington, Jan. 12, 1795. As to appointment of 
a marshal. 

65 Hamilton to Washington, Jan. 21, 1795. As to excise. 

66 Hamilton to Willink, etc., Jan. 25, 1795. Loans. 

69 Hamilton to Washington, Jan. 31, 1795. As to French consul. 
77 Hamilton to Washington, Feb. 4, 1795. Enclosing report. 

MILITARY PAPERS 

138 Hamilton to McHenry, July 28, 1798. Recommending Philip 
Church for an army appointment. 

142 Hamilton to John Jay, Oct. 29, 1798. Asking an interview on 
military business. 

142 Hamilton to Washington (?), October 29, 1798. 

185 Hamilton to McPherson, December 26, 1798. Asking for draft 
of surveys. 

215 Hamilton to McHenry, February 16, 1799. Asking for distribu- 
tion of troops. 

215 Hamilton to Washington, Feb. 18, 1799. Enclosing letters for 
approval. 

215 Hamilton to Theo. Sedgwick, Feb. 19, 1799. As to division of 
Massachusetts into military districts. 

222 Hamilton to Rivardi, March i, 1799. Ordering him to visit 

certain posts. 

223 Draft of an act for organizing troops, March i, 1799. 

232 Hamilton to , , 1799. As to transportation con- 
tracts. 

232 Hamilton to C. C. Pinckney, March 7, 1799. Distribution and 

recruiting of troops. 

233 Hamilton to Washington, March 14, 1799. Residence of Pay- 

master-General. 

234 Hamilton to McHenry, March 16, 1799. Recruiting. 
234 Hamilton to McHenry, March 16, 1799. Recruiting. 

236 Hamilton to McHenry, March 19, 1799. Asking for lists, etc. 

239 Hamilton to Washington, March 27, 1799. Recruiting. 

240 Hamilton to Washington, April 3, 1799. Announcing carrying 

out of certain orders. 
248 Hamilton to McHenry, April 17, 1799. Acknowledging letters. 
248 Hamilton to Walbach, April 17, 1799. Ordering certain cavalry 

evolutions to be tried. 
251 Hamilton to McHenry, April 26, 1799. Submitting plan for 

artillery regiments. 
262 Hamilton to McPherson, May 26, 1799. Asking suggestions as 

to organization. 
264 Hamilton to Capt. EUery, May 29, 1799. Giving orders. 

268 Hamilton to Capt. AUum, June 8, 1799. Ordering him to his 

command. 

269 Hamilton to Maj. Hoops, June 10, 1799. Giving orders. 

272 Hamilton to McHenry, June 18, 1799. Enclosing report. 

273 Circular to commandants, June 19, 1799. 

275 Hamilton to McHenry, Jime 21, 1799. As to organization of 

cavalry. 
279 Hamilton to M. Clarkson, June 25, 1799. Asking suggestions of 

names for officers. 
279 Hamilton to McHenry, June 25, 1799. As to clothing of army. 
284 Hamilton to McHenry, July 2, 1799. As to raising cavalry. 

Omitted Letters 515 

Page. 

291 Hamilton to John Jay, July 29, 1799. New York fortifications. 

291 Hamilton to General Stevens, July 29, 1799. Uniforms. 

292 Hamilton to McHenry, July 30, 1799. Straw and fuel. 

296 Hamilton to Wolcott, August 10, 1799. Hospital in Rhode 

Island. 
302 Hamilton to Washington, Aug. 21, 1799. Recruiting returns. 

308 Hamilton to McHenry, Sept. 2, 1799. Barracks and quarters, 

309 Hamilton to Toussard, Sept. 6, 1799. Fort at Portsmouth. 

336 Hamilton to Swan, Sept. 22, 1799. Pay-rolls. 

337 Hamilton to Washington, Sept. 23, 1799. Winter quarters. 

341 Hamilton to McHenry, Oct. 3, 1799. Hutting troops. 

342 Hamilton to , Oct. 4, 1799. Winter quarters. 

353 Hamilton to Washington, Oct. 21, 1799. Barracks. 

355 Hamilton to McHenry, Oct. 22, 1799. Disposition of Western 

troops. 

356 Hamilton to McHenry, Oct. 25, 1799. Transmitting proceedings 

of court-martial. 
356 Hamilton to McHenry, Oct. 25, 1799. Lt. Smith's claim. 

359 Hamilton to John Adams, Oct. 29, 1799. Acknowledging an 

order. 

360 Hamilton to McHenry, Oct. 29, 1799. Works at Loftus Heights. 

368 Hamilton to , Oct. 31, 1799. Relative rank. 

369 Conjectures as to wagons, , 1799. 

370 Hamilton to Col. Reade, Nov. 2, 1799. Forage. 

383 Hamilton to Washington, Nov. 28, 1799. Enclosing a letter. 

391 Hamilton to North, Dec. 21, 1799. As to funeral ceremonies at 

Washington. 

393 Hamilton to Toussard, Dec. 22, 1799. Artillery regulations. 

396 Hamilton to McHenry, Jan. 15, 1800. Act regulating commands. 

399 Hamilton to , Jan. 6, 1800. Quarters. 

400 Circular, Jan. 25, 1800. Enlistment of troops. 

401 Hamilton to McHenry, Feb. 21, 1800. Arrangement of officers. 

402 Hamilton to McHenry, Feb. 28, 1800. Travelling expenses of 

an officer. 
404 Hamilton to C. C. Pinckney, March 7, 1800. Instructions to 

officers, etc. 
413 Remarks on organization, , 1800. 

415 Hamilton to C. C. Pinckney, March 26, 1800. Enclosing a plan. 

416 Hamilton to Ogden, April 15, 1800. Duties of Quartermaster- 

General. 
434 Hamilton to , May 27, 1800. Length of step. 

PRIVATE CORRESPONDENCE 

469 Hamilton to Pintard, April 23, 1791. Asking suggestions as to 
revenue laws. 

471 Hamilton to Bayard and others, , 1791. As to 

site for a factory. 

506 Hamilton to Van Schaack, April 20, 1792. As to certain manu- 
factures. 

517 Hamilton to E. Boudinot, July 30, 1792. Making an appoint- 
ment. 

633 Hamilton to Washington, May 5, 1795. Enclosing a letter from 
G. Morris. 

5i6 Omitted Letters 

VOLUME VI 

Page. 
64 Hamilton to Wolcott, Nov. 15, 1795. Enclosing draft of "The 

Explanation." 
92 Hamilton to John Jay, March 10, 1796. Declining to act as 
counsel for the State, 
loi Hamilton to Washington, April 8, 1796. Enclosing a draft. 
267 Hamilton to McHenry, Feb. 13, 1798. Asking him to sell some 

stock. 
370 Hamilton to John Adams, Oct. 29, 1798. Acknowledging order. 
381 Hamilton to Oliver Wolcott, Dec. 28, 1798. As to loan. 
428 Hamilton to Swan, Feb. 17, 1800. Soldier's claim. 

549 Hamilton to Oliver Wolcott, Aug. 14, 1802. Plan for a business 

partnership. 

550 Hamilton to G. Morris. Enclosing law papers. 

VOLUME VII 

836 Resolutions for amendment of Constitution as to presidential 

election, 1802. 

837 Petition for act to supply New York with water, 1802. 

838 Plan of Merchants' Bank. 

END OF VOLUME X. 

rJ 

•r'-f A — 

^y^i«i»T^^« ^rwf-. »■■--•-. ■■ ■ ..^ . 

University of 
Connecticut 

Libraries 

II Hill nil! 

3y1b3U2UU/^!lUU