Jane Jacobs 
An Oral History Interview 
Conducted for the GVSHP Preservation Archives 
by 
Leticia Kent 
Toronto, Canada 
October 1997
The views expressed by the contributor(s) are solely those of the contributor(s) and do not 
necessarily reflect the opinions or endorsement of our organization.

Copyright 2001, 2004 by the Greenwich Village Society for Historic Preservation. For permission to use this history other than 
for research, instruction, or private study, please contact the Greenwich Village Society for Historic Preservation, Oral History 
Program, 232 East 11th Street, New York, NY 10003. 
ABSTRACT 
 
Jane Jacobs (1916-2006) was an urban planner, author, and activist. In this oral 
history, Jacobs discusses various preservation battles she participated in while she 
was living in Greenwich Village. 
 
She begins the interview by discussing the fight to prevent Robert Moses from 
expanding a roadway through Washington Square Park. In this portion of the 
interview Jacobs talks about the role of Ray Rubinow and his Joint Emergency 
Committee (JEC) in this fight, as well as this committee’s influence upon 
subsequent preservation battles in the Village. In particular, she reflects on the way 
the JEC effectively leveraged the political landscape to support its position. Jacobs 
also discusses the decision by the committee to advocate initially for only a 
temporary closure to the park and the effect of the closure upon the community. 
Finally, Jacobs talks about issues related to the design of the park after its 
permanent closing to traffic. Individuals referenced in this section of the interview 
include Edith Lyons, Shirley Hayes, Raymond Rubinow, Norman Redlich, and 
Carmine DeSapio. 
 
Jacobs continues the interview by discussing the effort in the early 1960s to 
challenge the City’s proposed urban renewal plan for the West Village—a plan 
which, if implemented, would have demolished a large section of the West Village. 
She reflects upon the formation of the Committee to Save the West Village, 
detailing the strategies it employed in its successful fight against the proposed plan. 
Jacobs also discusses the transformation of the committee afterwards into the West 
Village Committee and its subsequent efforts to add housing to abandoned areas. 
 
Jacobs then discusses her role in the battle against the proposed Lower Manhattan 
Expressway. She talks about how she became involved in this fight through the 
urging of the pastor of a local church, Fr. Lamountain, and the effects that local 
politics (such as infighting between the Village Independent Democrats and 
Carmine DeSapio’s political machine) had upon this effort. 
 
Jacobs concludes the interview by reminiscing about her move to the Village in the 
thirties, as well as briefly discussing other activities, such as the Greenwich Village 
Study in the 1950s, Save the Village, and the unsuccessful fight with NYU over the 
construction of Bobst Library near Washington Square Park. 

Copyright 2001, 2004 by the Greenwich Village Society for Historic Preservation. For permission to use this history other than 
for research, instruction, or private study, please contact the Greenwich Village Society for Historic Preservation, Oral History 
Program, 232 East 11th Street, New York, NY 10003. 
INTERVIEWEE: Jane Jacobs 
INTERVIEWER: Leticia Kent 
LOCATION: Toronto, Canada 
DATE: October 1997 
 
JACOBS: What was significant about the battle over Washington Square? There 
were several things that were significant—not only in the battle, but in a much 
wider sense—affecting other things. I would like to mention three of those that 
affected all the other Village battles and battles in some other places too, and one 
that particularly affected a different area of the Village. So let's take them up in 
order. 
One was the umbrella organization that Ray Rubinow devised. In retrospect, 
it seems so sensible, so obvious, so natural, and yet it didn't exist before he thought 
it out, invented it and actually got it working. After that, it became the model for 
practically every successful fight we had to wage in Greenwich Village. 
 
KENT: Explain what the organization was. 
 
JACOBS: The organization was this: Let me backtrack. In previous issues and 
battles in Greenwich Village a kind of bureaucratic approach had been taken. If 
you wanted to get other people on side, besides whatever organization—and it was 
always at that time an existing organization—had recognized the crisis, the ongoing 
crisis, or the need for a fight for it, about it. Whatever others you wanted to bring 
in, you thought of them as organizations. So that the issue had to be presented to 
them, and maybe with speakers, and so on and so on. And then whatever their 
practices were—like a steering committee or the semi-annual meeting or whatever 
it was—had to approve this with resolutions, and then what action would they take. 
Well, you know, things in real life move faster than that kind of bureaucratic 
approach, and it wasn't very effective. Furthermore, to gain one inch of effective 
support it took such enormous amounts of speeches, engagements, whatever. 

Copyright 2001, 2004 by the Greenwich Village Society for Historic Preservation. For permission to use this history other than 
for research, instruction, or private study, please contact the Greenwich Village Society for Historic Preservation, Oral History 
Program, 232 East 11th Street, New York, NY 10003. 
Now Ray Rubinow made this—again, it s eems so obvious, but it was really 
brilliant at the time he did it—he made this observation that lots of individual 
people who were active civically and members of these organizations, believed in 
this or that cause and battle and would be perfectly willing to join in on it, would be 
enthusiastic about it and delighted to give their energy and their efforts and their 
talents to it, without all this guff in between. 
So what he did was think about this problem and how to overcome the 
friction of civic bureaucracy. That’s what he was thinking about. I don’t know what 
he called it, but that’s exactly what he was trying to counter. His solution, which 
was wonderfully practical, was to have an umbrella organization that was only 
about this particular issue. In this case, in Washington Square, it was the Joint 
Emergency Committee to Close Washington Square to All but Emergency Traffic. 
Which seems to outsiders like a cumbersome kind of name, and why couldn’t you 
have something catchier. This was exactly suited to the problem. We weren’t 
trying to embrace all kinds of points of view about the Village, all kinds of political 
groups, all kinds of anything. We were trying to collect and concentrate on this 
issue, the people who felt as we did on that issue. In order to dramatize this and 
clarify this, a name like that was necessary, not something like “The Such-and-Such 
Association”—you know? 
So that’s the reason that Greenwich Village also developed these strange and 
wonderful names, like “The Committee to Get the Clock Started on the Jefferson 
Market Courthouse.” People knew what they were getting into. They weren’t 
getting into an ideology. They weren’t committing themselves to things they might 
think of as “Oh my god, I don't believe in that.” They were getting into a particular 
thing, and that’s what we mean by an “umbrella” organization. 
But back to Washington Square. All right. Washington Square was notable 
not only for using the umbrella organization—“The Joint Emergency Committee” it 
became known as for short—but that did set a pattern of a way to address realities 

Copyright 2001, 2004 by the Greenwich Village Society for Historic Preservation. For permission to use this history other than 
for research, instruction, or private study, please contact the Greenwich Village Society for Historic Preservation, Oral History 
Program, 232 East 11th Street, New York, NY 10003. 
and join people who believed in a particular thing and might disagree enormously 
on other things. 
That leads into the next thing that I think that battle had a great effect on. 
Normally, in Greenwich Village—and I th ink this was true in New York as a 
whole—it was part of the tragedy that was occurring in New York at the time and 
later—was that elections, which ought to help make the politicians responsive to 
what their constituents want and ought to clarify issues, were obfuscating and were 
confusing. You know, it was almost like imperial politics. Divide and conquer, 
setting people apart from each other. 
A civic election in New York was always a time of enormous danger to any 
cause that you were trying to push because here people would collect who believed 
in a certain thing, like the umbrella organization that I was just referring to. And 
lo and behold the election campaign starts and of course it turns out that they don’t 
all agree—and why should they—on who shou ld be elected or on whether they’re 
Democrats or Republicans or Liberals or whatever was going at the time. Why 
should they? 
So here people who were united on a particular issue and being effective on it 
would all of a sudden disintegrate and begin fighting each other and drop the issue 
and go in for who should win the election. People who had been allies a few weeks 
before would become bitter enemies. Not only did this hold up whatever progress 
was being made, it also took a long time to rebuild alliances after these kinds of 
bitter battles. Most important of all, it meant that elections were not being used to 
reinforce democracy and to get constituents what they wanted, but were being used 
in the very opposite way, to undermine. 
 
KENT: What did this have to do with Washington Square? 
 
JACOBS: To my understanding—I may be wrong about this—but as far as I know 
this was the first instance in which a citizens group, a citizens’ movement, 

Copyright 2001, 2004 by the Greenwich Village Society for Historic Preservation. For permission to use this history other than 
for research, instruction, or private study, please contact the Greenwich Village Society for Historic Preservation, Oral History 
Program, 232 East 11th Street, New York, NY 10003. 
deliberately and—some people thought cold-bloodedly—used an election for their 
purposes and their cause, instead of letting the election divide and shatter them. I 
can speak to this, I think maybe better than almost anybody. All right, I'll say 
outright: I can speak to this better than anybody because I was in on the very birth 
of this idea. One night I went off to sleep, but my husband, Bob, stayed awake 
worrying about Washington Square and thinking what to do about it, and sometime 
in the middle of the night he woke me up and he told me, “Here’s what we have to 
do. We have to insist that the people in power do what we want before the election.” 
Now, let me explain about the dynamics of this election. That will clarify 
how he thought it out. It was an election in the city in which the chief protagonists 
were: Bill Passanante, who was part of the Carmine DeSapio, old Democratic, 
Tammany machine; and the Republican who was running—I think he was a 
Republican—Whitney North Seymour Jr. They were opposed to each other for 
State Assemblyman. 
Now State Assemblyman is not an earth-shattering job, but there was more 
to this than meets the eye because this was a question of whether Passanante, 
meaning the DeSapio machine, was to continue supreme in our district or not. 
Passanante—these are nice guys, both of them—but Passanante had been equivocal 
on these questions because at the time—this was not true later, I believe—he was a 
good machine politician who took his orders from the party line, you might call it, of 
the machine. Mike Seymour was more independent-minded and he had been in 
favor of closing Washington Square Park to all but emergency traffic for a long 
time. He was one of the first fighters on this. He was a very good fighter. He 
believed in this. He had every reason to expect and hope that he would get the 
support of others who felt like him. The trouble was, he was not in power. The 
people who were in power were DeSapio’s machine. 
So what Bob woke me up in the middle of the night to tell me was what we 
had to concentrate on. It didn’t matter what Mike Seymour thought, because he 
had no power. He was important, no doubt about that, not only as a very nice 

Copyright 2001, 2004 by the Greenwich Village Society for Historic Preservation. For permission to use this history other than 
for research, instruction, or private study, please contact the Greenwich Village Society for Historic Preservation, Oral History 
Program, 232 East 11th Street, New York, NY 10003. 
person and a valuable person, but he was important as an alternative, an election 
alternative. But the people in power were the ones we had to concentrate on as 
responsible. 
“Look, if you’re in power you can do it, and we expect you to do it, and if you 
don't do it we’re going to consider you rascals and throw you out.” We could think 
this way, he explained, because we did have a good alternative, Mike Seymour. So 
he made up a slogan right then and there in the middle of the night: Stanchions by 
such and such a date—and I’ve been trying to think what that date was. I think it 
was "Stanchions by July 1st." 
 
KENT: These were stanchions to stop the buses. 
 
JACOBS: To stop all traffic except emergency traffic. Fire trucks or ambulances or 
police cars could still go through, nothing else. But the stanchions would stop 
everything else. And the idea was that it would be a temporary thing and a 
triumph, and again Bob was very right about this. He said his notion was that if a 
trial got in and it showed how successful this was, it would become permanent. But 
in any case, we would have the trial. 
But it had to be done then, with the understanding, delivered through Bill 
Passanante, that if it was not done then, that he would be thrown out. The idea 
would be that those in power who could do this are letting us down. We don’t want 
them any more. We’ll get somebody else. Now the alternative to that was, I mean 
the corollary to that was, if they do do it, they will be thanked. They will be 
considered as worthy of holding power. So that was our carrot. We had the carrot 
and the stick. And he worked all this out. 
So promptly, as soon as we had our next meeting—I don’t remember whether 
it was the next day or the day after that. We had frequent meetings and in between 
we were always on the telephone with each other, and so on. All of this was 
conveyed, and the idea of “Stanchions by . . .”—I’ll say July 1st because I think I 

Copyright 2001, 2004 by the Greenwich Village Society for Historic Preservation. For permission to use this history other than 
for research, instruction, or private study, please contact the Greenwich Village Society for Historic Preservation, Oral History 
Program, 232 East 11th Street, New York, NY 10003. 
remember that was it, but I may be wrong. Now, how could we put some muscle in 
this? Bob also thought of this. 
You know I’ve gotten a lot of credit—first, last and in between—for being 
astute politically. But I don’t think I was astute politically at all in comparison 
with Bob. He was very daring in these ideas. I got an awful lot of knowledge of this 
sort and also of a way of thinking, so that I did become astute politically, I must 
say, later on, but it was largely because of being taught how to think in this fashion. 
So he should get a lot of credit for this. He usually stayed in the background, and I 
don’t think people realized how important he was to all the fights in Greenwich 
Village. 
Now, the next thing he thought of was how do we show our muscle. Well, we 
announced that we should have a rally, and in a very few days. It doesn’t matter 
what the rally is about. It’s just about Washington Square. We don’t have to think 
all that up. We can make that up when the time comes. It will be in a very few 
days, and we will publicize this very fast. We will show our muscle and we will 
show what a fantastic organization we have that can decide on a rally, can just 
plaster the Village with posters about it everywhere and can get it up in no time. 
To politicians and to an election campaign, that’s muscle, you know? 
 
KENT: What happened? 
 
JACOBS: We got the kids to work. We announced the rally and in no time there 
were posters all over Greenwich Village about this rally. And this we did hear from 
the feedback that this stunned and impressed the politicians involved. Everybody 
knows about this rally immediately. The funny thing about this was the height of 
the posters. If anybody has thought of that, posters are usually up at eye level of 
adults, right? Maybe even above eye level. These were all below the eye level of 
adults. If they weren’t on a storefront they were apt to be below the bottom of the 
showcase window. Wherever. That was about the height. We had all these little 

Copyright 2001, 2004 by the Greenwich Village Society for Historic Preservation. For permission to use this history other than 
for research, instruction, or private study, please contact the Greenwich Village Society for Historic Preservation, Oral History 
Program, 232 East 11th Street, New York, NY 10003. 
elves, all these kids putting the posters up. Our children were putting them up, 
and oh, they worked for hours. They would go with paste pots and with their roll of 
posters, and of course they liked slopping the paste around and putting those 
posters up, but they were at child height. This was very appropriate for this battle 
because of course it was about a park—Washington Square Park—that very much 
belonged to the children. The children of Greenwich Village were interested in this 
fight. They were responsible little citizens. They often appeared at the rallies, and I 
don’t mean just ones that their mothers brought in strollers, but older ones too. 
They were very concerned about it. 
 
KENT: Okay, here comes the rally. Did any politicians show up? 
 
JACOBS: The rally didn’t matter. Before the rally ever happened we were 
beginning, the wheels were turning. Bill Passanante realized he had to get those 
stanchions up or he was going to be creamed. We had told him so. We had told 
him, “We will use every avenue that we have of public opinion and of explaining 
things.” We had already told him before the rally announcement and the posters, 
“Unless you get those stanchions up, that’s going to decide whether you get elected 
or not.” 
And this whole umbrella organization—mind you—you have to think of this 
as combined with Ray Rubinow’s idea—was conveying this to him. This was not just 
Bob Jacobs telling his wife about it in bed in the middle of the night. The whole 
organization had been convinced that this was the way to go. Of course this made a 
lot of bad feeling. Bill Passanante thought this was pretty unjust to unload on him 
all this responsibility. We weren’t unloading it all on him. We were unloading it on 
his organization and we were relying on him to tell the organization, “I’m going to 
lose the election and you’re going to lose the election,” in effect, “unless you get 
these stanchions up.” And they did have the power to do it. They would never have 
done it otherwise, but they had the power to do it. 

Copyright 2001, 2004 by the Greenwich Village Society for Historic Preservation. For permission to use this history other than 
for research, instruction, or private study, please contact the Greenwich Village Society for Historic Preservation, Oral History 
Program, 232 East 11th Street, New York, NY 10003. 
In the meantime, Norman Redlich was working on Carmine DeSapio. He 
had avenues of talking to him directly, and he was conveying the same thing. And 
other Village leaders, like Tony Dapolito and Ruth Wittenberg and Margot Gayle 
and Edith Lyons and Shirley Hayes, all these people who had been—and Ray 
himself—who had been fighting on this so long, were conveying the same message. 
But the thing that made it mandatory, that the DeSapio organization had to do 
something, was that they would lose the election if they didn’t. 
Now, Mike Seymour felt very badly treated in all this. Here he had been 
from the beginning a staunch adherent of closing the park. What was he being told 
now? He was being told, because we didn’t mince words or try to be hypocritical or 
anything, he was being told that, “Look, if your opponent, who has the power to do 
it or can evoke the power to do it, shuts off that park to traffic before election, we’re 
not going to support you for election. We’re going to thank them and let people form 
their own conclusions about who delivers for them. This is a battle for Washington 
Square.” 
He was outraged at this. He felt it was immoral. I don’t think he ever 
changed his mind since—that we should think that which political person up for 
election would actually accomplish our purpose was more important than what kind 
of a person they were, what they believed, what they had demonstrated of their 
beliefs from way back. 
In fact, what we were inventing in neighborhood politics was issue-oriented 
politics. These were the great days of the fights between old Democrats and the 
Village Independent Democrats. And of course there were those who thought it was 
more important to get their Democratic candidate elected than it was to get 
Washington Square closed. In fact, they took the view that if they ousted the old 
Tammany group and they got the Village Independent Democrats in, utopia would 
arrive. Well, not really, but it would be much easier to get responsive politics, and 
they thought we were looking at it very short-run. We want to get that park closed. 
They were looking at it long-run, in their view—we want to get in a better 

Copyright 2001, 2004 by the Greenwich Village Society for Historic Preservation. For permission to use this history other than 
for research, instruction, or private study, please contact the Greenwich Village Society for Historic Preservation, Oral History 
Program, 232 East 11th Street, New York, NY 10003. 
administration so fights like this won’t arise. So there was bad feeling about that. 
On the other hand, most of the Village Independent Democrats really wanted to get 
the park closed to all but emergency traffic, so yes, there was bitterness about that. 
But we did get the temporary closing, and this brings up another strange thing 
about this battle that had or should have had a much wider effect. 
 
KENT: So we’ve gotten the stanchions by the date. Passanante delivers. 
 
JACOBS: Right. 
 
KENT: Alright. Temporary. 
 
JACOBS: And DeSapio was thanked. There was a ribbon tying event and he— 
 
KENT: Was it Norman Redlich’s daughter and your daughter cutting the ribbon? 
 
JACOBS: Tying the ribbon. 
 
KENT: Tying the ribbon. 
 
JACOBS: Yes. And there was a ceremony in the park on a Sunday. The Borough 
President was there. So they had delivered and our organization delivered our part 
by thanking the powers that be—the ones that were in control and able to do this—
that they had done the right thing. 
Now this was at the time considered a temporary measure. That was okay 
with us. Put the stanchions up, close off the park while the committee studies the 
effects. So this was not a revolution, nothing radical and so on, a chance to 
experiment a little. They, of course—Moses and the City traffic department and all 
of them—had always opposed doing anything of this kind. I thought it was a 

Copyright 2001, 2004 by the Greenwich Village Society for Historic Preservation. For permission to use this history other than 
for research, instruction, or private study, please contact the Greenwich Village Society for Historic Preservation, Oral History 
Program, 232 East 11th Street, New York, NY 10003. 
pretext, but I understand now they really believed this. They thought that if they 
closed off the roadway through the square there would be horrendous increases in 
traffic to the point of chaos around the square and in other streets. They said that. 
They said, “If you close off this roadway that goes through the park, you are going to 
be back on your knees—all the people in the Village—begging us to put that 
roadway back in the park because of the inundation of traffic elsewhere, 
and the awful tie-ups and jams that will be around the park.” 
We didn’t believe this but we didn't know for sure. We said, “We’ll try it, this 
is an experiment.” 
The amazing thing was that not only was there not the chaos, no tie-ups in 
traffic around the park, none of that. But actually traffic numbers declined in those 
areas where they had predicted chaos. Now this was very interesting. In fact if you 
think of it, it’s the reverse of the awful impasse that has occurred for two 
generations now with American traffic, and Canadian too, where you put in 
something that is supposed to alleviate traffic, that is supposed to drain it off from 
where it shouldn’t be— 
 
KENT: And it attracts it. 
 
JACOBS: And it attracts it. It not only attracts it to there—that’s what was 
expected, that’s what was done on purpose—it not only attracts it to the channel 
but it increases traffic everywhere else that was supposed to be relieved. That’s the 
strange and interesting thing. Now here was the very opposite case where a channel 
was removed and that was supposed to back the traffic up into these other places 
and it didn’t. Very interesting problem. You can see that the traffic people were 
thinking of automobiles—traffic—as if it were water. Water will go—will find its 
way—in the easiest channel and if you dam it off or block it off, it will find side 
channels or some other place to go instead. And that was the image they had—the 
physics you might say of traffic. They should already have been suspicious of it 

Copyright 2001, 2004 by the Greenwich Village Society for Historic Preservation. For permission to use this history other than 
for research, instruction, or private study, please contact the Greenwich Village Society for Historic Preservation, Oral History 
Program, 232 East 11th Street, New York, NY 10003. 
because—that is not the way—making a better channel for traffic to work as I just 
explained. Now they had proof of the opposite. Wouldn’t it have been interesting if 
they had looked into this? They had a rather sensational bit of information there. 
No. The traffic people were completely incurious about what they had done and its 
effects. 
I’ll drop that for a minute and explain. So pleasant and effective were the 
results of shutting off Washington Square to traffic that I don’t think anybody after 
that, not that I remember, ever seriously suggested opening the roadway again. 
That “Stanchions by July”—whatever it was—had really settled it. That supposedly 
temporary thing had really settled the issue. The battle was won. 
But to get back to this question about traffic, which still needs looking into. I 
was reminded of this as recently as 1996 in a battle in Toronto about changing a 
middle block of a street, reversing traffic flow in it to prevent it from becoming a 
throughway in rush hour. And the Toronto traffic department people were there, 
and they were explaining that—this was at the neighborhood meeting—they were 
explaining that if this was done it would indeed help that stretch. But the cars 
would go somewhere else. Of course they were trying to divide the neighborhood. 
The neighborhood was divided on this among the people who feared they would be 
victimized by this. 
I explained at this meeting that I knew from experience beginning with 
Washington Square and I had watched this happening in other places. I knew that 
if you impede the convenience of traffic anywhere in a particular neighborhood the 
whole neighborhood benefits. There are fewer cars in the whole neighborhood. It 
doesn’t work like water at all. And sure enough it was done in this neighborhood in 
Toronto and the total traffic counts went down, just the same as they went down in 
the Washington Square neighborhood so many years before. And still, traffic 
departments had not looked into this—don’t understand what is happening. That’s 
why I say this was an important early effect of the Washington Square battle that 
could have been taken advantage of and wasn’t. 

Copyright 2001, 2004 by the Greenwich Village Society for Historic Preservation. For permission to use this history other than 
for research, instruction, or private study, please contact the Greenwich Village Society for Historic Preservation, Oral History 
Program, 232 East 11th Street, New York, NY 10003. 
KENT: That’s a lesson that applies to areas larger than Washington Square. 
 
JACOBS: Oh, it applies to areas everywhere, not even just in North America. 
 
KENT: I understand now. How long was it before the temporary closing became the 
permanent closing? 
 
JACOBS: I don’t remember. There was no crisis that I remember involving that. At 
some point it was just regarded as a fait accompli. It was so successful as a closing 
and successful as an improvement of traffic, not a gumming up of it. There was 
never any campaign to remove the temporary thing and there didn’t have to be, 
therefore, a campaign to make it permanent. That was settled. 
What wasn’t settled of course were other issues of design of the park. And in 
the design we had talented people in the Village who were important in that. 
Among them were Bob Nichols, and Edgar Tafel, and my own husband, Bob Jacobs, 
who was involved with that, too. He was not the architect for it but he gave advice 
and helped in the programming and thinking. 
Moses’ outfit designed just a horror for the park. Oh dear, I wish I could 
think of the nickname for it. Well it was in fact a huge comfort station. Oh, I know. 
My husband called it “Moses’ temple to urination.” [Laughter] It was ridiculous. 
But going on from the fight in the park, the fight to get a decent design for what 
was done in the park was the next stage. 
 
KENT: Was this pro-bono? Was everyone donating his services? 
 
JACOBS: I don’t think so, but I think a lot of people did. I think for the actual 
design, with the working drawings and the supervision of the building and so on . . . 
No, that would be under the usual arrangements. But the talk, the educated talk 

Copyright 2001, 2004 by the Greenwich Village Society for Historic Preservation. For permission to use this history other than 
for research, instruction, or private study, please contact the Greenwich Village Society for Historic Preservation, Oral History 
Program, 232 East 11th Street, New York, NY 10003. 
with one another and with the community about it . . . Greenwich Village architects 
who had fought for the Square and understood how it was used. What was its part 
in the life of the Village? How complicated its uses were. An outsider would hardly 
ever have understood how complicated the uses of this park were and the 
multitudinous roles that it played in the life of the community. This was not just 
any park, you know. Maybe just any park that people love is important, but this 
was a really vital organ in this area and this district of New York. 
 
KENT: It was also a college campus, wasn’t it? 
 
JACOBS: Yes, it was a college campus. It was the incubation ground for the revival 
of folk singing, literally it was. 
 
KENT: Did NYU—just to go back—did NYU have any part in closing of the Square? 
 
JACOBS: Its part was to urge putting traffic through the square. And here we 
come to a dismal thing about most city institutions. They are—they’re blackmailed. 
They are so easily blackmailed because they want various things from a city. They 
need favors. And therefore they try to cooperate with the City, or whatever political 
jurisdiction they are in, to the point of the destruction of the area—and that has 
often happened as a result of the way institutions behave. They are not good 
neighbors because they are so subject to blackmail—political blackmail. 
 
KENT: And the favors that they need, are what? Tax abatements? Zoning 
changes? 
 
JACOBS: That sort of thing. But also, mostly they have to do with property. In 
those days they were all expanding. Later, even more so. They want variances on 

Copyright 2001, 2004 by the Greenwich Village Society for Historic Preservation. For permission to use this history other than 
for research, instruction, or private study, please contact the Greenwich Village Society for Historic Preservation, Oral History 
Program, 232 East 11th Street, New York, NY 10003. 
what people are normally allowed to do with buildings. And they want—they even 
want expropriation of property of for their purposes. 
 
KENT: There was a unique organization called the Judson Church that was helpful. 
Am I correct? 
 
JACOBS: Yes. Churches are, not always, but very often are very helpful. However, 
universities and hospitals seem to have the idea that they are so righteous and so 
noble and so necessary that anything they want to do is justified—no matter how it 
hurts other people. That’s my experience with them. 
 
KENT: I’ve interrupted you, shall we return to the park? 
 
JACOBS: Let’s see, where were we? You know a curious thing about New York 
University, and its role in all this. Many of the professors in New York University 
were on our side, in favor of closing the park off to all but emergency traffic. We 
never got a one of them to come out publicly, as I remember. And it would have 
been very helpful if they did because the NYU administration would come out to 
hearings and on occasions when spokesmen were really important, in favor of traffic 
through the Square. I would get very angry and actually, although I tried to hide it, 
full of contempt—well-justified contempt. 
These professors who would say, “Go to it!” Look, this was their own college 
campus. “Go to it! Fight them!”, and so on. 
“Well what about you, will you speak?” 
 “Well no, it wouldn’t be prudent.” 
What a bunch of hypocrites! What a bunch of cowards! That’s the way I got to 
feeling about them. What mice to have these beliefs and to be afraid to express 
them! Or maybe this was illuminating about the administration of the University. 

Copyright 2001, 2004 by the Greenwich Village Society for Historic Preservation. For permission to use this history other than 
for research, instruction, or private study, please contact the Greenwich Village Society for Historic Preservation, Oral History 
Program, 232 East 11th Street, New York, NY 10003. 
Maybe it was an administration that was so deeply inimical to free speech that it 
had terrorized its professors from taking responsibility as citizens. 
 
KENT: Except for Norman Redlich. 
 
JACOBS: Norman Redlich was not employed at that point by New York University. 
 
KENT: I stand corrected. 
 
 JACOBS: Yes. Norman Redlich spoke out. He was an independent person, but he 
was not a member of any faculty at that time in that fight. 
 
KENT: Shall we return to the design of the park? 
 
JACOBS: Well I think I’ve said what I can say about the design of the park. There 
are people who are much better able to speak on that than I was. Bob Nichols would 
be able to. Edgar Tafel. They would be very good authorities on that 
[I’ll] speak on one more thing with this battle for the park that had a wider 
effect than is generally recognized. And this has to do with a particular area of the 
Village—the West Village, where urban renewal threatened to wipe out the 
neighborhood. 
But the year before that battle started, in the end of ‘59 or ‘60, not long after 
the Washington Square battle had been fought and won, the City decided to cut five 
feet off the sidewalks—of the width of the sidewalks on Hudson Street—on each 
side of the street, to make one more lane of traffic through the street. It was a very 
heavily traveled street, a major traffic street in that area. Now, the reason that the 
stores, and the people who lived over the stores, and the people who lived beside the 
stores, and the people off the side streets from Hudson, and the people who used the 
Abingdon Square park to cross the street and so on—the reason that we could live 

Copyright 2001, 2004 by the Greenwich Village Society for Historic Preservation. For permission to use this history other than 
for research, instruction, or private study, please contact the Greenwich Village Society for Historic Preservation, Oral History 
Program, 232 East 11th Street, New York, NY 10003. 
with that street at all was because there were twenty foot wide sidewalks and these 
served as buffers—very important buffers between the traffic and the retail stores 
and the other uses. Not only were they buffers for this—they, of course, made it 
possible for pedestrians to use and enjoy the street along with the traffic. And also 
even for children to play on that street—for children who lived along there—and for 
children to travel up and down the street pretty safely, to get to the park. The 
cutting off of the sidewalks would not only have penalized all of these uses and 
users, but it would have transformed what had been a viable and valuable city 
street into a no-account thing. 
 
KENT: It was also an agora, wasn’t it? 
 
JACOBS: It was what? 
 
KENT: An agora, a place where people meet. 
 
JACOBS: Meet? Sure, of course! 
 
KENT: Exchange information. 
 
 JACOBS: Sure, the way any good city street with lots of pedestrians and other uses 
that bring people together. So this. . . It doesn’t seem like much, subtracting five 
feet from the sidewalk on each side of the street. But reducing those sidewalks with 
all those uses, as well as their important buffer use, from twenty feet to fifteen 
would have been disastrous. And you may be sure that more would have been 
whittled off in subsequent years, too. Now, the people on Hudson Street and nearby 
were able to fight this successfully, largely because of the Washington Square battle 
that had just gone before it. 

Copyright 2001, 2004 by the Greenwich Village Society for Historic Preservation. For permission to use this history other than 
for research, instruction, or private study, please contact the Greenwich Village Society for Historic Preservation, Oral History 
Program, 232 East 11th Street, New York, NY 10003. 
Several things were extremely important in this—techniques. The people on 
Hudson Street who had been involved in the Washington Square battle knew a lot 
about techniques now, including the children—maybe even especially the children 
who had learned all about getting petitions around, getting signatures for petitions, 
and responsibly delivering them. The children, in fact, were much more successful 
in getting petitions signed—both the Washington Square ones and then later the 
sidewalk ones—because of the McCarthy era. Lots of grown ups were still afraid to 
sign petitions. They were afraid that they would automatically be associated with 
dangerous radicals or something. But when you see a nice little kid who sincerely 
wants to save his park or his sidewalks, you know you’re not in with a dangerous 
association. And I think that’s possibly the reason—one of the reasons, anyway—
why the children were such successful petition gatherers. The other reason was 
they believed in their cause and that came across. It’s hard to resist such sincerity 
and idealism. 
 
KENT: The West Village battle? 
 
JACOBS: One morning, early in 1961—it must have been in February—I 
opened the New York Times to discover that the neighborhood—14 blocks in the 
neighborhood that I lived in—was being designated for what they called an urban 
renewal study. Now, having written about a lot of urban renewal for the 
Architectural Forum, I knew at once what that meant—that we were going to be 
designated to be wiped out. They called it just “designated for a study,” because 
that’s the way it always began. And the study always showed that yes, this area 
was susceptible to urban renewal. Furthermore, I had an idea about the scope of the 
thing because the study money that was asked for and granted was always a given 
percentage of the cost of the whole urban renewal program. I forget the figures now, 
and they wouldn’t mean anything in today’s money, anyway. But what it meant to 
me was the cost of the entire thing was just what you would expect for wiping out 

Copyright 2001, 2004 by the Greenwich Village Society for Historic Preservation. For permission to use this history other than 
for research, instruction, or private study, please contact the Greenwich Village Society for Historic Preservation, Oral History 
Program, 232 East 11th Street, New York, NY 10003. 
completely these 14 blocks and putting in, probably, high rent apartments. This was 
an awful shock to see this. 
I promptly got on the phone and so did a number of others who read this and 
realized its importance. To condense what we learned during the day—some of us 
from each others’ phone calls and some of us from what we got fresh—was that we 
were the only ones in town—the only ones concerned. The people who lived there 
who didn’t know about this, they… 
The city and the planners, and the Planning Commission had done what 
Zeckendorf, in a later statement about something else to Leticia Kent called, 
“getting all his ducks in a row.” They had gotten all their ducks in a row before this 
was announced. Being bureaucrats, of course, they were very much impressed by 
organizations. And that consisted of getting somebody from the Greenwich Village 
Association, somebody from our political representatives, also the political 
organizations, and the churches. Interestingly enough, it was only the Catholic 
church in the area that had been informed—St. Veronica’s—and that was because 
the cardinal at the time worked closely with Robert Moses. And, in fact, he had 
replaced the pastor, the usual pastor, with another church official, a monsignor. We 
were told at one point, this was because the pastor would probably have 
sympathized with his flock rather than somebody else who didn’t know them and 
whose mission it was to put the thing through. Then people who were very 
important in charitable organizations, like, I remember Barbara Reach. 
 
KENT: Oh yes. 
 
JACOBS: And she knew about it. All of these people and their organizations had 
been informed very shortly before the announcement, but with the propaganda 
about how marvelous it would be and how much housing they would build, and how 
this was a slum, and what a good thing, how sanitary [it would be] to wipe it out. 
You know, all the usual things. And a lot of what they were told wasn’t true at all. 

Copyright 2001, 2004 by the Greenwich Village Society for Historic Preservation. For permission to use this history other than 
for research, instruction, or private study, please contact the Greenwich Village Society for Historic Preservation, Oral History 
Program, 232 East 11th Street, New York, NY 10003. 
Wasn’t in the plans. But it was the usual stuff that was used to sell urban renewal 
programs. 
Norman Redlich, who had been one of those informed about it—and informed 
erroneously as to what it was—he was good enough to call a meeting of a lot of the 
people who had been informed and sold on this. And I went over, and I forget who 
else. But I believe Edith Lyons, and my husband, and a few of the people from the 
neighborhood, we went to this meeting. I’m sorry I’m vague about it, just where it 
was. But it was the very day of the announcement. It was really fast. 
And Norman had also taken the trouble to call up some people who could give 
him inside information [from the] City. And he had verified and found out from 
people who really were on the inside and really knew that it was to bulldoze the 
place, wipe them all out, put up these high rent apartments, in one of these sterile 
schemes. He was shocked at this because when he had been sold on it, insofar as he 
was, this was not the picture that had been given him, you may be sure. So we 
quickly—by him telling what he had found out and by me telling what I knew from 
my work reporting urban renewal things. Most of the people brought on side with 
this—the regular community-minded people who weren’t in the planning board 
[INAUDIBLE] that sort of thing—were disabused of their notion that this was a 
good thing and did not support it. I’ll always also—on the opposite side of things—
deplore Barbara Reach because she was so sold, somehow, on helping people 
abstractly—no matter what it did to them in the concrete—that she—it simply did 
not matter what she knew about it, what it would do... 
 
KENT: She was associated with the Community Service Society, if I recall. 
 
JACOBS: That’s right. And she was a do-gooder in the very worst ivory tower sense. 
So right up to the very end she always believed it would be a good thing—because it 
was called something like urban renewal—because it promised housing. 

Copyright 2001, 2004 by the Greenwich Village Society for Historic Preservation. For permission to use this history other than 
for research, instruction, or private study, please contact the Greenwich Village Society for Historic Preservation, Oral History 
Program, 232 East 11th Street, New York, NY 10003. 
What the children learned in getting Washington Square petitions was to be 
very, very responsible about collecting filled out petitions from stores and delivering 
stacks of new petitions when they were running out of them. One of my children 
who remembers all this was ten or eleven when this happened. 
Ned has refreshed my memory that every day after school he went to all the 
stores that he had stocked with petitions, gathered up the ones that had been 
signed since the day before, delivered, checked over how many they had left and left 
more if need be. It was wonderful how not only he—but all the children involved in 
these efforts—were so responsible and indispensable really. Another thing that he 
refreshed my memory on was that we had not the usual format of a petition where 
you have what it’s all about at the top of the page and then rows and rows and rows 
where people can sign. No. Every one of our petitions was an individual one for one 
signer with that one signer’s address, and had the statement on each one of those 
pieces of paper. And that was quite deliberate because, if you have great stacks of 
these individual petitions, not only are they more impressive than consolidated 
ones, but they also say so clearly: the medium is the message. Each one of these 
pieces of paper is a person who cares. Each one of these pieces of paper is 
somebody—not quite conveyed by the medium with a form with many, many 
signatures—which is telling you something about mass-production thought. But 
these individual ones don’t. They—they are just an example of the way all the 
people in these fights in the Village thought about all the details and made the most 
out of even the most simple things. I think that a lot of the secret of winning the 
battles was that kind of attitude. 
 
KENT: Now you know there is something that I wanted to ask you relative to all of 
these battles. What do you think brought people to Greenwich Village and was it a 
special place? 

Copyright 2001, 2004 by the Greenwich Village Society for Historic Preservation. For permission to use this history other than 
for research, instruction, or private study, please contact the Greenwich Village Society for Historic Preservation, Oral History 
Program, 232 East 11th Street, New York, NY 10003. 
JACOBS: Well I think, yes. It was a special place, indeed. And part of its 
specialness was the great diversity of people there. That’s what made it different 
from suburbs or whatever. But it follows that—the fact of people being so diverse—
they all had diverse reasons for being there. So you can’t say what brought them in 
a generalized way. 
 
KENT: Well, I meant the hospitable, you know, the street life and the easy ways of 
interacting and so on and so forth and also the... [INAUDIBLE] 
 
JACOBS: Yes but that doesn’t really account for very much, Leticia, because there 
were lots of people in Greenwich Village who were aloof and who, in fact, because of 
their work as artists or scholars or whatever, needed not to have too much many 
inroads made on their time and on their consciousness. And they had found a place 
in the city that was congenial and where they could get their work done. And was 
convenient. And didn’t make inordinate pressures on their time and their energy. 
And, at that time, not on their money either. And yet, where they could live their 
own lives, where they didn’t have a lot of other people in their hair that they didn’t 
want in their hair. So there were all kinds of reasons why people were there, and 
many people who didn’t know that they liked street life or these congenial attitudes, 
or may even have thought they didn’t like the city. Who knows? When they got 
there and there was the opportunity, they entered into it and enjoyed it and 
thought, “My goodness! How lucky,” they were. 
There’s a law of supply and demand about such areas, and if there aren’t 
enough of them in a city, then eventually the prices go up and up and up, because 
more people want to be in that sort of area. Then the supply can’t satisfy. Many a 
city has very few neighborhoods of that kind and invariably they become extremely 
expensive, and that has happened in Greenwich Village, too. But it’s a symptom 
and it’s a pitiful thing that there is so much demand for areas of that kind and so 
few areas are like that. 

Copyright 2001, 2004 by the Greenwich Village Society for Historic Preservation. For permission to use this history other than 
for research, instruction, or private study, please contact the Greenwich Village Society for Historic Preservation, Oral History 
Program, 232 East 11th Street, New York, NY 10003. 
[Pause in recording] 
 
KENT: Now here is some more information on sidewalks, which goes with the 
material [discussed earlier]. 
 
JACOBS: Because of a glitch, this was left out. The way we discovered about the 
sidewalks was this: There were surveyors working on the street and making their 
marks with chalk and with paint. The adults, naturally, all asked when they passed 
the surveyors, who were working over a distance of several blocks on several days, 
what it was all about. What this was for? And in response they got mumbles or “It’s 
just a routine survey,” or something like that. And I know I asked them and I think 
probably they—hundreds of people—must have asked them. 
Well our son, Jimmy, coming home from school one day, he didn’t ask, “What 
is this for?” He asked about their work. And this was not intended to find out what 
it was for. He was genuinely interested in surveying and what they were doing and 
how they did it. And they saw that and told him—showed him—this brave, 
inquiring little boy, how surveying was done. Then they told him the sidewalks 
were going to be cut off. That night when Jimmy was going to bed and I was tucking 
him in, he said we are going to lose our tree. 
I said, “What do you mean? It’s doing very well. I wouldn’t worry about the 
tree.” And he said, “No, no. They are going to cut off our sidewalks and the tree is 
on that part of it and we’ll loose the tree.” 
We had planted this tree in ‘56 and it was the only tree on Hudson Street for 
many blocks. Now that’s changed. There are quite a few trees on Hudson Street. I 
said, “How do you know that? What is this about cutting off the sidewalks?” And he 
explained to me about the surveyors and that five feet were to be cut off on each 
side of the street. 

Copyright 2001, 2004 by the Greenwich Village Society for Historic Preservation. For permission to use this history other than 
for research, instruction, or private study, please contact the Greenwich Village Society for Historic Preservation, Oral History 
Program, 232 East 11th Street, New York, NY 10003. 
 The next morning, the children and I, we wrote a petition against the cutting 
off of the sidewalks and took it down to the printer in the next block. It is very 
convenient to live in a mixed neighborhood. We asked the printer if he could do the 
petitions we had. He said that he had a lot of restaurant menus to do and he 
couldn’t get to it for a couple of weeks. 
So one of the children said, “Well, the sidewalks will be cut off by then. 
That’s too late.” 
He said, “What sidewalks?” And when he understood that the sidewalks that 
we were talking about were right in front of his shop he said, “Let me see that.” And 
he read the petition and he said, “Can you come back in an hour?” And in an hour 
we had great stacks of these petitions ready to use. Jimmy immediately took quite a 
few of them around to stores. Later on Ned did that, too. And Ned and Mary 
immediately set up a table in front of our house to grab passers-by on the sidewalk 
to sign the petitions. Of course, this was a very efficient way to get the news around 
also, killing two birds with one stone. 
Now our petitions didn’t win this battle by themselves, by any means. They 
were absolutely necessary to it, but here is where our connections that we had made 
in the Washington Square battle were very important. We now knew—way over in 
our more obscure neighborhood of the Village—we now knew people in other parts 
of the Village—and people who could acco mplish things and knew their way around. 
One of these, a very wonderful citizen of Greenwich Village was Tony Dapolito, who 
had a bakery on Prince Street. It was a good bakery, too. He was a good baker, 
marvelous baker, and a marvelous citizen. That was a considerable way from our 
neighborhood of the Village—but Tony was very generous about helping other 
neighborhoods. And when he saw we were helping ourselves with the petitions and 
how concerned we were, he pitched in, too. And it was owing to Tony’s help that we 
quickly got to the right people in the city government to talk to and to send 
delegations to, and actually got the scheme stopped. 

Copyright 2001, 2004 by the Greenwich Village Society for Historic Preservation. For permission to use this history other than 
for research, instruction, or private study, please contact the Greenwich Village Society for Historic Preservation, Oral History 
Program, 232 East 11th Street, New York, NY 10003. 
[End of Tape, Side 2] 
 
KENT: Continuation of the West Village battle 
 
JACOBS: A lot of things happened very, very fast in the first and second days after 
this announcement. Ann Lye, who was very knowledgeable about real estate, her 
husband Len Lye, [a] very fine artist and filmmaker—they were bright people, and 
she had read the announcement in the paper—and she knew what it portended. We 
didn’t know each other. She lived north of the designated area on the West Side of 
Greenwich Village. Her neighborhood would not have been wiped out. She had a 
friend, Rachele Wall, who lived just to the north of the designated area, on 11th 
Street. And she and Rachele promptly figured out what needed to be done in the 
neighborhood, immediately. These people had lots of initiative. Not only they—but 
it turned out that the whole neighborhood had—people with lots of initiative and 
good sense. In that area to the north beginning at 11th Street running up to about 
14th, I believe, there was an association, a neighborhood association. Our area 
didn’t have any neighborhood association. They were rather rare at the time, Ann 
and Rachele had both been active in it. The president of it was a dentist named Dr. 
Dodelson. They promptly got hold of him and asked him to call a meeting and to 
hold it down in St. Luke’s Church in the designated area and invite people from the 
area. I can’t tell you which day this occurred on but it was a very quickly after the 
announcement. And at that meeting, Ann suggested that—she made a motion that I 
be made a co-chairman of the committee because now it was embracing a much 
bigger area and somebody from that area should be one of the chairmen of it. This 
was voted on and agreed to and so I became a co-chairman of what was to become 
the Committee to Save the West Village, and was to devote itself for just about the 
next year entirely to saving the neighborhood. Already we had, you see, a sort of 
umbrella organization—thanks to Ann and Rachele—because promptly the people 

Copyright 2001, 2004 by the Greenwich Village Society for Historic Preservation. For permission to use this history other than 
for research, instruction, or private study, please contact the Greenwich Village Society for Historic Preservation, Oral History 
Program, 232 East 11th Street, New York, NY 10003. 
on our borders, on the borders of our neighborhood—understood that this affected 
them and they joined with us. 
Another thing that happened very rapidly was that Rachele got in touch with 
an acquaintance of hers, Mr. Lester Eisner, who happened to be the director of the 
regional office—the New York and New England office—of the Federal Urban 
Renewal Administration. That weekend we took him—Rachele and I did—took him 
on a tour of the West Village and showed him what kind of place it was. We went 
into many apartments—the expensive ones, but also the very inexpensive ones—the 
ones that would have been tagged as slums. And he saw what a fine neighborhood 
it was, how diverse it was, how neighborly the people were in it and how happy they 
were to live there. How they didn’t feel—no matter what their ethnic origins were 
or no matter how poor they might be—they did not feel exploited from living in that 
neighborhood. They felt grateful to the neighborhood. This was no Potemkin Village 
expedition. He went anywhere he wanted. People were willing to let him in 
anyplace. He met landlords. He met tenants. We didn’t say who he was. He didn’t 
say who he was. But he was extremely helpful to us—not in any underhanded way 
at all—but just by telling us what the law was—important points we ought to know 
about the law and it was vital that we knew these things. 
When you think of it, it’s an outrage that people were not informed of these in 
a regular way—about these facets of the law—and here they were: That the area 
had to be proved to be a slum—if it was to be designated as ours was—by certain 
criteria. And he directed us to where we could get what these were. It was public 
knowledge, but you wouldn’t have known that in New York. These criteria could be 
gotten from his office. They could be gotten from Washington. They had to do with 
noise, with dirt, with health statistics, with value of property, with percentages of 
buildings that were dilapidated, with abandonments, all that sort of thing. And as 
far as possible, since these were very bureaucratic regulations, they were to be put 
in the form of statistics and supported by actual data. So we learned that that was 
necessary to designate it. 

Copyright 2001, 2004 by the Greenwich Village Society for Historic Preservation. For permission to use this history other than 
for research, instruction, or private study, please contact the Greenwich Village Society for Historic Preservation, Oral History 
Program, 232 East 11th Street, New York, NY 10003. 
Then he told us that the law now said—or the regulations now said—that the 
people of the area must participate in the planning and in the decisions about the 
area. And he also told us that what this meant, and the way it was interpreted, was 
that if we said anything about what we wanted in the area, then we were deemed to 
have participated and to [have] fulfilled that part of the law. Therefore, we 
understood that we should be extremely careful not to say, “Wouldn’t it be nice if 
the area had such and such”, or “Wouldn’t it be an improvement if, blah, blah, 
blah”. 
“Ha! You participated! Now that part of the law is fulfilled.” 
Knowing those two things had a great deal to do with our subsequent 
strategy in fighting this battle. They, you might say, they set the parameters of it. 
But let’s go back to the first public meeting on this. At this meeting, there 
were representatives turned up from the City’s Urban Renewal Agency. And also a 
group we didn’t know existed in our neighborhood called MICOVE. That was an 
acronym for “Middle Income Co-operative Village” something—and that was kind of 
cute—MI-COVE—“my cove”. And this is what we came to know as a puppet 
organization set up by the City. Its head was someone who lived in the 
neighborhood, sure enough. And she had been coached by them, by city planning 
employees and promised an apartment. So—and she had a very, very small 
organization. But this organization had been selected, in fact had been created by 
the City, to be, in effect, the representative of the citizens of the West Village. They 
were going to speak for us all. 
 That became impossible because of this meeting that was called because of 
the outrage expressed. Someone else who came to this meeting—several people 
were from the Lower East Side, and they already knew some of the tricks of the 
City because they had experienced them themselves—and it was from them that we 
learned about puppet organizations. We were getting an education very fast. Gloria 
Hamilton, who became extremely important in the Committee, was at that first 
meeting, too. The White Horse—she was the wife of one of the owners of the White 

Copyright 2001, 2004 by the Greenwich Village Society for Historic Preservation. For permission to use this history other than 
for research, instruction, or private study, please contact the Greenwich Village Society for Historic Preservation, Oral History 
Program, 232 East 11th Street, New York, NY 10003. 
Horse Tavern and she lived over the White Horse and it was within the designated 
area—quite a famous literary landmark there and a favorite gathering place for 
people from many parts of the city. They would have been wiped out along with so 
many other places. 
In the meantime, Bob, my husband, went over to another bar. This was, I 
guess just shortly before the meeting I’m telling about at St. Luke’s. That bar was 
very near St. Veronica’s Church and was a favorite with the local longshoremen. [It] 
wasn’t the only place where they could be met but it was one place. And also Danny 
Laughlan who ran it had been a pillar of the church—he and his wife, Agnes, of St. 
Veronica’s. 
So Bob talked to Danny Laughlan about what this designation meant. They 
were smack in the middle of the designated area. Another member of the 
congregation of St. Veronica’s became very important in this—in the Committee— 
because on Sunday, the very Sunday after the announcement he met people on the 
church steps and began telling them what was going to happen to them and what 
was going to happen to St. Veronica’s for that matter. 
And so there was a good representation of those people at the meeting and 
they were getting informed. All of this speedy spread of information throughout the 
area, sound, well-informed information, was absolutely vital. 
Now knowing from Mr. Eisner what he had told us (which I just mentioned a 
little while ago), we knew that one big task was to document the conditions in our 
area and document them accurately. So that became [a] chief effort, early effort, 
into which we put a great deal of energy and time. I think the very next night after 
our first public meeting we went to an apartment over on Weehawken Street. We 
went there because it was the apartment of someone who had just recently moved 
into the neighborhood who knew how to conduct market surveys. That was his job. 
So therefore he knew how to conduct surveys and he would instruct people on how 
to do it. In the meantime, Bob, my husband, figured out what should be done about 
conditions of buildings and how that could be surveyed. Carey Vennema figured out 

Copyright 2001, 2004 by the Greenwich Village Society for Historic Preservation. For permission to use this history other than 
for research, instruction, or private study, please contact the Greenwich Village Society for Historic Preservation, Oral History 
Program, 232 East 11th Street, New York, NY 10003. 
about surveys that could be done from tax records and that sort of thing. We had 
someone in the neighborhood who was an expert at recording and he... 
 
KENT: He was a sound engineer? 
 
JACOBS: He was a sound engineer and he took records of sounds throughout and 
also compared them with other areas that were considered to be not slums. 
 
KENT: Well, posh areas, like Sutton Place? 
 
JACOBS: Yes, indeed. Then there was someone else who took on the job of 
analyzing pollution and comparing the soot pollution in the neighborhood with the 
pollution in posh areas. All of this was a great deal of work, you may be sure. Oh, 
the…Let’s get back to the people who were in the meeting about how they do 
surveys. Naturally everybody had to work. We all had jobs and some of us who were 
working mothers had two jobs, in effect. But we were, everybody was in on this. 
Either their second job or their third job was saving the neighborhood. I think we 
must have—it must have been a neighborhood that had a terrible accumulated 
sleep shortage by the end of the year. So much had to go on in the middle of the 
night, this [was] the only time people had free for this. 
So I remember being present at the meeting of the people who were going to 
survey. What were they going to survey? The thing, in this instance, was the 
permanence or transience of the people in the area—their ages, various other 
statistical demographic information. The markets survey fellow—he had a 
blackboard there and here were all these people—two in the morning, I believe it 
was—sitting with notebooks in their laps on the floor of his apartment. Must have 
been about twenty people learning how to conduct a survey. He had already worked 
out a questionnaire that would satisfy the criteria of various things that had to be 
gathered door to door. 

Copyright 2001, 2004 by the Greenwich Village Society for Historic Preservation. For permission to use this history other than 
for research, instruction, or private study, please contact the Greenwich Village Society for Historic Preservation, Oral History 
Program, 232 East 11th Street, New York, NY 10003. 
And they were learning how to do it, and what to avoid like, “Don’t get on to 
other subjects. You have to get this questionnaire answered—that’s the important 
thing. And we need to do it pretty rapidly.” They learned from him what to do in 
cases of various awkwardnesses, or if there happened to be hostile people, or if 
people couldn’t understand what it was they were doing or needed another 
language. This had to be a survey that was a hundred percent, not just like a poll, a 
representative sample. So they learned their lessons just like a classroom except the 
students were all sitting on the floor. There just weren’t enough seats in the 
apartment to accommodate a classroom. But the blackboard was there, the teacher 
was there and the determination to learn what to do right was there. All these 
surveys with the various people competent to make them were carried on 
simultaneously and rapidly. 
When we finished, we had a remarkable document profiling these fourteen 
blocks. I will jump ahead and say that when it became public knowledge—public 
information at a hearing later on—and we presented this information to defend the 
neighborhood, and Mr. Eisner then saw what we had—he said that it was—he told 
us that it was the best survey that he knew of this kind. And what we had done for 
nothing—free—would have cost the government, he said, at least fifty thousand 
dollars. Now mind you, this is back in 1961. Fifty thousand dollars was probably 
five hundred thousand in today’s terms. He thought it was just an extraordinary job 
and very complete. And it showed that, by all the legal criteria, the West Village 
was not a slum—could not legally be designated for urban renewal. But that made 
no difference to the City Planning Commission. It wasn’t interested in our 
information. It had already—they had already made up their minds; they totally 
disregarded it. 
However, it was very good that we had this even though the City was so 
corrupt it paid no attention. It was important because it became known to other 
groups, other people. We didn’t have exactly an umbrella organization but we had 
all kinds of allies now, especially through the rest of Greenwich Village but also in 

Copyright 2001, 2004 by the Greenwich Village Society for Historic Preservation. For permission to use this history other than 
for research, instruction, or private study, please contact the Greenwich Village Society for Historic Preservation, Oral History 
Program, 232 East 11th Street, New York, NY 10003. 
many other parts of New York and increasingly, throughout the whole country. We 
were news just because we were Greenwich Village and newspapers and magazines 
elsewhere began to take notice that here was an area that didn’t meet the criteria of 
a slum at all—and look, the federal bulldozers were coming after it anyway. That 
survey that we did—whatever it was worth—whether it was worth a half a million 
in today’s money or whatever—to us it proved worth its weight in gold for showing 
what kind of an area it was. 
Now the other important thing that we had learned very early on about not 
participating in planning … This was very difficult for us in many ways because we 
had to keep saying, “No. No. No. Remove this designation from our area." 
“Well what do you want?” The people of the Planning Commission and other 
agencies of the City would keep asking us seductively. 
 And we had to keep answering, “We’ll tell you when you remove the 
designation.” Because otherwise, we would have fallen into this trap, into this 
ambush. And this in the end proved our strongest defense—that we had never 
participated in planning, or discussions of planning, of the area. If we had forgotten 
that piece of information, we would likely have been lost. 
I think it’s an outrage that this was not general public knowledge. We 
informed as many people as we could but the idea was so—the city government was 
so slimy—that they would ask you to make suggestions and then use the very fact 
you had given the suggestions to stick a knife in you. It was hard for people to 
believe. Was it hard for us to believe? We had to keep reminding ourselves at every 
single meeting that we did not offer any constructive cooperation to the City about 
our area—and why—or we would have been done in. 
We had to keep telling other people why we were so apparently negative. The 
newspapers were always castigating us one way and another for being negative—
these negative people. Well, the system had set up—been set up, as I explained—
that you had to be. But we were not really negative people, and we were planning 
for ourselves and what we would do when we got the designation removed. We were 

Copyright 2001, 2004 by the Greenwich Village Society for Historic Preservation. For permission to use this history other than 
for research, instruction, or private study, please contact the Greenwich Village Society for Historic Preservation, Oral History 
Program, 232 East 11th Street, New York, NY 10003. 
doing a lot of work on that. It was just that we wouldn’t have anything to do with 
the City on it. 
There was a long strip of vacant land where there had been a railroad, 
running north and south to some of the warehouses. In fact, it was rather 
picturesque. The railroad ran right into and out of some of the warehouses. It was 
elevated, and it had not been used for quite a long time. And it was being 
abandoned. It was because of the abandonment of this railroad—this was one 
reason—that our area was designated. It struck somebody that here was already a 
vacant strip of land. It was on Eleventh Avenue, uptown. It was at Washington 
Street in our area, and it was of the depth of—well, you know how railroad track 
is—about a third of the block deep—not a great deal of the area. 
 
KENT: It almost terminated at Westbeth, didn’t it? 
 
JACOBS: Yes. I think it did. No, it went right through the area. 
 
KENT: Oh, did it? 
 
JACOBS: Yes. But you know I had forgotten that. We had—I had—some maps. I’ve 
sent them to Boston College which has the archive of my papers. Well, it was our 
dream that when the designation was removed—and we didn’t have this ax over our 
heads—we would plan to augment the neighborhood by filling in the houses, filling 
in the area with new houses, and that this would accomplish quite a number of 
things simultaneously. It would show the whole city how you could add housing 
without dislocating anybody or any businesses. 
 
KENT: Didn’t you have a motto? “Not even a sparrow—” 

Copyright 2001, 2004 by the Greenwich Village Society for Historic Preservation. For permission to use this history other than 
for research, instruction, or private study, please contact the Greenwich Village Society for Historic Preservation, Oral History 
Program, 232 East 11th Street, New York, NY 10003. 
JACOBS: Yes, but that didn’t come quite yet…Without anybody being moved or 
dislocated. This would also be very important economically because . . . Think how 
much farther the housing money of all the public agencies would extend if could be 
used that way to add, rather than to subtract, and to increase the diversity of a 
place? 
 
KENT: Excuse me. Don’t I recall that when all the units were projected were added 
up that they were less, in fact, then what had been there? 
 
JACOBS: Oh, yes. Near the end of my second book, The Economy of Cities, I have 
something about the cost of this under the City’s plan and how many dwelling units 
would be added. And how many under the West Village Committee plan. And 
economically, our method was so superior. It would have been the greatest boon to 
New York. And we would have done the most enormous service that you could 
imagine citizens doing for their city—by showing them how to do this. And we, in 
fact, had that idea all along. 
The architects that we hired for this—Perkins and Will—a very good 
architectural firm with offices in White Plains—they calculated the kinds of plans— 
floor plans—for this that could be used in various combinations in all kinds of 
vacant lots. So there would be economies of scale in doing this, just as surely as 
there are certain economies of scale in those sterile urban renewal schemes, or 
public housing schemes. 
But these would be in-fill housing. I think this was the first instance—that I 
know of anyway—of in-fill planning for citi es. This is very popular now. It’s used 
many places—in Europe, in Canada—and it’s considered very advanced. I don’t 
think it’s used in any systematic way in New York, even to this day. And New York 
could have led the world in this important planning technique. We had a motto in 
any planning that we did—in anything sponsored by the West Village—we would—
our basic ground rule was that nobody shall be dislocated, or “relocated” as they 

Copyright 2001, 2004 by the Greenwich Village Society for Historic Preservation. For permission to use this history other than 
for research, instruction, or private study, please contact the Greenwich Village Society for Historic Preservation, Oral History 
Program, 232 East 11th Street, New York, NY 10003. 
euphemistically called it in those days. And the slogan took the form that you 
mentioned, “Not a sparrow shall be moved.” 
Well, that was one thing that was going on in those days, on another plane. 
We did it because it seemed like a very good idea because people were hungry also 
to be constructive. It’s very hard to be negative all the time and our neighborhood 
was full of constructive, non-negative people. And it galled them to have to keep 
saying, “No. No. No.” And it was very important for our own morale that we should 
be thinking of improvements if we ever got the chance to do them. The City was 
extremely secretive about all kinds of things. We couldn’t be secretive. We had, for 
one thing, too many people. You can’t keep a secret with hundreds of people and it 
was very important that everybody involved knew about it. So for those two 
reasons, there was no use trying to keep secrets when everybody—so many people—
would know them. And it was still more important that our side should know 
everything that was going on in this fight. Because each person then could take 
initiative intelligently when need be, because each one knew just what the 
strategies were, just what the difficulties were, just what was underway. 
We also told the other side—told the City—always what we were going to do 
to fight them. We didn’t try to keep anything secret from them. We said, “We’ll 
make a survey and show that… and this survey is going to show that you're wrong,” 
for instance. They always knew when there was going to be a rally or when we were 
coming down in force to a hearing, anything of that sort. 
We never bluffed them, either. The police always were asking us how many 
people would be present at a rally or at a march or whatever was happening and we 
would answer honestly that we didn’t know. If it was during a working day, we 
would point out that lots of people had to work [and] we didn’t really expect too 
many people. Whatever was our honest estimate of this. And that was the best 
policy as a strategy, or as a tactic. Because if you say, attempting to boast or blow 
up your strength beyond what it is, “There are going to be so and so many people,” 
and then you get only that number, or even less, your opponents figure you had a 

Copyright 2001, 2004 by the Greenwich Village Society for Historic Preservation. For permission to use this history other than 
for research, instruction, or private study, please contact the Greenwich Village Society for Historic Preservation, Oral History 
Program, 232 East 11th Street, New York, NY 10003. 
failure on your hands. Bluffing is bad strategy. But we didn’t anyway. We figured 
honesty and full exposure was the best thing. 
This also applied to how we treated information from our opponents. We got 
lots of information on their plans, which they did try to keep secret. The reason we 
got all this information and intelligence was that there were so many people in their 
own offices who agreed with us, and who knew how crooked the whole thing was—
the whole scheme was—and they would come to us with information. So we always 
knew what our opponents were cooking up before they were ready to spring it 
themselves. 
And the way we put that information to use—a lot of it could have been very 
dangerous to us, those plots and plans of theirs ... The way we put it to use was we 
would trumpet it. We would say that a meeting had been arranged at the 
Settlement House by so and so for Ellie Guggenheimer or whoever it was, “to come 
out with a statement that the Settlement House—the Greenwich House—believed 
in the West Village urban renewal.” We would say this is going to happen. Then 
they would deny it. But once they denied it, they couldn’t do it. We did that over 
and over with their schemes. 
The most amazing one was right at the end of the fight when—right after 
Wagner’s election that year—when Mr. Felt, the head of the Planning Commission, 
and David Rockefeller of the Downtown Lower Manhattan Association, had a 
telephone conversation in which it was agreed that they would announce some plan 
that had to do with the West Village—while , as Mr. Felt put it, “our honored Mayor 
is out of town.” Because they knew by this time that the mayor was abandoning this 
designation of the West Village and this was an attempt to euchre him into doing 
it—supporting the designation anyhow or confusing the matter. We didn’t find out 
what the announcement was about. I think it was something about the location of 
the new Stock Exchange, but whatever it was, it was a plan. 

Copyright 2001, 2004 by the Greenwich Village Society for Historic Preservation. For permission to use this history other than 
for research, instruction, or private study, please contact the Greenwich Village Society for Historic Preservation, Oral History 
Program, 232 East 11th Street, New York, NY 10003. 
So I went to see an assistant of the mayor, told him what had been told [to] 
us by a worker in one of those offices about this telephone conversation and he said, 
“Well, what’s it about?” 
 And I said, “I don't know what it’s about. But there is a plan to make this 
announcement. So why don’t you call Mr. Felt and ask him what it’s about.” So he 
did so and Mr. Felt, apparently in great embarrassment, denied that there was such 
a plan. Okay. They couldn’t do it. Always bring things into the open was our 
scheme. 
Now who were our opponents in this? I’ve mentioned two or three already. 
The City Planning Commission, of course. The Downtown Lower Manhattan 
Association—the scheme may very well have originated with them, rather than 
with the Planning Commission. We never found out for sure where it originated. 
But they were both hand-in-glove in pushing it—the one openly, the other covertly, 
from the very start. Other opponents of ours were the Citizens’ Housing and 
Planning Council, the Regional Plan Association—I believe those were the principal 
so-called civic organizations. Oh, and the Cardinal’s office of the Catholic Church. 
Probably Robert Moses but he really didn’t enter into this. People called it a battle 
against Moses because by this time anything that involved bulldozers was 
considered to be Moses’ scheme. He—I’m sure his office—cooperated with all this 
but he didn’t seem to have initiated it. The actual person who picked out our area— 
within the City—was Samuel Ratensky. But again, I can’t say he really picked it 
out. It may have been the Downtown Lower Manhattan Association or Ratensky 
working in cooperation with them. 
The individuals who were serious opponents of ours included Stanley Isaacs. 
Now that was odd because Isaacs was a great opponent of Moses and led successful 
fights against Moses regarding Tavern on the Green in Central Park and other 
matters. But he came to see me and we had a long conversation of several hours in 
our living room about the West Village and I was trying to convince him that it was 
a bad scheme and he was trying to convince me to give up the fight. And neither of 

Copyright 2001, 2004 by the Greenwich Village Society for Historic Preservation. For permission to use this history other than 
for research, instruction, or private study, please contact the Greenwich Village Society for Historic Preservation, Oral History 
Program, 232 East 11th Street, New York, NY 10003. 
us convinced the other, but I never could get Stanley Isaacs to understand what a 
ridiculous and expensive thing, socially, as well as economically, this urban renewal 
plan was. 
 
KENT: Was Stanley Tankel the Regional Plan Association’s point-man in this 
matter? 
 
JACOBS: I think Stanley Tankel knew better than to want this plan. He kept out of 
this. He didn’t do us any harm. He didn’t do us any good. He was—he and his plan 
were—just irrelevant to this. He was a very nice guy, Stanley Tankel. 
The City also set up—I’ll call these shell organizations. MICOVE, which I 
mentioned earlier, was a puppet organization. They actually got a few people 
together and got them to have some meetings and made some resolutions and so on. 
These shell organizations that they set up were really empty, but they were to give 
a façade of community approval—widespread community approval—to the 
designation of the West Village for urban renewal. So that it looked on paper, or as 
they announced it, it looked as if the longshoremen were in favor of it, as if the 
artists were in favor of it. Other groups—well, we took it upon ourselves to see what 
these facades amounted to. And to go to the legitimate organizations—show them 
what was being said, in effect, in their name—and they had a fit and gave 
statements to newspaper reporters about it. 
For instance, the longshoremen, who were supposed to be in favor of this, 
amounted to one disgruntled man who had been anointed by somebody in the City 
Planning Commission with an organization’s name. The actual longshoremen in the 
area and their union—their association—came out with statements that, no, they 
were outraged at this. They were against the urban renewal scheme. The artists of 
Greenwich Village, far from being in favor of it, were major helpers of the West 
Village people. And these were very important artists, internationally known 
artists, who had a benefit show for the West Village, and who were appalled at the 

Copyright 2001, 2004 by the Greenwich Village Society for Historic Preservation. For permission to use this history other than 
for research, instruction, or private study, please contact the Greenwich Village Society for Historic Preservation, Oral History 
Program, 232 East 11th Street, New York, NY 10003. 
plan. But the City had found some artist or other who was glad to be anointed with 
the name of an artists’ association and that was their façade. 
The developer who was somehow involved with this plan—I don’t know 
whether he had reason to think that he would be the developer to build the new 
housing but he was involved in the scheme—[was] Rose Associates. They were, at 
the time, employing, or working in cooperation with Barry Benepe, who was a very 
young man. Barry Benepe has done many good things later in his life, especially the 
greenmarket movement. But at this point, whether he was deluded or, like Barbara 
Reach, believed so thoroughly in urban renewal, or whether he was just naive, I do 
not know. He was doing errands for Rose Associates such as going around to 
apartments in a building in our area where most of the tenants were Puerto Ricans 
and asking them questions. When we found out what the questions were, we 
realized they would be twisted to indicate community approval for this plan. 
Actually the Puerto Rican residents of those buildings were very staunch members 
of our committee. The children of those families were the chief messengers who 
rushed around with news of what we called “the Creepers.” 
The City sent all kinds of people under various guises to try to pry out 
statements that could be useful to them. And the children were very alert to these 
people. The Creepers particularly concentrated on the Puerto Ricans because they 
could promise them all kinds of things in the relocation. 
 Now actually the Puerto Rican community liked the West Village very much. 
They were well integrated into the West Village. There were special services in 
Spanish at St. Luke’s Church, for instance, to accommodate them. They used to 
hold pig roasts in our backyard on certain festival days. Their children were well 
assimilated into the schools. So the City’s attempts to make ethnic friction in the 
neighborhood—which is what they were tr ying to do—didn’t work at all. And in 
fact, the Puerto Rican part of the community, as I said, were the chief ones to let the 
rest of the community know what The Creepers were doing. 

Copyright 2001, 2004 by the Greenwich Village Society for Historic Preservation. For permission to use this history other than 
for research, instruction, or private study, please contact the Greenwich Village Society for Historic Preservation, Oral History 
Program, 232 East 11th Street, New York, NY 10003. 
One day when Barry Benepe was down there some of the children from those 
buildings ran up to the White Horse where Gloria Hamilton lived above the tavern. 
Her husband was one of the owners of the tavern, and she was of major, major 
importance in every way in this fight. She was so sensible and so energetic and so 
devoted to the community, and they told her that a Creeper was down there. So 
Gloria dropped whatever she was doing and tore down and confronted Barry 
Benepe. And she gave him a most eloquent speech about misleading the people 
there, trying to use them, what they said, to hurt their own interests. And what a 
wicked thing he was doing. And how bad—socially bad, and humanly bad—was the 
part that he was taking. And he began to cry. 
I mention this because not long ago—this is now 1997—not long ago a friend 
of mine here in Toronto was talking to Barry Benepe and he mentioned me and said 
that I had made him cry. If that’s his version of this history, I would like to correct 
that. No, it was Gloria Hamilton that made him cry. I would have been glad to 
make him cry but I wasn’t there at that time. 
Rose Associates and Barry Benepe and MICOVE and another Creeper, 
named Roger Schaffer, were manufacturers of puppet organizations who worked 
with the City. They all worked in cahoots with a woman near Columbia University, 
who had an office where, and a little business for—it was really quite crooked—
making or supplying papers to Columbia students that they didn’t write 
themselves. She had been convicted of this fraud and served time for it, but was 
now at large again. And this cheating organization for students was now being used 
as an organization to do clerical work for puppet organizations. We found this out 
by comparing the typewriting on a letter that Barry Benepe sent me. A really 
strange letter where he asked for my recommendation for something—a travel 
fellowship that he wanted. And here on this typewritten letter from him to me was 
the same peculiarity of an R in the typewriter that always kept dropping and a few 
other typewriter peculiarities that we had noticed in the typing that came from not 
only MICOVE (the puppet organization that was set up for us) but also the puppet 

Copyright 2001, 2004 by the Greenwich Village Society for Historic Preservation. For permission to use this history other than 
for research, instruction, or private study, please contact the Greenwich Village Society for Historic Preservation, Oral History 
Program, 232 East 11th Street, New York, NY 10003. 
organization that was set up over in Cooper Square in the Lower East Side. So 
somehow or other the same typewriter was being used, in short, for a couple of 
puppet organizations and by Barry Benepe. Almost sheerly by chance, Erik 
Wensberg, who was the editor of the Columbia University magazine... 
 
KENT: The Columbia University Forum? 
 
[End of Tape, Side 3] 
 
JACOBS: Yes—found out where this office was and went there. And on the desk 
there he found a telegram. By this time Barry Benepe was in Italy. He had gotten 
his fellowship, and there was a copy of a telegram to him from Rose Associates right 
there in this clerical office for puppet organizations and for student cheating. 
Strange, strange thing. Of course, we publicized this information about the same 
office using, sending communications, telegrams for Rose Associates, and for the 
puppet organizations doing their work. Before we publicized it, we got—we took 
samples of—the typing for all these organizations to a well recognized analyst. 
 
KENT: Typewriter expert, forensic… 
 
JACOBS: Forensic typewriter expert, whose information and judgments, and 
analyses were often used in the courts. 
 
KENT: And didn’t he corroborate? 
 
JACOBS: Oh, yes. He said these were from the same typewriter. No doubt about it. 
And showed—in fact, he saw similarities that were a little too subtle for us. And did 
it just the way they do in court—for testimony in court. And we called a press 
conference and presented these for the newspapers. 

Copyright 2001, 2004 by the Greenwich Village Society for Historic Preservation. For permission to use this history other than 
for research, instruction, or private study, please contact the Greenwich Village Society for Historic Preservation, Oral History 
Program, 232 East 11th Street, New York, NY 10003. 
Now, all of this cost not a great deal of money because we were do-it-yourself 
fighters—the way we made the survey an d did so many other things ourselves, 
always distributed our own leaflets, wrote our own stuff, and so on. But still it was 
expensive in our terms. This was not a rich neighborhood. We had to raise money 
and we began running book sales. People would give their surplus books and we 
would have book sales. That was a favorite, and it continues to this day in the West 
Village. But it began then. We had an artists’ show. Rachele Wall organized that, 
and her husband, Leon Wall, was an artist. She knew a great many—she knew all 
the important artists of the time. We got some empty space in an industrial 
building in which to have it. It was a very exciting art show. It was attended by 
people from all over the city. 
A major way we had of raising money—probably second in importance only to 
the book sale, because they could be repeated—was making Christmas wreaths and 
then selling the wreaths. They were very inexpensive. We got all the raw materials 
and we all sat around making Christmas wreaths and then of course everybody in 
the Committee bought one. But we also sold them to sympathizers elsewhere. 
Christmas wreaths are still, so many years later, being sold by the West Village 
Committee—the successor to the Committee to Save the West Village—as one of 
their methods, traditional methods of raising money. The same as the book sales 
are still being held. We were very fortunate in having in the community Leon 
Seidel’s Lion’s Head Coffee Shop. Later on—quite a few years later—he moved it 
east. 
 
KENT: To Sheridan Square. 
 
JACOBS: Yes. To Sheridan Square. But at this time it was at Charles Street and 
Hudson. That’s where he started. And it stayed open late at night. And 
furthermore, Leon was there even after it closed—I suppose doing his bookkeeping 
and that sort of thing. Not only did people meet there, Leon was a very important 

Copyright 2001, 2004 by the Greenwich Village Society for Historic Preservation. For permission to use this history other than 
for research, instruction, or private study, please contact the Greenwich Village Society for Historic Preservation, Oral History 
Program, 232 East 11th Street, New York, NY 10003. 
public character. He got information almost sooner than anyone else and then 
spread it almost sooner than anyone else. You just dropped in at Leon’s to get the 
news even if you weren’t getting a coffee or dinner or anything. He also became a 
depot, an important depot. As time went on in this fight we needed to have lots of 
things printed for distribution—leaflets around the neighborhood especially, but 
other things, too, that we wanted to get out to the larger community. He had a 
friend who worked in a printing company and was able, through an arrangement 
with his employer, to do printing himself after his shift was over. And he would stop 
in at Leon’s to pick up anything that had been left there by a committee member for 
printing. And as long as you got it to Leon’s before one a.m., you knew that you 
would have it the next morning, ready to deliver before you went to work. 
 
KENT: Well, that certainly was efficient. 
 
JACOBS: Yes. All the details of this fight could not be told in anything less than 
quite a long book, nor credit to all the people who were important in the fight and 
who lent whatever talents and ideas and so on that they had. But I’ll mention a few 
of these: Carter Winter, one of the members. He was an art director. He thought up 
such a great—well, I’ll call them exhibition ideas in this sense. A very original man. 
On one of the hearings that we went to, he turned up with a lot of glasses from 
Woolworth’s. You could get very cheap eye glasses from Woolworth’s in those days— 
with Xs made of adhesive, or masking tape rather, on each of the glasses. Everyone, 
the moment they saw them, they knew what it was. It was a building condemned 
for demolition. It was the sign that was on the windows. He also brought along 
masking tape so that everybody who wore glasses anyhow could put these Xs on 
their own glasses. And for the people who didn’t have glasses, he had this large 
number from Woolworth’s. So here we were—a big contingent of several hundred 
people. We made quite a splash at this hearing, all with our Xs on our glasses. It 
made such a splash and was so startling looking that the photographs that news 

Copyright 2001, 2004 by the Greenwich Village Society for Historic Preservation. For permission to use this history other than 
for research, instruction, or private study, please contact the Greenwich Village Society for Historic Preservation, Oral History 
Program, 232 East 11th Street, New York, NY 10003. 
people took of us appeared all over the world. We began getting clippings sent to us 
from Brazil, and from Europe... 
 
KENT: This is like Esperanto. 
 
JACOBS: Yes. Everybody understood it—this demonstration in New York. And by 
this time we were getting support—verbal support and sometimes even editorial—
newspaper—support. The Saturday Evening Post, which was a very popular 
magazine at that time, came out with an editorial for us. 
We began to become a symbol of what was wrong with urban renewal and 
courage and the indefatigability, which we sure had, of people fighting it…. 
 
KENT: Excuse me. Go back to the crossing out—the X-ing—of the glasses. Didn’t 
Stanley Isaacs characterize that fairly peaceful demonstration as a “riot”? 
 
JACOBS: Not that demonstration, but another one. The one he characterized as a 
riot was the one where the City—it was one more step in them trying to drive the 
nails in the designation. It was the City Planning Commission announcement that 
they were, despite all the surveys, despite all the evidence, they were designating it. 
 
KENT: I’m sorry. I interrupted you. 
 
JACOBS: No, that’s all right. And the riot, the so-called riot, was an attempt by our 
side to tell of some nefarious doings on the part of James Felt—that he had made a 
deal to designate this. And we had some evidence for that. But they would not allow 
our side to speak at all. Therefore, some members, I think Hugh Byfield was the one 
who insisted on getting up in spite—a very dignified man—in spite of being told 
that he could not speak. And saying, without permission, “Felt made a deal” and 
then tried to explain what he meant by that. 

Copyright 2001, 2004 by the Greenwich Village Society for Historic Preservation. For permission to use this history other than 
for research, instruction, or private study, please contact the Greenwich Village Society for Historic Preservation, Oral History 
Program, 232 East 11th Street, New York, NY 10003. 
Felt said to the police, “ Remove that man!” So Hugh was dragged out into 
the hall by the police. And in the meantime, I believe it was Steve Zoll who got up 
and repeated the same thing and tried to explain the evidence and what was meant. 
And he was dragged out by the police. And then one after another got up, tried to 
make the statement. You see, everybody knew. This was not arranged, but 
everybody in the Committee to Save the West Village—there were hundreds of 
them there—knew the whole story and any one of them was capable of explaining 
it. So the idea that by taking people out one after another you could squelch them— 
that didn’t work…. 
 
KENT: So when people say that you were the chief strategist, you may have been 
but you were by no means alone. 
 
JACOBS: Oh, I was not even the chief strategist! This was a very joint effort on 
everybody’s part. That was another of the delusions of the City. They thought that I 
was the leader of this and that if they could get rid of me that the fight would 
evaporate somehow. They thought I was some kind of a witch or whatever. But that 
was not true. They didn’t understand at all how communities worked. They didn’t 
understand at all how movements like this occur. They can’t be synthetic. They 
have to be real. And if I had been removed as the leader there would have been ten 
other leaders who could come take my place, who knew everything I knew, who had 
provided a lot of these ideas. 
 
KENT: So how was it resolved? Let’s move along. 
 
JACOBS: All right. Eventually—oh, I was not there during this so-called riot 
because of the forensic typewritten material. I had rushed off to the typewriter 
analyst’s office and gotten their statement and their blowups of the type and that 
sort of thing and we had called a press conference near City Hall. And I went there 

Copyright 2001, 2004 by the Greenwich Village Society for Historic Preservation. For permission to use this history other than 
for research, instruction, or private study, please contact the Greenwich Village Society for Historic Preservation, Oral History 
Program, 232 East 11th Street, New York, NY 10003. 
with Rachele and Erik and some of the others who had been instrumental in finding 
this—we thought of it as the typewriter ne st, or the cheating nest. And we were in 
the midst of the press conference while the so-called riot was going on, which only 
consisted of people saying, “Felt made a deal,” being taken out in the corridor by the 
police and somebody else saying, “Felt made a deal.” 
When I was asked about this riot by, I guess, the New York Times, I said 
that—from what I knew—that we were not vi olent. We were merely vocal. That was 
a fact. But it was one more effort to try to tar us. 
Oh, trying to tar us. I remember that Ira Robbins of the Citizens’ Housing 
and Planning Council called us “Selfish. Pinkos,”—a whole string of names. And 
when that appeared in the newspaper and was read at one of our meetings 
everybody roared with laughter. And I knew then that whole McCarthyism business 
and the fear that it had engendered was over. Nobody minded what names they 
were called anymore. It was a good sign. 
The way this whole thing ended finally was that Mayor Wagner was 
convinced that there was no sense in trying to go further with this—that opposition 
to it only grew by the day—that he beca me convinced that we really never would 
give up. And what we understand from somebody who was present at an interview 
between him and James Felt was that he said—he called Felt in and told him that 
the designation would have to be dropped—that these people were “too excitable.” 
That was the reason. And Felt asked for one more chance to meet with the 
community and persuade it. And so Mayor Wagner told him—this is all hearsay 
but so many of these things were reported to us by people who were there, you 
know, and this was. Mayor Wagner told him, “All right” he could have one more 
chance. And if the community really wanted this, that was different, and he could 
try. 
So Mr. Felt did hold a meeting, and he specified who would come to this 
meeting. But he also specified that I should not come. Now this was his delusion—
that if I was not there that he could manipulate the other people. And he had 

Copyright 2001, 2004 by the Greenwich Village Society for Historic Preservation. For permission to use this history other than 
for research, instruction, or private study, please contact the Greenwich Village Society for Historic Preservation, Oral History 
Program, 232 East 11th Street, New York, NY 10003. 
Barbara Byfield— The idea of James Felt manipulating Barbara Byfield was 
hilarious—Gloria Hamilton—I’m not sure . There were about fifteen or twenty 
people who were known to be hard workers and representative of the community. 
 
KENT: Including Robert H. Jacobs, Jr.? 
 
JACOBS: No, he wasn’t there. 
 
KENT: Excuse me. 
 
JACOBS: No. He didn’t have him at the meeting. So there they sat around at some 
boardroom-type table at the Planning Commission and Mr. Felt did his best at 
seduction—which was not very good. And what he wanted to get them to do was to 
tell him what they would like for the community. Now, we knew from the very 
beginning that that was the great trap. And everybody knew that. And that if they 
told him one word of what they would like for the community, he would twist it to 
say that he had community permission. That’s what he was trying as his last 
gambit. 
“Really. We’d like to know what would you like?” That was his... 
And the only answer he got was from every one of them was, “Remove the 
designation from the West Village. That’s what we want. After the designation is 
removed, we can go on. We can talk about other things. But nothing until the West 
Village designation is removed.” And then they all said in chorus to remove the 
designation. 
So that was his last chance. And when he had to report failure—or somebody 
who was there reported failure to Mayor Wagner—the designation was removed 
and the fight had been won. And after that, then we formed the Committee—the 
West Village Committee—in place of the Committee to Save the West Village. It 

Copyright 2001, 2004 by the Greenwich Village Society for Historic Preservation. For permission to use this history other than 
for research, instruction, or private study, please contact the Greenwich Village Society for Historic Preservation, Oral History 
Program, 232 East 11th Street, New York, NY 10003. 
had been saved. And the Committee got to work on all kinds of improvement that 
we did want. 
 
KENT: And housing was put into the community without displacing anyone—and 
more units than the urban renewal plan would have added. Isn’t that correct? Or 
subtracted, you might say. 
 
JACOBS: That’s right. And we got up a very nice booklet. There’s a copy of it that I 
gave—my only copy—I gave to my archive at Boston College. There must be some 
other copies around. But it explained—it might be of some historical importance—it 
explained the theory of infill housing—how this could be done so economically. And 
it was a very pretty booklet, too, very well done. Because the art director of it was 
Charlotte Winter, who was Carter’s wife. She worked in the art department of 
Architectural Forum—one of the assistant art directors there. So it was a nice 
professional job. And that housing is finally there now in spite of many obstructions 
to it and delays. The tenants have a good organization and I’m on their list to 
receive their newsletter which is called Down By the Riverside. 
 
[End of Tape, Side 4] 
 
KENT: Lower Manhattan Expressway. 
 
JACOBS: That fight has a very long history and I was in it only for a part of it. I 
wasn’t in it at the beginning and I wasn’t in it at the end. I was in at some episodes 
in the middle—in the sixties. Actually the scheme for this expressway goes back to, 
I believe, it’s 1929—to the Regional Plan Association transportation scheme for New 
York City that included not only the Lower Manhattan expressway but a cross-town 
expressway at 28th Street, I think it was, “a midtown expressway” and some others. 
It was going to have big highways down each side of Manhattan, and kind of 

Copyright 2001, 2004 by the Greenwich Village Society for Historic Preservation. For permission to use this history other than 
for research, instruction, or private study, please contact the Greenwich Village Society for Historic Preservation, Oral History 
Program, 232 East 11th Street, New York, NY 10003. 
shoelacings of big expressways across. And of course all the interchanges that such 
things involve and that have aptly been called “the Los Angelizing” of the city. 
I suppose we can excuse the Regional Plan Association, even if grudgingly, 
for this because in 1929 they surely had no idea the devastation and the futility of 
such a scheme. What I find it hard to have forgiven them for is their clinging to the 
plan and promoting the plan long after it became evident how disastrous it would 
be. But that’s what they did. It was as if this was an heirloom bequeathed to them 
by a previous generation of regional planners that they must treasure and burnish 
and carry out. The Regional Plan Association was quite an elite sort of group that 
had many of the worst aspects of paternalism, and being out of touch with the life of 
most of the people of New York. So that may have played a part up in it, too. 
Anyway, I got into it in, I guess it was ‘62 or ’63. And we had won the West 
Village fight by that time. [It] must have been in mid or early—I guess it was early 
‘62. And I had just gone back to work at my regular job at the Architectural Forum 
the year before, and had had to fit that in with fighting to preserve the West 
Village. Then I had a sigh of relief. Now I could get along only with my job and with 
my domestic duties and interests as a wife and mother. My, wasn’t life calming 
down? 
But Father Lamountain of Broome Street came to see me from the Church of 
the Most Sacred Heart. And he had been fighting the expressway on behalf of his 
parishioners and the neighborhood. And, of course, his parishioners had been 
fighting it. This was in Little Italy. The expressway, which was sometimes called 
the Broome Street Expressway, would wipe out his street, his church and the homes 
and shops and so on, of no end of his parishioners and others. And I suppose it was 
because he knew that the West Village fight had been won and he thought that 
maybe some of these seasoned fighters could help him and his people in the Broome 
Street Expressway crisis. 
I resisted this. On the other hand, I could see what an utterly disastrous 
thing it was, not only for his neighborhood, but and others in that part of 

Copyright 2001, 2004 by the Greenwich Village Society for Historic Preservation. For permission to use this history other than 
for research, instruction, or private study, please contact the Greenwich Village Society for Historic Preservation, Oral History 
Program, 232 East 11th Street, New York, NY 10003. 
Manhattan, but also for the Village. It was quite clear that the scheme to put the 
wide roadway through Washington Square was connected to this expressway. It 
was either an access or an egress—I forget which—point to the expressway. That’s 
why it was considered necessary. That was being planned in the usual way by 
Moses. He would do part of a highway without showing its implications. And then 
sooner or later, to the horror of many people, it became clear what these disjointed 
pieces added up to. 
Well, it was clear that one of the things the expressway would add up to was 
not only the Washington Square road, but that it would join up with the West Side 
Highway and make much more of a thing of it and more interchanges again. And 
heaven knows what it was going to do over on the East Side, but plenty. So the 
disaster that it would portend for the Village, as well as the other neighborhoods, is 
the reason I—although I felt very resistant to getting into another fight. I wanted to 
work on my work. I had a feeling the City was making not only my life, but 
everyone’s life, absurd by making us spend our precious time and our energy 
responding to things of this kind instead of doing the work that we wanted to do. 
Oh well. Couldn’t be helped. 
So I agreed at least to go to a few of Father Lamountain’s meetings that he 
was holding on a regular basis at his church. And he had been also seeing to it that 
people were informed of the dates of the hearings that were, for whatever reason, 
connected with the expressway. It was necessary to appear at City Hall. And in 
some cases, arranging for buses, since a lot of his parishioners were not very used to 
traveling out of their neighborhood and, goodness, not going to an official places like 
City Hall. And they needed a little encouragement and help, just in the practical 
matter of doing it. Later they got more practice in this on their own. Of course the 
more I got to know about the expressway, the more hateful I found it—not only for 
itself and its effects, but for the way it was being done. And, therefore, got deeper 
and deeper into the battle. 

Copyright 2001, 2004 by the Greenwich Village Society for Historic Preservation. For permission to use this history other than 
for research, instruction, or private study, please contact the Greenwich Village Society for Historic Preservation, Oral History 
Program, 232 East 11th Street, New York, NY 10003. 
One difficulty we had—of course we had to widen this fight as much as 
possible and show people throughout New York and throughout Manhattan, 
especially, what this meant for them. One of the difficulties we had was the political 
fights going on in Greenwich Village at the time. Little Italy, where Father 
Lamountain’s church was, and where the expressway was going through, was the 
very heart of—the stronghold of—Carmine DeSapio, and the DeSapio and the 
Tammany Democrats. The Village Independent Democrats—not all of them, but, I 
know, some of the most vociferous, tended to think that the expressway would be a 
good thing purely because, it would wipe out Little Italy—like wiping out the 
enemy territory. So it was not the easiest thing in the world to convince these 
people that there were more important considerations—for the City and for the 
Village—than wiping out Little Italy to take revenge on Carmine DeSapio. But 
gradually people began to understand this and to see what were the priorities. 
We also had allies in the Lower East Side because of what was going to 
happen there. And Doc Halpern, who came from farther east on the root of the 
expressway, was very important. Let me see, who—well, Rachele Wall, again. She 
had been such a great fighter for the West Village and she was a real stalwart in 
this battle. And so was Erik Wensberg who had been a great stalwart in the West 
Village fight and then became, to use a cliché, a tower of strength in the expressway 
fight. 
 
KENT: And Hy Harmatz of Ratner’s? 
 
JACOBS: Hy Harmatz. Yes, indeed. Of Ratner’s—a famous restaurant in the route 
of the expressway. 
Well, we had hearings in which we presented the virtues of what the area 
now known as SoHo—which James Felt, the Planning Commissioner, insisted upon 
calling “Hell’s Hundred Acres” and making us sound as if we believed in fire traps 
and dilapidation, and so on. He also called it “The Valley.” And it was, the way he 

Copyright 2001, 2004 by the Greenwich Village Society for Historic Preservation. For permission to use this history other than 
for research, instruction, or private study, please contact the Greenwich Village Society for Historic Preservation, Oral History 
Program, 232 East 11th Street, New York, NY 10003. 
said it, it was like the twenty third psalm. You know, “Yea, though I walk through 
the valley of the shadow of death…” [Laughter] The Valley sounded so sinister. It’s 
almost unbelievable now that it was regarded by officials at that time as a positive 
good to wipe out those beautiful cast iron buildings. 
 
KENT: Had Margot Gayle— 
 
JACOBS: Margot Gayle had taught us all by this time about cast iron buildings and 
to value them and to recognize them. And I can’t tell you how important her 
education, and her sensitivity, and her love of the city and of its heritage of good 
architecture was in this battle and in others. There were really wonderful buildings 
along this route, directly along the route. You would think that organizations like 
the Municipal Art Society would have recognized this and been on our side in this 
fight. No, indeed. They were, like so many of the elite of New York in these battles, 
they were our enemies. They were our opponents. They actually encouraged people 
to go to work designing what there should be instead of those cast iron buildings 
and instead of those old neighborhoods. Oh, well. I imagine this was, in a way, the 
decay of the good old responsible citizens of New York—that their organizations had 
been vitiated over the years, and become corrupted and decayed. Anyway, the elite 
of New York and their organizations failed the City over and over in these parlous 
days. And the Municipal Art Society is just one more example of that. 
We had hearings. We got people down. We spread the word—tried to get 
people to understand what this expressway plan would mean to the city. And, what 
do you know? At the end of 1962, Mayor Wagner and the rest of the Board of 
Estimates turned down the expressway and it seemed we had won. Great rejoicing. 
Lindsay, who was Congressman then, came in to speak against the expressway that 
fall at a hearing. And he was greeted with absolutely tumultuous applause, because 
as a Congressman he had been against the expressway and had made common 
cause with our side, written effective letters, and so on. This was right in the 

Copyright 2001, 2004 by the Greenwich Village Society for Historic Preservation. For permission to use this history other than 
for research, instruction, or private study, please contact the Greenwich Village Society for Historic Preservation, Oral History 
Program, 232 East 11th Street, New York, NY 10003. 
hearing by the Board of Estimate that he entered and was cheered and applauded. 
And I think this was not lost on Mayor Wagner. It couldn’t have been. He was right 
there, and the Democratic organization. They saw that they were on the unpopular 
side and they saw that there was a competition that was likely to do them in. So I 
believe that that had—but I don’t know—I believe that had an effect. Now the 
expressway seemed to have been laid to rest. 
Oh, by the way, a very disconcerting thing happened during that hearing—or 
associated with that last hearing. Father Lamountain was the leader of this battle, 
and a very good one, too. And he had been going to be what you might call the 
master of ceremonies for our side at the hearing, introducing each speaker against 
the expressway, and giving a kind of running narration to the whole thing where 
necessary. The night before the hearing he called me up and said that he had a very 
ill friend up in Massachusetts somewhere that he had to go to. It was a life and 
death thing. And that he would not be able to appear at the hearing. My heart sank 
and so did everyone else that I told this to, about him not being able to come. And it 
was agreed in the emergency among us that I would have to take his place—
somebody else could have but, you might say, I drew the short straw—and be the 
one who introduced the speakers. And of course there were plenty to help with this. 
 Now Father Lamountain came back afterward and it was a long time before I 
heard what had actually had happened. He had been called to the archdiocese 
headquarters behind St. Patrick’s Cathedral in midtown New York. And, by one of 
the Monsignors in charge there, he had been told that he had to withdraw from this. 
Now, he was trained in the Church’s very hierarchical organization, and he was 
trained in obedience to the church hierarchy. And, if this had been decided by the 
bishop or the cardinal, in fact, and his entourage, he had no choice but to obey it. 
Furthermore, he was not to let anybody know that he was withdrawing because the 
Church had ordered him to. So, in effect, he was not only ordered out of the fight at 
this crucial moment, but he was ordered to lie to his colleagues. And he really had 
no choice. 

Copyright 2001, 2004 by the Greenwich Village Society for Historic Preservation. For permission to use this history other than 
for research, instruction, or private study, please contact the Greenwich Village Society for Historic Preservation, Oral History 
Program, 232 East 11th Street, New York, NY 10003. 
Well, we defeated the expressway for that time, in spite of this, in any case. 
And the fight died down for a while. But the expressway scheme had not been 
abandoned at all. Now, the fight was not only taken up by the City Planning 
Commission, but also very vigorously by the State—the State Highway 
Department—which meant it was taken up very vigorously by Governor Nelson 
Rockefeller. The State became our chief opponent at this time. 
I forget exactly just what the technical maneuvers were that, you know, 
brought this monster back to life again. But the timing of it had to do with a new 
law—some new highway laws, or regulations of the federal government. There had 
been so many fights against the highways, especially going through cities, and so 
much opposition that this had reached the halls of Congress. 
 
[Break in recording] 
 
In May of 1968, new regulations were going to go into effect that required 
more stringent studies of highways before they were adopted, and more information 
about them and their effects than had been previously required. So in April, in the 
month before those new regulations were to go into effect, a new hearing on the 
Lower Manhattan Expressway was rushed, this time by the State. And the 
expressway was not dead after all. This was held in Seward Park High School at 
night. By this time, quite some years had passed since the last dire threat and in 
the meantime, many thousands and thousands and thousands of people in New 
York—tens of thousands—had learned how bad the expressway would have been. 
SoHo was already reviving—starting to. I shouldn’t say reviving. This new, exciting 
neighborhood was being created. And the pioneer artists in that area—people like 
Harry Jackson—had been joined by many others. 
 
KENT: And that connection, may I ask you about artists’ housing? And when that 
had occurred and when that had to do with it? 

Copyright 2001, 2004 by the Greenwich Village Society for Historic Preservation. For permission to use this history other than 
for research, instruction, or private study, please contact the Greenwich Village Society for Historic Preservation, Oral History 
Program, 232 East 11th Street, New York, NY 10003. 
JACOBS: Yes. 
 
KENT: And who instigated it? 
 
JACOBS: Yes. That was part of Save the Village and the Artists’ Housing. Save the 
Village was Doris Diether and Carey Vennema. My husband, Bob Jacobs, worked 
with them very hard over the years. They worked to prevent existing houses from 
being emptied of people or the rents raised so high that people couldn’t afford to live 
in them. Artists’ housing began as much the same kind of thing with Ann Lye. 
 
KENT: About when? 
 
JACOBS: In the sixties. I can’t tell you exactly when in the sixties. It may even 
have started toward the end of the fifties. Now the artists’ housing—the idea of it 
was that artists could have their studios and live in the same spaces—often in 
spaces that had previously been industrial. 
 
KENT: And also illegal. 
 
JACOBS: It would have been illegal for them to live there. So this was a fight to get 
it legitimized. They were living in—many, many artists were living in—such spaces 
illegally. And that’s the way SoHo was being resettled, as an artist’s area, to a quite 
an extent. So this was very much associated, in an oblique way, with the fight 
against the Lower Manhattan Expressway. It was very clear by then that buildings 
that would be destroyed, the neighborhoods that would be destroyed, were the very 
areas chosen by artists and becoming the most cosmopolitan and sophisticated, you 
might say, areas of the city. Very choice. 

Copyright 2001, 2004 by the Greenwich Village Society for Historic Preservation. For permission to use this history other than 
for research, instruction, or private study, please contact the Greenwich Village Society for Historic Preservation, Oral History 
Program, 232 East 11th Street, New York, NY 10003. 
So by the time this Seward Park High School hearing was being held in the 
spring of ‘68, it was pretty clear to many, many people that this expressway would 
be a disaster. Nevertheless, the State was determined to push ahead with it, and in 
order to do it the most expeditiously, to get the hearing over and the decision made 
before the new regulations—federal regulations—went into effect. 
 The hearing was held by a number of state officials. They had come down 
from Albany. It was patently a phony, the whole thing. A hearing is supposed to be 
held before a decision is made, of course, and the decision itself is supposed to be 
based on what comes out in the hearing, the information. This decision had been 
made. This hearing was just to go through the motions. And the state officials didn’t 
even attempt to conceal that. They were just trying in the most technical way to 
satisfy what they considered the letter of the law. 
And their feelings about this were made most obvious, in a way, by how they 
had set up the hearing. They sat on the stage with desks, or tables. And the 
audience, of course, was all down below in the large high school auditorium. The 
microphone was down on the floor at the level of the audience at the front of the 
auditorium, right at the foot of the stage, in the shadow of the stage, you might say, 
below it. 
Well, all that was okay, even though rather undemocratic looking. But the 
ridiculous thing was that the microphone was turned toward the audience in the 
auditorium, so that the speaker had to stand behind it, under the stage, and face 
the audience. It was very clear that the people at this hearing were not addressing 
the officials, that they were not there for the benefit of enlightening the officials, 
which is what the hearing was supposed to be about, but they were there to let off 
steam. The whole thing was just to let off steam and to go through the motions. 
Well, there were, anyway, in spite of this, hundreds of people who wanted to 
be heard. And although the time permitted to each speaker was limited and people 
were short, it was going on and on. Oh, the first speakers, of course, were the 
relatively few in favor of the expressway and they were all officials, just about. 

Copyright 2001, 2004 by the Greenwich Village Society for Historic Preservation. For permission to use this history other than 
for research, instruction, or private study, please contact the Greenwich Village Society for Historic Preservation, Oral History 
Program, 232 East 11th Street, New York, NY 10003. 
Then came this torrent of one person after another who was against the 
expressway. 
 At some stage I had, the same as other people, handed my name in to 
someone at the door who asked you as you came in, “Do you want to speak?” 
 And I had said, “Yes,” I did. 
 And eventually, what was it, I don’t know, about 11 o’clock at night by then. 
This would go on, it was plain, into the hours of the morning. Somebody or other 
whose name had come up earlier than mine ceded his time to me to speak. I didn’t 
know what to do. Everything was stacked against us. So I went up to the 
microphone. I was very angry. We were all very angry in that auditorium. And I 
said, I pointed out, how ridiculous it was that we were talking to ourselves the way 
the microphone had been set up, instead of to the officials who were supposed to be 
listening to us and making their decision on the basis of what they heard. You can 
imagine how cynical we all felt about that. 
 And when I said that, the chief state person who was present, whose name 
was Mr. Toth, came running down the steps and turned the microphone around. 
Here was this criticism of how it had been set up. That was rank hypocrisy, and so I 
turned it around again and said we had been talking to ourselves so far and so we 
might as well continue. That they weren’t listening to us. That nothing would make 
them listen to us. They had made their decision. That was clear. And that they were 
really only errand boys, in any case, who had no power to make decisions. They had 
been sent by their betters from Albany and they had no autonomy. So we had better 
let them take back a message, these errand boys. The message they should take 
back was that we would never stand for this expressway. And to emphasize that we 
would never stand for it, so they would remember this, I intended just to climb up to 
their level on the stage and walk across the stage and down the other side. And I’d 
be happy to be joined by anybody else who felt this way and would like to make the 
point of, “Please carry this message back to Albany.” 

Copyright 2001, 2004 by the Greenwich Village Society for Historic Preservation. For permission to use this history other than 
for research, instruction, or private study, please contact the Greenwich Village Society for Historic Preservation, Oral History 
Program, 232 East 11th Street, New York, NY 10003. 
So Frances Goldin, who was a civic leader on the Lower East Side came and 
joined me and we both started to march—went up the stairs and started to march 
across the stage. And people got up from their seats and formed behind us. They 
were going to march across the stage with us, too. 
Now something very curious, and, as far as I was concerned, really 
unexpected happened. There was a stenotypist who had a new machine and had 
been employed by the State to make a record of this hearing. She was very proud of 
her new machine and it was precious to her, as well it should be. It was her means 
of earning a living. It was her tool. I, for one, and I don’t think the others, either, 
would ever have attacked her tool, her means of a livelihood. But she was 
frightened. And she picked up her stenotype machine, she stood up from her table 
and picked up her stenotype machine and clasped it to her bosom to protect it. The 
tapes with the record on them fell out of the machine because gravity was not 
supposed to take care of them in this strange position. The machine was no longer 
on its bottom. It was on its side and out fell these tapes and they ran across the 
floor like confetti. It was amazing. 
And she kept saying, “I’m not a state employee! I’m not a state employee!” as 
if to disassociate herself from who she thought we were threatening. I don’t know 
what in the world was going through her head, but she was scared, that was for 
sure, and she didn’t want us thinking she was one of that group of errand boy men 
up there. 
In the meantime, Mr. Toth was saying to the policeman who was up on the 
stage, “Arrest that woman! Arrest that woman!” by whom he meant me. 
 The policeman, who I later got to know as Patrolman McGovern, said to me, 
“Why don’t you come and sit here Mrs. Jacobs.” He didn’t arrest me. But he said, 
“Why don’t you come and sit here.” And he pointed to an empty chair on the stage. 
So I went over and stood apart, beside the chair. 
 And then I watched this really surrealistic event that was unfolding. 
Everything else was silent, eerily silent almost, on the stage. People were kind of 

Copyright 2001, 2004 by the Greenwich Village Society for Historic Preservation. For permission to use this history other than 
for research, instruction, or private study, please contact the Greenwich Village Society for Historic Preservation, Oral History 
Program, 232 East 11th Street, New York, NY 10003. 
arrested in their march across, and here was all this tape, like confetti, rolling out 
and spreading everywhere on the stage. And people began picking it up from the 
floor and tossing it in the air as if they were dancers. But everything was peaceful 
and quiet, too. That’s why it was so surrealistic. The state officials had retreated to 
the very back of the stage and they looked as terrified of us as the stenotypist did. I 
don’t know why. We weren’t menacing anybody. It was a very peaceable, civilized 
crowd. I just suppose they felt so alienated from ordinary people. I don’t know why, 
but anyhow, it was really strange. 
 And I stood there watching this and I thought, “This has got to end somehow. 
Those officials don’t have a clue how to bring this to an end. Nobody else seems to.” 
And I didn’t have a clue either, but I knew that it had to be brought to an end. 
 So an inspiration about that struck me, and I left the chair and walked back 
the way we had come. We never did cross the stage. The others came along behind 
me and I went down and people went and took their seats again. Such a strange 
episode was over now. And I said, “There is no hearing because the record is gone. 
And without a record, there can’t be a hearing.” That was the inspiration that had 
suddenly struck me. I really had no idea that this was going to happen—or when it 
happened, what in the world to make of it or do with it. So I said, “We may as well 
go home because the hearing is over.” And everybody began to get up from their 
seats and leave. And as I went out, a police captain touched me on the shoulder and 
told me that I was arrested. And I said, “What am I being charged with?” 
And he said, “Well that will be taken care of later. Mr. Toth has insisted that 
I arrest you.” 
And I said, “I don’t think that’s very bright of him.” 
 And he said, well, he didn’t either, but he had no choice. 
The police, fortunately, as far as I could make out, were on our side. And I 
laid that to the fact that they had been listening to the hearing, too, and saw what 
scoundrels the state officials were and what a miserable part they were playing. 
And how right all these hundreds of people from the neighborhood were in their 

Copyright 2001, 2004 by the Greenwich Village Society for Historic Preservation. For permission to use this history other than 
for research, instruction, or private study, please contact the Greenwich Village Society for Historic Preservation, Oral History 
Program, 232 East 11th Street, New York, NY 10003. 
assessment of what a waste of money, what a destruction of the neighborhood, what 
a ruination of Manhattan. 
 
KENT: We’re almost at the end of the tape so... 
 
JACOBS: Yes. Well the only thing, subsequently, that affected me was the trial that 
I had, in which the serious charges against me were reduced to disorderly conduct, 
and to pay for damage that they claimed to the stenotype machine. 
Very well. I knew very well that I hadn’t touched that stenotype machine, 
and I also knew that nobody else had, that I had seen. There was no damage to it. 
So I had my lawyer, Charles Rembar, try to pursue that—get a receipt for repairs—
get some kind of a statement. He never could get it. I said, I didn’t want that on my 
record, that I had damaged a machine and it had to be established. But no! They 
were just as crooked about that as they were about anything else. 
Later in 1968 I left for Toronto, where I took up residence for other reasons, 
entirely, than anything to do with the expressway. And I had to come back to New 
York a number of times for court hearings. But then the fight, the actual fight, was 
carried on by other people—the fight that finally put that expressway to rest. So 
that will have to be the tale of someone else, how that was done. 
 
[Break in recording] 
 
JACOBS: This a correction, or an emendation, to something I said in the account of 
the West Village battle. I spoke there of a conversation of James Felt with David 
Rockefeller of the Downtown Lower Manhattan Association that had to do with 
some announcement that was being planned. I am not sure what this was—I wasn’t 
present at it and in recollection of what was told to me—I’m not sure whether David 
Rockefeller himself was figuring in this phone conversation or whether it was one of 
his surrogates—his director—or one of his other functionaries in the Downtown 

Copyright 2001, 2004 by the Greenwich Village Society for Historic Preservation. For permission to use this history other than 
for research, instruction, or private study, please contact the Greenwich Village Society for Historic Preservation, Oral History 
Program, 232 East 11th Street, New York, NY 10003. 
Lower Manhattan Association. But it was someone at that association and James 
Felt who were concerned with this. And my recollection is that it was Rockefeller, 
but I am not sure of that. 
 
KENT: Is that it? 
 
JACOBS: That’s it. 
 
KENT: Right. Thank you very much Mrs. Jacobs 
 
 
KENT: When did you move to Greenwich Village? 
 
JACOBS: I think it was in 1934. I moved to Morton St. with my sister. We had been 
living briefly in Brooklyn. I didn’t know, and neither did she, that we were moving 
to Greenwich Village. 
I would spend the afternoons wandering around New York after going to 
employment agencies in the morning, and I would come out—I didn’t know 
anything about the city really—and I would come out of the subway just at random, 
someplace, and start walking around there and remember where the subway 
station was and go back in and find my way back to the St. George station in 
Brooklyn—to the station that was in the St. George hotel there, or by it. 
And this particular time I got out of the subway at a place called Christopher 
Street/Sheridan Square. I had no idea where I was, but I was enchanted with this 
place and I walked around it. And I spent the rest of the afternoon just walking 
these streets. [I] went back in the subway, went back to Brooklyn and told my 
sister, “Hey I found the place we have to live.” 

Copyright 2001, 2004 by the Greenwich Village Society for Historic Preservation. For permission to use this history other than 
for research, instruction, or private study, please contact the Greenwich Village Society for Historic Preservation, Oral History 
Program, 232 East 11th Street, New York, NY 10003. 
So it wasn’t so hard to find an apartment in those days. It was in the 
Depression. And we went, and in short order found this place on Morton Street in a 
building that Oliver Williams—a very progressive preservationist and real estate 
person and building renovator, well before his time—had. We couldn’t have had a 
nicer and finer landlord. Then later on, I moved to Washington Place and, in 1948, 
over to Hudson Street. 
I didn’t play any part in the Greenwich Village Study. I really am pretty 
blank about what it was. Stanley Tankel loved the Village and wanted to help. He 
wasn’t really involved in the particular fights I was in. I think of him as a very fine 
fellow and a good citizen. Nice person. Along the line of others who were somewhat 
above that battle in many ways. They did their parts, often in important ways, but 
not in the nitty gritty of the fighting, you might say. 
 Another one in that category was, for instance, Robert Weinberg. He was one 
of the important members of the Community Planning Board. And I believe that he 
had a great dealt to do with keeping that as a living entity which became more and 
more important in the affairs of Greenwich Village. But he observed a certain 
distance and neutrality from things, as was perhaps correct, considering that he 
was, I guess, the Chairman of the Board. 
In the Save the Village efforts—the petitions and the very definite things, 
very constructive things that they did, and effective things—I was not involved with 
those. My husband was. He was deeply involved in them. He worked a lot in the 
Save the Village campaigns with Doris Diether and with Carey Vennema. And his 
expertise as an architect was very useful in hearings about zoning applications of 
various kinds. Those fights had a lot to do with the zonings and he spent a lot of 
time at the Board of Standards and Appeals, and preparing for it. And so did Doris 
and so did Carey. Also, he was active—although less so than with Save the 
Village—he was active with the artists, the artists’ housing fight. Now the—I was 
obliquely involved in . . . 

Copyright 2001, 2004 by the Greenwich Village Society for Historic Preservation. For permission to use this history other than 
for research, instruction, or private study, please contact the Greenwich Village Society for Historic Preservation, Oral History 
Program, 232 East 11th Street, New York, NY 10003. 
KENT: Just a moment. 
 
 
KENT: You were obliquely involved... 
 
JACOBS: I was obliquely involved in the historic preservation movement by the 
City—the acceptance by the City Planning Commission of the idea of historic 
districts and buildings. My oblique involvement was this: that at one point James 
Felt thought that he could play off the designation of the West Village for clearance 
against the adoption by the City of historic preservation. I know for a fact that was 
part of it—it was to co-opt people, and to make them feel they were getting a 
compromise. So we in the West Village were supposed to be thrown to the wolves, so 
to speak, as a sacrifice for the City giving people the preservation measure. We 
were delighted about this because we thought that preservation was needed, too, 
and we were very pleased that somehow or other our efforts had, as we were told, as 
we had understood it, had helped push this. And we knew that it didn’t mean our 
sacrifice. 
Now, I knew Arthur Holden. I knew him as an architect and a poet who—in, 
well, to be frank, not very good poems, but a lot of interesting thinking—put his 
views about communities and architecture, law and so on, into sonnets. An odd 
exercise. But I never encountered him in the context of any of our battles in 
Greenwich Village. I think he was one of those people who thought a lot about these 
things but was above the battle. 
 Many of the people who got involved in one of the Greenwich Village battles 
were like me. They then got involved in another one, just because of the logic of one 
leading to another. But this also made us all the more effective, because people who 
got seasoned and educated in one fight could use that in others. And even more 
important, they had gotten to know people who could be helpful in these battles. 

Copyright 2001, 2004 by the Greenwich Village Society for Historic Preservation. For permission to use this history other than 
for research, instruction, or private study, please contact the Greenwich Village Society for Historic Preservation, Oral History 
Program, 232 East 11th Street, New York, NY 10003. 
 The battles between the Village and NYU. I got involved slightly in a 
peripheral way. The library— I thought that was a very unfortunate scheme and so 
did many, many others in the Village because it was on the south side of the square 
[Washington Square Park]—[a] high building where there had been a low one. And 
it would cut off the sunlight for a good part of the year when it was needed the most 
in the square. It seemed out of scale as well as having that liability. 
 
KENT: But that’s one you lost? 
 
JACOBS: On the south side of the square. Yes, we lost that one. Philip Johnson won 
it. He was the architect for the library. And he was so much admired as an 
architect. I admired him as an architect too, but I thought he was wrong about this. 
But a lot of people were willing to take his word about it—that it would be a grand 
addition. 
 
[End of Interview]