THE  WRITINGS 

OF 

JAMES  MADISON 

VOLUME  I. 
1769-1783 


OF  THIS  LETTER-PRESS  EDITION 
750  COPIES  HAVE  BEEN  PRINTED  FOR  SALE 

No 


^c/f  ^r^^^W^^^^x^^^^ 


October,  /poo 


The  life-sized  marble  medallion  bust  of  James 
Madison  was  made  in  Philadelphia  in  1 792,  when 
Madison  was  forty-one  years  of  age,  by  the  Italian 
sculptor,  Giuseppe  Ceracchi.  It  hung  on  the  walls 
of  Montpelier  until  after  Madison's  death  and  was 
considered  by  his  contemporaries  to  be  the  most 
faithful  of  the  likenesses  of  him.  It  was  purchased 
from  Mrs.  Madison's  estate  by  the  late  J.  C.  McGuire, 
Esq.,  of  Washington,  and  purchased  from  the  Mc- 
Guire  estate  for  the  Department  of  State  by  Sec 
retary  Thomas  F.  Bayard. 


THE   WRITINGS 


OF 


JAMES  MADISON 

COMPRISING  HIS  PUBLIC  PAPERS  AND  HIS  PRIVATE  COR 

RESPONDENCE,  INCLUDING  NUMEROUS  LETTERS  AND 

DOCUMENTS  NOW  FOR  THE  FIRST  TIME  PRINTED 


EDITED   BY 

GAILLARD  HUNT 


VOLUME    I. 

1769-1783 


G.  P.  PUTNAM'S  SONS 

NEW   YORK  LONDON 

27   WEST   TWENTY-THIRD   ST.  24   BEDFORD   ST.,    STRAND 

&$t  Knickerbocker  |)rtss 
1900 

i 


\ 


Ube  fmtcfeerbocfcet  press,  l^ew  »ork 


BECAUSE  OF  HIS  EMINENT  SERVICES  TO  AMERICAN  HISTORY 

AND  BECAUSE  HE  IS  MY   FRIEND 

I  DEDICATE  THESE  VOLUMES 

TO 

WORTHINGTON  CHAUNCEY  FORD 

EDITOR  OF 
"THE  WRITINGS  OF  GEORGE  WASHINGTON" 


281838 


CONTENTS  OF  VOLUME  I.  xi 


PAGE 

To  Ambrose  Madison,  January  2d  .         .         .118 

Family  affairs — Excise  on  spirits — Private  finances. 

To  Edmund  Pendleton,  January  9th  ....       120 

Mutiny  in  the  army. 

To  Edmund  Pendleton,  January  i6th          .         .         .       122 

Arnold's  depredations — Army  mutiny — "  Delegate   extraor 
dinary." 

To  Edmund  Pendleton,  January  23d  .         .         .       125 

Discontent  of  German  troops — Foreign  news — Arnold's  raid. 
To  Edmund  Pendleton,  February  —  ...       126 

Exchange  of  C.  Taylor — English  preparations. 

To  Thomas  Jefferson,  April  3d 127 

Arrival  of  stores — Refugees  taken  by  Captain  Tilley. 

To  Thomas  Jefferson,  April  i6th         ....       129 

Report  on  powers  of  Congress — Coercive  power. 
To  Edmund  Randolph,  May  1st  ....       132 

Land  title  of  Virginia. 

To  Edmund  Randolph,  May  1st          ....       133 

Captures  at  sea — Virginia  land  cession — French  suspicions — 
Vermont  question — Murder  by  refugees. 

To  Edmund  Pendleton,  May  29th       ....       136 

Duty  on  trade. 

To  Philip  Mazzei,  July  7th 138 

Progress  of  the  war — Vicissitudes  of  the  finances — Need  of  a 
navy — Barbarities  of  the  enemy  in  the  South. 

To  Edmund  Pendleton,  July  3ist        ....       147 

European  news — Preparations  against  New  York. 

To  James  Madison,  August  1st,  2d     .         .         .         .       148 

European  news — Preparations  against  New  York — Prospec 
tive  evacuation  of  Virginia — Prices — Purchases  of  books. 

To  Edmund  Pendleton,  August  I4th  .         .         .150 

Vermont  controversy. 

To  Edmund  Pendleton,  September  3d         .         .         .       151 

Troops  on  the  way  to  Virginia — Substantial  aids  from  France 
— Admirals  Hood  and  Graves. 

To  Edmund  Pendleton,  September  i8th     .         .         .       152 

Naval  forces — Aid  for  Virginia. 


xii  CONTENTS  OF  VOLUME  I. 

PAGE 

To  Edmund  Pendleton,  October  2d    .         .         .         .154 

Suffering   of   British   troops — Arrival   of   Digby — Affairs   in 
Europe — Government  of  distant  parts  of  Virginia. 

To  Edmund  Pendleton,  October  Qth  .         .         .         .156 

Argument  in  Nathan  case. 

To  Edmund  Pendleton,  October  i6th         .         .         .157 

Mississippi  question — Naval  arrivals — Nathan  case. 

To  Edmund  Pendleton,  October  3Oth          .         .         .158 

Congratulations  on  Yorktown — British  failures — Practice  of 
impressments — Virginia  land  cession. 

To  Edmund  Pendleton,  November  I3th     .         .         .       161 

Territorial  cessions — Compliments  for  the  Marquis  Lafayette. 

To  Thomas  Jefferson,  November  i8th         .         .         .       162 
Virginia  land  cession — Deane's  letters. 

To  Edmund  Pendleton,  November  2/th     .         .         .       164 

Arrival  of  Washington — Territorial  cessions. 

To  Edmund  Pendleton,  December  nth     .         .         .       165 

Deane's  letters — Requisitions  of  Congress. 

To  Edmund  Pendleton,  December  25th      .         .         .       166 

Captures  of  Commodore  Johnstone — Acquittal  of  Jefferson. 
1782. 

To  Edmund  Pendleton,  January  8th  ....       167 

Opening  of  the  bank — Seizures  authorized  of  British  mer 
chandize. 

To  Thomas  Jefferson,  January  I5th    .         .         .         .170 

Claim  to  western  territory — The  Virginia  cession. 

To  Edmund  Pendleton,  January  22d  .         .         .         .173 
Vermont  case. 

To  Edmund  Randolph,  January  22d  ....       175 

Repeal  of  impost  act  by  Virginia — Claims  of  the  army. 
To  Edmund  Pendleton,  February  7th         .         .         .       176 

Plans  for  public  debt — Apportionment  of  expenditures. 

To  James  Madison,  February  I2th      ....       177 
Forwards  books  and  papers — Need  of  money. 


CONTENTS  OF  VOLUME  I.  xiii 


To  Edmund  Pendleton,  February  25th        .         .         .        179 

Powers  of  proposed  bank. 

To  Thomas  Jefferson,  March  i8th       ....       179 

Old  map  of  Virginia. 

To  Edmund  Pendleton,  March  iQth    .         .         .         .       181 

New  British  plan  for  recovering  America. 

To  Thomas  Jefferson,  March  26th  181 

Territorial  cession. 

To  James  Madison,  March  3Oth 182 

Money  received — Purchases  of  books — British  plans. 

To  Edmund  Pendleton,  April  2d         ....       184 

Vermont  question — Virginia's  military  deficiencies. 

To  Edmund  Randolph,  April  9th        ....       185 

Land  disputes — Proofs  of  Virginia's  title  wanted. 

To  Thomas  Jefferson,  April  i6th  186 

Territorial  question — Virginia's  title. 

To  Edmund  Randolph,  April  23d       ....       188 

Mediation  of  Vienna  and  St.  Petersburg — Letter  from  Dana 
— Vermont  question. 

To  Edmund  Randolph,  May  — 189 

Foreign  designs  towards  America — Virginia  cession. 

To  Edmund  Randolph,  May  I4th       .         .         .         .191 

Ceres,  man  of  war,  arrives — New  ministry  in  England — Atti 
tude  towards  America — Territorial  question — Naval  engage 
ment — Sir  Guy  Carleton  treats  for  peace — Public  audience  for 
French  minister — Letter  to  Dana — Paper  currency. 

To  James  Madison,  May  2Oth 194 

Naval  news — Studies  of  his  brother — State  of  finances. 

To  Edmund  Randolph,  May  2ist        .         .         .         .       196 

The  Virginia  cession. 

To  Edmund  Randolph,  May  28th       ....       197 

Loan  from  France — Adams  in  Holland — Deputation  from 
Congress  to  visit  States — Unfavorable  rumors  concerning  Vir 
ginia —  American  independence  in  Holland  —  Flags  from 
Congress. 

To  Edmund  Randolph,  May  29th       ....       200 

Adams  in  Holland — Right  of  a  State  to  prohibit  exportations. 


xiv  CONTENTS  OF  VOLUME  I. 

PAGE 

To  Edmund  Randolph,  June  4th         ....       203 

Interdiction  of  British  manufactures  —  Attacks  on  Robert 
Morris. 

To  Edmund  Randolph,  June  -  ....       205 

Transportation  of  exiles. 

To  Edmund  Randolph,  June  6th         ....       206 

Exportations  of  tobacco. 

To  Edmund  Randolph,  June  nth       ....       207 

Flags — Jefferson's  conduct — Izard  and  the  Lees — Marbois's 
publication. 

To  Edmund  Randolph,  June  i8th       ....       209 

Illicit  trade  with  British  condemned. 

To  Edmund  Randolph,  June  25th       ....       210 

Illicit  trade  with  British — Adams's  letter  concerning  treaty 
with  Holland — Refugees. 

To  Edmund  Randolph,  July  2d 21 1 

Foreign  news — Financial  problems — Defeat  of  French  in 
West  Indies — Controversy  between  Connecticut  and  Pennsyl 
vania  unsettled. 

Report  of  the  Committee  consisting  of  Mr.  Madison, 
Mr.  Duane,  and  Mr.  Clymer  relative  to  the  instruc 
tions  of  Mr.  Adams,  July  5th 214 

To  Edmund  Randolph,  July  Qth          ....       215 

Virginia  patriotism — Suppression  of  trade  with  the  enemy — 
Bank  dividend. 

To  Edmund  Randolph,  July  i6th       ....       216 

Cypher — Virginia  militia — Remittance  of  allowance — Carle- 
ton  on  exchange  of  prisoners — Enemy  in  western  country — 
News  from  New  England — Lippencot  and  Asgill. 

To  Edmund  Randolph,  July  23d         ....       220 

Recognition  by  the  States  General — British  policy — Foreign 
news. 

To  Edmund  Randolph,  August  9th    ....       222 

Letter  from  Carleton  to  Washington  concerning  peace  nego 
tiations — Exchange  of  prisoners. 

To  Edmund  Randolph,  August  I3th.         .         .         .       223 

British  attitude — Back  lands  as  means  of  revenue — Virginia's 
boundary. 


CONTENTS  OF  VOL  UME  I.  xv 


PAGE 

To  Edmund  Randolph,  August  2Oth  ....       226 

Action  of  Congress  concerning  French  control  of  American 
Ministers. 

To  Edmund  Randolph,  August  2/th  ....       226 

Uniform  naturalization  laws  necessary — Lippencot  case  — 
Randolph's  territorial  report — Need  of  money. 

To  Edmund  Randolph,  September  3d         ...       229 

Evacuation  of  Charleston — Petition  from  Kentucky — Ex 
change  of  prisoners  —  French  frigate  wrecked  —  Pecuniary 
troubles — French  army. 

To  Edmund  Randolph,  September  loth     .         .         .231 

Congress  replaces  French  frigate  with  the  America — Debate 
on  Western  lands — Virginia's  policy. 

To  Edmund  Randolph,  September  nth     .         .         .       233 

Laurens  returns — War  news — Conversation  between  Shel- 
burne  and  the  Duke  of  Richmond. 

To  Edmund  Randolph,  September  I7th     .         .         .       234 

Adams  negotiates  loan  in  Holland  —  Financial  details  — 
Adams's  treaty — Debates  in  British  cabinet — French  frigate 
wrecked  in  Delaware  Bay. 

To  Edmund  Randolph,  September  24th     .         .         .       238 

Proceedings  at  Versailles — Frigate  UAigle  captured — France 
remits  interest — Arrears  due  to  army — Laurens's  conduct — 
Pecuniary  troubles. 

To  Edmund  Randolph,  September  3Oth     .         .         .       242 

Want  of  money — Grenville  on  American  Independence. 

To  Edmund  Randolph,  October  8th  .         .         .         .       243 

Pecuniary  difficulties — Treaty  with  Sweden. 

To  Edmund  Randolph,  October  I5th          .         .         .       244 

Sir  Guy  Carleton  on  suspension  of  hostilities. 

To  Edmund  Randolph,  October  22d  ....       246 

Plenipotentiary  commission  issued  to  Fitzherbert  by  George 
III. — Adams's  treaty  with  States  General — Discontent  of  army 
— Movements  of  Dutch  fleet. 

To  Edmund  Randolph,  October  2Qth          .         .         .       248 

British  fleet  leaving  New  York — Lippencot  case — Pay  for 
army — New  York's  territorial  cession. 


xvi  CONTENTS  OF  VOLUME  7. 


Debates  in  the  Congress  of  the  Confederation  from 

November  4,  1782,  to  June  21,  1783         .         .         .       250 

To  Edmund  Randolph,  November  5th        .         .         .25i,n. 

New  York's  territorial  cession — Count  de  Vergennes  inter 
cedes  in  favor  of  Asgill — British  passport  given  Laurens — 
Evacuation  of  New  York — Cipher. 

To  Edmund  Randolph,  November  loth      .         .         .258,  n. 
Asgill  released. 

To  Edmund  Randolph,  November  I2th     .         .         .259,  n. 

Jefferson  appointed  Peace  Commissioner. 

To  Edmund  Randolph,  November  I4th      .         .         .259,  n. 

Jefferson's  appointment  as  Peace  Commissioner. 

To  Edmund  Randolph,  November  i9th      .         .         .26i,n. 

Rhode  Island  rejects  impost — Territorial  controversy  between 
Connecticut  and  Pennsylvania. 

To  Edmund  Randolph,  November  26th      .         .         .  262,  n. 

Delinquency  of  Virginia  in  payment  of  Congressional  requisi 
tions — Rhode  Island's  rejection  of  impost — Policy  suggested 
for  Virginia. 

To  Edmund  Randolph,  December  3d          ...  270,  n-. 

Redemption  of  Continental  money — Queries  put  to  Jaquelin 
Ambler,  Treasurer  of  Virginia. 

To  Edmund  Randolph,  December  loth      .         .         .  277,  n. 

Action  of  Congress  in  regard  to  finances — British  relieve 
Gibraltar — Destruction  of  British  fortress  on  Hudson's  Bay — 
Livingston's  resignation — Jefferson  expected. 

To  Edmund  Randolph,  December  I7th      .         .         .  292,  n. 

Rhode  Island's  reasons  for  rejecting  impost — Vermont — Code 
for  regulating  captured  property  —  Oswald's  commission  — 
Spain's  intentions. 

To  Edmund  Randolph,  December  24th      .         .         .  294,  n. 

Arrival  of  French  frigate — Oswald's  commission— Adams's 
treaty — Foreign  news — Livingston  remains  in  office — Conduct 
of  States  in  regard  to  impost — French  army  embarks. 

To  Edmund  Randolph,  December  3<Dth      .         .         .  296,  n. 

Rejection  of  impost — Jefferson  arrives — Deputies  from  army 
— Departure  of  French  fleet — Ship  South  Carolina  captured. 


CONTENTS  OF  VOLUME  I.  xvii 


1783. 


PAGE 


To  Edmund  Randolph,  January  /th  ....  303,  n. 

Deputation  from  army — Acknowledgment  of  independence 
in  treaty. 

To  Edmund  Randolph,  January  I4th          .         .         .  310,  n. 

Army  affairs — Valuation  of  lands — Jefferson. 

To  Edmund  Randolph,  January  28th          .         .         .  330,  n. 

Newspaper  proposed  for  Virginia — Continental  revenue  neces 
sary — Territorial  disputes — Adams's  treaty. 

To  Edmund  Randolph,  February  4th          .         .         .  343,  n. 

Continental  revenue — Impost — Virginia  affairs — Cipher. 

To  Edmund  Randolph,  February  nth        .         .         .  364,  n. 

Valuation  of  lands — Livingston's  resignation — Jefferson  de 
tained — Rumors  of  peace. 

To  James  Madison,  February  I2th      ....  366,  n. 
Rumors  of  peace. 

To  Edmund  Randolph,  February  I5th        .         .         .  368,  n. 

Dawn  of  peace — Danger  from  army. 

To  Edmund  Randolph,  February  i8th        .         .         .  3/i,n. 

Impost  in  Virginia — : Valuation  of  land. 

To  Thomas  Jefferson,  February  i8th  .         .         .  372,  n. 

Peace— Suspicion  of  British  court. 

To  Edmund  Randolph,  February  25th        .         .         .  384,  n. 

Public  revenue — Discontent  in  army — Peace  rumors — Seizure 
of  clothing  intended  for  British  prisoners — Danger  of  dissolu 
tion. 

To  Edmund  Randolph,  March  4th      ....  397,  n. 

Public  revenue — Morris's  resignation. 

To  Edmund  Randolph,  March  I  ith    .         .         .         .402,0. 

Morris's  letters — Plan  for  public  revenue — Jefferson  detained. 

To  Edmund  Randolph,  March  I2th    .         .         .         .403,0. 

Preliminary  articles  of  peace  negotiation — Franklin's  corres 
pondence  commended — Resignation  of  Franklin  and  Adams. 

To  Edmund  Randolph,  March  i8th    .         .         .         .407,0. 

Diplomatic  situation — Letters  from  ministers — Discontent  in 
army — Washington's  conduct — Deplorable  condition  of  affairs. 


xviii  CONTENTS  OF  VOLUME  I. 


PAGE 


To  Edmund  Randolph,  March  24th    ....  424,  n. 

Peace  preliminaries  signed. 

To  Edmund  Randolph,  March  25th    .         .         .         .  430,  n. 

French  loan  —  Army  unpaid  —  Anonymous  addresses — Pro 
vision  for  public  revenue  unsettled. 

To  Edmund  Randolph,  April  1st         .         .         .         .  439,  n. 

Randolph's  influence  in  State  Legislature — Failure  of  States 
to  support  Congress — Franklin  praised — Suspension  of  hos 
tilities. 

To  Edmund  Randolph,  April  6th        ....  442,  n. 

British  creditors — Publication  of  Morris's  letters — Report  on 
public  revenue — Valuation  of  lands — Washington's  letter. 

To  Edmund  Randolph,  April  loth      ....  446,  n. 

Cessation  of  hostilities. 

To  Edmund  Randolph,  April  I5th      .         .         .         .  449,  n. 

Carleton  on  prisoners  and  loyalists — Debates  on  ratification. 

To  Thomas  Jefferson,  April  22d          ....  453,  n. 

Revenue  plan  passed  —  Hamilton's  opposition  —  Question 
raised  by  cessation  of  hostilities. 

Address  to  States  accompanying  Recommendations 

of  Congress 454,  n. 

To  Edmund  Randolph,  May  6th         ....  460,  n. 

Address  to  States — Adams's  letter — Spain's  attitude — Confer 
ence  between  Washington  and  Carleton. 

To  Thomas  Jefferson,  May  6th  ....         .46i,n. 

Adams's  letter — Spain's  attitude — Treaty  of  commerce  with 
Great  Britain. 

To  Thomas  Jefferson,  May  1 3th          .         .         .         .463,^ 

British  conduct — Treaty  of  commerce  with  Great  Britain — 
Conference  between  Washington  and  Carleton. 

To  Edmund  Randolph,  May  -  .         .         .         .464,  n. 

Propositions  of  Congress — Treaties  of  commerce — Virginia's 
policy — Commercial  treaty  with  Great  Britain. 

To  Thomas  Jefferson,  May  2Oth          ....  472,  n. 

Territorial  cession  of  Virginia. 


CONTENTS  OF  VOLUME  I. 


xix 


To  Edmund  Randolph,  May  2/th       .         .         .         .473,0. 

Thanks  for  remittance — Rhode  Island's  attitude — Jefferson's 
political  prospects — Randolph's  return  to  State  Legislature. 

To  Thomas  Jefferson,  June  roth          .         .         .         .  475,  n. 

Livingston's  resignation — Inactivity  of  Congress. 

To  Edmund  Randolph,  June  loth      .         .         .         .475,11. 

Commercial  treaties — Adams's  conduct — Cession  of  Virginia. 

To  Edmund  Randolph,  June  I7th       .         .         .         .  478,  n. 

Dana  at  St.  Petersburg — Army  affairs — Standing  army  in 
time  of  peace — Jefferson  coming  to  Congress — Nominations  for 
Secretary  of  Foreign  Affairs. 

To  Edmund  Pendleton,  June  24th      .         .         .         .484,  n. 

Grievances  of  mutineers  —  Opposition  to  Congressional 
measures. 


JAMES   MADISON. 

JAMES  MADISON'S  family  traditions  were  wholly 
colonial  and  extended  back  to  the  first  settlement  of 
Virginia.  With  the  mother  country  he  had  no  living 
connection,  and  only  one  member  of  the  family,  his 
second  cousin,  Rev.  James  Madison,  received  any  part 
of  his  education  there.  England  was  not,  therefore, 
home  to  the  Madisons  as  it  was  to  many  other 
Virginia  families,  and  there  were  no  divisions  of  the 
house  and  consequent  heartburnings  when  the  separa 
tion  came,  but  all  of  them  embraced  the  patriot  cause 
in  the  beginning  and  without  hesitation.  From  the 
shores  of  Chesapeake  Bay,  where  James  Madison's 
direct  ancestor,  John  Madison,  received  a  patent  for 
lands  in  1653,  the  family  pushed  its  way  inland 
towards  the  Blue  Ridge  mountains,  and  his  grand 
father,  Ambrose,  occupied  the  tract  in  Orange  County 
where  his  father,  James,  and  himself  spent  their  entire 
lives.  He  was  thus  completely  a  Virginian,  and  his 
life  was  well  rooted,  as  George  Eliot  has  expressed 
it,  in  a  spot  of  his  native  land,  where  it  received  "  the 
love  of  tender  kinship  for  the  face  of  earth."  During 
the  eighty-four  years  of  his  life  he  was  never  continu 
ously  absent  from  Montpelier  for  a  twelvemonth. 

The  Virginia  convention  of  1776  was  composed 
chiefly  of  men  past  the  middle  period  of  life  ;  but  there 

xxi 


xxii  INTRODUCTION. 


was  a  small  circle  of  young  members  who  afterwards 
rose  to  eminence,  among  whom  was  Madison,  then 
but  twenty-three  years  old.  He  was  known  person 
ally  to  few  of  his  colleagues  and  was  mastered  by  a 
shrinking  modesty,  which  kept  him  in  the  background  ; 
but  he  had  the  reputation  of  being  a  scholar  and 
was  put  on  the  committee  to  draw  up  the  Declaration 
of  Rights.  He  made  one  motion  in  the  convention, 
offering  a  substitute  to  the  clause  relating  to  religious 
freedom.1  It  was  not  accepted  as  he  presented  it, 
but  a  modification,  eliminating  a  chief  objection  to  the 
clause  as  originally  presented  by  the  committee,  was 
adopted.  If  Madison's  clause  had  been  taken  as  he 
wrote  it,  there  would  have  been  no  occasion  for  the 
subsequent  struggle  for  complete  religious  freedom  in 
Virginia,  for  it  was  so  sweeping  that  any  further  pro 
gressive  action  would  have  been  redundant.  The 
offering  of  this  amendment  was  Madison's  first  im 
portant  public  act,  and  his  belief  that  it  was  right 
was  the  strongest  belief  he  had  at  that  time. 

He  was  then  a  profoundly  religious  man,  and  his 
family  surroundings  were  Episcopalian.  When  he 
returned  home  after  his  graduation  from  Princeton  in 
1772,  he  plunged  into  religious  studies,  wrote  com 
mentaries  on  the  gospels,  and  acquired  an  extensive 
knowledge  of  theological  literature.  His  education 
at  a  Presbyterian  college,  the  love  of  liberty  which 
was  a  passion  with  the  young  Americans  of  his  school, 
the  ill-repute  surrounding  the  clergy  of  the  English 
church  in  Virginia,  the  persecution  which  he  saw 

1  His  amendment  maybe  seen  on  pp.  40,  41. 


IN  TROD  UCTION.  xxiii 

visited  upon  the  Baptists  in  his  section  of  the  State- 
all  combined  to  make  him  champion  the  cause  of  ab 
solute  religious  freedom  and  separation  of  church 
from  state.  Beginning  with  the  convention  of  1776 
he  fought  for  this  step  by  step,  until  it  was  finally  se 
cured  by  Jefferson's  bill,  which  Madison  introduced  in 
the  legislature,  but  which  need  never  have  been  writ 
ten  had  Madison's  amendment  to  the  Bill  of  Rights 
been  accepted.  Madison  was  a  strong  man  who 
walked  through  life  alone  and  did  not  disclose  his 
inner  thoughts  on  vital  personal  questions.  What  his 
religion  was  has  thus  always  been  a  matter  of  dispute. 
To  Episcopal  clergymen  his  course  did  not  render  him 
popular,  and,  although  he  attended  their  church,  he 
was  not  a  communicant.  Agnostics  often  claim  him 
as  having  been  one  of  them,  chiefly  because  he  was  a 
friend  of  Jefferson's  and  is  supposed  to  have  been  in 
fluenced  by  him  ;  but  he  made  his  religious  studies, 
took  his  first  radical  stand  for  disestablishment,  and 
had  probably  formed  his  religious  views  before  he 
knew  Jefferson.  Non-Episcopal  clergymen,  although 
not  claiming  him  as  a  member  of  any  of  their  sects, 
have  written  of  him  gratefully.  Undoubtedly,  he 
sympathized  with  them,  and  he  had  warm  friends 
among  them.  He  believed  in  the  existence  of  sects 
and  used  to  quote  Voltaire's  aphorism,  "  If  one  religion 
only  were  allowed  in  England,  the  government  would 
possibly  become  arbitrary  ;  if  there  were  but  two,  the 
people  would  cut  each  other's  throats  ;  but  as  there  are 
such  a  multitude,  they  all  live  happy  and  in  peace." 1 

1  Rives's  Life  and  Times  of  James  Madison,  ii.,  220. 


xxiv  INTRODUCTION. 

As  Madison  was  an  advanced  thinker  on  religious 
subjects,  so  was  he  beyond  his  time  as  an  economic 
reasoner.  In  his  correspondence  with  Jefferson  he 
always  met  the  daring  speculations  of  that  philoso 
pher  with  views  and  conclusions  carefully  matured. 
Twenty  years  before  Malthus  published  his  Essay 
on  the  Principles  of  Population  Madison  reached 
substantially  the  same  conclusions,  as  his  writings 
show.  He  welcomed  Malthus's  work  when  it  ap 
peared,  as  he  had  done  Adam  Smith's. 

On  the  subject  of  slavery  he  and  his  friends  stood 
together  in  a  frank  admission  that  it  was  a  crushing 
public  and  private  evil,  and  he  earnestly  desired  to 
find  a  means  by  which  his  State  and  himself  might 
escape  from  it.  On  his  return  to  Montpelier  from 
Congress  in  December,  1 783,  he  took  up  the  study  of 
law,  having  for  one  object,  as  he  wrote,  to  gain  a  sub 
sistence,  depending  "  as  little  as  possible  upon  the 
labor  of  slaves."  September  8,  1 783,  he  wrote  to  his 
father  that  he  was  unwilling  to  punish  a  runaway  ne 
gro  simply  "  for  coveting  that  liberty  for  which  we  have 
paid  the  price  of  so  much  blood  and  have  proclaimed 
so  often  to  be  the  right  and  worthy  the  pursuit  of  every 
human  being."  In  the  convention  that  framed  the 
Constitution  Madison  and  George  Mason  worked 
together  in  opposition  to  the  pro-slavery  labors  of 
South  Carolina  and  other  Southern  States.  In  the 
first  Congress  under  the  Constitution  "  The  Humane, 
or  Abolitionary  Society"  of  Virginia,  composed  chiefly, 
if  not  wholly,  of  Quakers,  requested  him,  as  "  a  friend 
to  general  liberty,"  to  introduce  their  memorial  against 


INTRODUCTION.  xxv 


the  slave  trade  and  asked  his  judgment  on  a  proposi 
tion  to  petition  the  Virginia  Legislature  for  a  law 
declaring  all  slave  children  born  after  the  passage  of 
the  act  free  at  the  age  of  eighteen  for  the  women 
and  twenty-one  for  the  men.1  This  was  similar  to 
the  scheme  of  emancipation  which  Jefferson  enter 
tained,  but  which  he  did  not  bring  forward,  because 
"  the  public  mind  would  not  yet  bear  the  proposi 
tion."  It  never  became  able  to  bear  an  emancipation 
proposition,  and  Madison  lived  and  died  a  humane 
slaveholder  opposed  to  the  institution  of  slavery. 

When  Madison  went  into  the  Continental  Con 
gress,  March  20,  1780,  he  was  probably  the  youngest 
member,  and  he  looked  younger  than  he  was ;  but  he 
had  conquered  his  modesty  and  was  able  to  speak  his 
views  when  occasion  required.  The  most  important 
subject  before  the  Congress  was  that  of  meeting  the 
public  expenses.  Paper  money  was  piled  upon  paper 
money  ;  commerce  had  fled  ;  there  was  hardly  any 
specie  to  be  had;  the  States  found  it  difficult  and 
were  often  disinclined  to  raise  respectable  revenue  by 
taxation.  Madison  led  the  fighting  for  a  funding  of 
the  debt,  the  prohibition  of  further  paper  emissions, 
and  an  adequate  continental  revenue  by  a  five  per 
cent,  tax  on  all  imports.  The  day  that  he  made  one 
of  his  strongest  speeches  in  favor  of  the  last-named 
proposition  news  was  received  that  the  Virginia  Leg 
islature,  which  had  previously  agreed  to  it,  had  with 
drawn  its  assent.  Nevertheless,  he  did  not  lessen  his 
labors,  but  took  the  extraordinary  course  of  disregard- 

1  Department  of  State,  Madison  MSS. 


xxvi  INTRODUCTION. 

ing  the  Legislature's  instructions.  In  this  matter  he 
acted  from  a  national  standpoint,  for  Virginia's  interest 
was  the  same  as  that  of  the  other  States. 

In  advocating  an  insistence  upon  the  right  of 
America  to  the  free  navigation  of  the  Mississippi 
River  from  the  source  to  the  sea,  he  stood  for  a  meas 
ure  more  vital  to  Virginia  than  it  was  to  any  other 
State.  The  first  elaborate  state  paper  to  come  from 
his  pen  was  the  instruction  to  Jay  at  Madrid  on  this 
subject,  and  it  is  not  too  much  to  say  that  no  member 
of  the  Congress  could  have  prepared  the  instruction 
so  well. 

Madison's  service  in  Congress  at  this  time  and  later 
laid  bare  before  him  all  the  insufficiencies  of  the  Ar 
ticles  of  Confederation,  and  it  was  his  fortune  to 
participate  in  each  successive  step  that  led  to  the 
formation  of  the  Constitution.  When  he  went  into 
the  convention  he  was  better  equipped  for  the  work 
that  lay  before  it  than  any  other  delegate.  After  his 
election  he  arranged  the  notes  which  he  had  gathered 
laboriously  in  the  course  of  years  of  experience  and 
study.  These  notes  covered  the  governments  of  the 
world,  ancient  and  modern,  as  they  furnished  illustra 
tions  likely  to  affect  the  forming  of  a  new  government 
for  America,  and  they  also  contained  a  carefully 
arranged  description  of  the  weakness  and  vices  of 
the  existing  government.  He  had  one  primal  object 
before  him  —  to  evolve  a  scheme  for  a  stronger 
government  which  would  remedy  the  defects  of 
the  Articles  of  Confederation  and  which  the  people 
would  accept.  He  was  without  pride  of  personal 


IN  TROD  UCTION.  xxvii 


opinion  and  was  always  willing  to  compromise  when 
by  doing  so  his  main  object  would  not  be  lost.  As 
the  Constitution  was  not  written  by  any  one  member 
of  the  convention,  so  was  it  not  wholly  satisfac 
tory  to  any  one  member.  Madison  had  no  cut-and- 
dried  constitution  in  his  pocket  when  he  went  to 
Philadelphia ;  but,  keeping  the  general  principles  of 
the  Virginia  plan  before  him,  he  set  himself  to  the 
task  of  accomplishing  a  result.  He  was  more  con 
tinuously  in  his  place  than  any  other  member  and 
spoke  frequently  and  always  temperately  and  to  the 
point.  When  a  division  of  sentiment  among  the 
members  was  so  pronounced  as  to  make  any  conclu 
sion  seem  improbable,  he  was  patient  and  hopeful, 
and  returned  to  the  subject  when  all  were  in  better 
humor.  As  the  days  wore  on  he  came  to  be  recog 
nized  as  the  leading  man  in  the  convention,  and  when 
the  Constitution  was  finally  sent  to  the  people  for 
their  judgment,  it  was  generally  known  that  Madison, 
more  than  any  one  else,  had  wrought  it  into  shape. 

Eight  States  had  ratified  the  Constitution  when  the 
Virginia  convention  met  to  consider  it,  and  the  ratifi 
cation  of  nine  States  was  necessary  to  put  it  into 
effect.  It  was  confidently  believed,  therefore,  that 
its  fate  would  be  decided  by  Virginia's  action.  When 
it  first  reached  the  State,  it  was  generally  approved  ; 
but  as  each  man  began  to  study  it  many  found  objec 
tions  to  it,  and  the  preponderance  of  influential  men 
was  on  the  side  of  its  rejection.  When  the  conven 
tion  met,  George  Mason  and  Patrick  Henry  led  the  op 
position,  and  Madison,  George  Nicholas,  and  Edmund 


xxviii  IN  TROD  UCTION. 

Randolph  led  the  forces  in  favor  of  ratification. 
Madison  was  fresh  from  the  convention  that  framed 
the  Constitution  ;  he  had  recently  written  his  numbers 
in  the  Federalist ;  he  could  speak  readily,  and  there 
was  hardly  an  argument  against  the  Constitution  for 
which  he  did  not  have  the  best  answer  ready  pre 
pared.  The  chief  fighting  was  waged  between  him 
and  Henry.  Madison  was  constantly  on  his  feet, 
and  during  four  days  he  spoke  thirty-five  times. 
Henry  was  supposed  to  be  invincible  before  a  Vir 
ginia  assemblage  and  was  unquestionably  the  most 
powerful  man  before  the  people  in  the  State.  Madi 
son  beat  him,  and  his  victory  was  the  greatest  tri 
umph  of  his  life.  Quick  upon  the  heels  of  each 
other  had  followed  his  success  in  the  convention 
that  framed  the  Constitution,  his  success  in  conjunc 
tion  with  Hamilton  and  Jay  in  turning  the  growing 
sentiment  against  the  Constitution  by  the  publica 
tion  of  the  Federalist,  and  the  crowning  success 
of  carrying  the  ratification  in  Virginia.  This  may  be 
said  to  have  marked  the  culmination  of  that  part 
of  his  career  which  was  unquestionably  the  greatest. 
The  rest  was  made  up  of  earnest  work  and  high  honors, 
but  the  achievements  winning  for  him  a  great  place 
in  history  were  those  of  the  period  before  the  gov 
ernment  under  the  Constitution  went  into  operation. 
In  the  first  House  of  Representatives  he  was  a 
leader,  but  he  soon  became  the  leader  of  a  party.  He 
and  Hamilton  had  frequently  co-operated  before  the 
Constitution  was  formed,  and  they  stood  together  as 
the  two  most  effective  champions  of  ratification  the 


IN  TROD  UCTION.  xxix 

Constitution  had  ;  but  they  naturally  fell  apart  after 
the  government  was  established  and  parties,  as  ex 
ponents  of  different  habits  of  thought,  were  formed. 
Their  surroundings  and  training  had  been  dissimilar, 
and  they  did  not  agree  in  disposition.  If  Hamilton's 
theory  of  government  was  the  more  scientific,  Madi 
son's  had  a  broader  basis  of  popular  desire  ;  at  any 
rate,  they  were  different.  The  two  men  could  not  be 
coadjutors  without  one  or  the  other  changing  his 
views.  It  is  therefore  as  unjust  to  accuse  Madison 
of  having  deserted  Hamilton  as  it  would  be  to  ac 
cuse  Hamilton  of  having  deserted  Madison.  They 
were  active  opponents  in  their  views  as  to  how  the 
Constitution  should  be  interpreted  in  the  conduct  of 
the  government,  and,  being  earnest  and  positive,  they 
drifted  into  distrust  and  injustice  toward  each  other, 
as  political  opponents  nearly  always  do. 

The  parties  were  divided  to  a  great  extent  on 
sectional  lines,  and  Madison  was  a  Southerner  and  a 
Virginian.  The  narrow  sectionalism  that  then  pre 
vailed  needs  no  explanation.  There  was  no  national 
feeling  overspreading  the  continent,  nor  could  it  be 
forced  into  being.  The  States  were  jealous  of  each 
other,  and  the  Articles  of  Confederation  had  really 
been  as  strong  a  scheme  of  national  government- as 
the  people  would  stand  at  the  time.  So  cultured  a 
man  as  Edmund  Randolph  wrote  some  years  after  the 
Constitution  had  been  in  operation,  "  you  see  I  am  not 
yet  really  an  American."  Madison  was  biased  in  his 
political  actions  by  a  preference  for  the  welfare  of 
Virginia  over  that  of  any  other  State.  Washington 


xxx  INTRODUCTION. 

alone  of  the  active  statesmen  of  that  day  manifested 
a  wholly  unprejudiced  national  spirit.  The  interests 
of  the  North  and  the  South  were  opposed,  and 
Madison  bent  his  energies  to  keep  in  control  the  in 
terests  of  the  South.  He  never  liked  New  England 
men,  and  all  of  his  intimate  friends  were  Virginians. 
He  was  as  much  of  a  Southerner  as  John  Adams  was 
a  New  Englander,  and  more  need  not  be  said. 

Few  sympathizers  with  the  Federalist  party  of  a 
hundred  years  ago  can  now  be  found  to  defend  the 
Alien  and  Sedition  Laws  which  wrecked  that  party. 
They  were  conceived  in  a  spirit  of  intolerance  and 
had  all  the  ingredients  in  them  of  tyranny  and  oppres 
sion.  In  opposing  them  many  Republicans  went  to 
the  opposite  extreme  and  uttered  sentiments  which 
they  lived  to  regret.  Madison  wrote  the  Virginia  res 
olutions  of  1798,  and,  while  they  are  not  necessarily 
Calhounism,  he  lived  long  enough  to  be  obliged  to  de 
fend  them  against  the  charge  that  they  contained  the 
germs  of  nullification.1 ' 

When  Madison  became  Secretary  of  State  he  and 
his  chief  determined  upon  the  inauguration  of  what 
they  hoped  to  make  a  new  American  policy  in  in 
ternational  intercourse.  "  If  a  treaty  is  proposed," 
wrote  Robert  R.  Livingston  to  him  July  i,  1801, 
"  that  is  not  to  be  supported  by  arms,  but  by  commer 
cial  exclusions,  that  shall  not  refer  to  the  present  war, 

1  It  is  a  fact  worth  noticing  in  passing  that  Edward  Livingston,  who  opposed 
bitterly  the  Alien  and  Sedition  Laws  and  championed  the  Virginia  and  Kentucky 
resolutions  in  the  House  of  Representatives,  wrote  Jackson's  proclamation 
against  the  nullifiers  thirty  years  later,  and  that  the  Union  party  of  South 
Carolina  frequently  appealed  to  the  Virginia  resolutions  as  offering  sound 
doctrine  in  their  opposition  to  Calhoun's  creed. 


IN  TROD  UCTION.  xxxi 

and  shall  be  open  to  all  nations  that  choose  to  adopt 
it,  I  think  it  cannot  fail  to  meet  with  sufficient  support 
to  establish  a  new  law  of  nations,  and  that  our  admin 
istration  will  have  the  glory  of  saying,  in  the  words 
of  the  prophet,  *  a  new  Law  I  give  unto  you,  that 
you  love  one  another.'  " l  Madison  was  not  an  enthusi 
ast  and  did  not  share  Livingston's  extravagant  hopes  ; 
but  he  had  been  an  advocate  of  commercial  retaliation 
as  the  most  effective  weapon  to  employ  against  Great 
Britain  from  the  time  of  the  first  Congress,  when  he 
introduced  his  tonnage  bill.  He  saw  his  policy  carried 
to  the  extreme  of  an  absolute  refusal  to  trade  at  all  with 
a  country  with  which  we  were  not  yet  at  war,  and  he 
saw  it  fail  miserably  of  its  purpose.  When  he  stepped 
from  the  office  of  Secretary  of  State  up  to  that  of 
the  Presidency,  he  was  warned  in  the  beginning 
that  a  continuance  of  the  embargo  would  wreck  the 
administration  that  continued  it.  Furthermore,  he 
was  told  that  perseverance  in  it  would  produce  in  New 
England  "  open  and  effectual  resistance  to  the  laws  of 
the  LTnion.":  At  no  time  after  the  adoption  of 
the  Constitution  were  the  dangers  from  without  and 
within  so  menacing.  With  fluctuations  of  false  hopes 
the  inevitable  came  ;  the  cherished  "  American  Pol 
icy  "  was  thrown  to  the  winds,  and  Madison  found 
himself  at  the  head  of  a  nation  at  war.  He  was  a 
rounded-out  statesman  of  wide  experience  and  ripe 
knowledge,  but  of  martial  spirit  he  had  none.  He 
was  a  man  of  peace  and  of  books.  His  physique 
was  weak,  and  he  cared  nothing  for  manly  sports. 

1  Department  of  State,  Madison  MSS.  *  Ibid. 


xxxii  IN  TROD  UCT1ON. 


Nowhere  in  the  record  of  his  life  is  there  a  hint  that 
he  ever  had  a  quarrel  which  approached  culmination 
in  a  personal  encounter.  His  blood  flowed  temper 
ately,  and  he  hated  war,  and  his  incapacity  as  a  war 
President  was  painfully  manifest. 

The  country  was  not  united,  and  he  had  not  force 
enough  to  unite  it.  A  treasonable  faction  was  breed 
ing  in  New  England,  and  he  knew  not  how  to  crush 
it.  A  vigorous  leader  of  men  and  of  popular  forces 
was  what  the  occasion  demanded,  and  Madison  did 
not  meet  the  requirements.  Such  success  as  the  war 
achieved  owed  nothing  to  him.  An  honorable  peace 
and  a  reaction  of  prosperity  and  calm  gave  him  an 
opportunity  to  conclude  his  administration  creditably, 
and  he  retired  from  public  life  with  a  great  reputa 
tion  ;  but  he  had  really  won  it  before  he  became 
President.1 

In  private  life  he  set  an  example  of  beautiful  sim 
plicity  and  purity.  No  breath  of  scandal  was  ever 
raised  against  him.  No  man  ever  accused  him  of  un 
truth  or  meanness.  He  was  gentle  and  sympathetic 
towards  all  who  approached  him.  He  was  generous 
in  giving  and  dispensed  a  free  hospitality.  While  he 
never  introduced  a  jest  into  a  public  speech  and 

1  At  a  dinner  party  in  Washington  in  March,  1829,  Henry  Clay  and  his  polit 
ical  opponent  Samuel  Harrison  Smith,  of  the  National  Intelligencer,  were 
analyzing  the  characters  of  Jefferson  and  Madison.  "  Mr.  Clay  preferred 
Madison  and  pronounced  him  after  Washington  our  greatest  statesman  and  first 
political  writer.  He  thought  Jefferson  had  the  most  genius  —  Madison  the 
most  judgment  and  common  sense  —  Jefferson  a  visionary  and  theorist,  often 
betrayed  by  his  enthusiasm  into  rash  imprudent  and  impracticable  measures  — 
Madison  cool,  dispassionate  safe." — From  a  private  letter  of  Mrs.  Smith's  to 
her  son  among  the  family  papers  of  J.  Henley  Smith,  Esq.,  of  Washington. 


IN  TROD  UCTION.  xxxiii 


rarely  into  a  letter,  he  had  a  rich  fund  of  humor,  and 
his  good  stories  went  from  mouth  to  mouth  among 
his  friends.  His  household  was  one  of  rare  happiness 
and  innocence,  and  perhaps  the  highest  tribute  to  his 
private  worth  was  paid  by  the  hundred  slaves  who 
stood  around  the  grave  at  his  funeral  and  gave  an 
extraordinary  exhibition  of  the  genuineness  of  their 

grief.1 

*          *          * 

During  the  closing  years  of  his  life  Madison  occu 
pied  himself  in  arranging  his  papers  and  especially 
those  relating  to  the  framing  of  the  Constitution. 
He  bequeathed  them  to  his  wife,2  intending  that  she 
should  immediately  publish  the  debates  in  the  Con 
gress  of  1782,  1783,  and  1787,  the  debates  in  the 
constitutional  convention,  the  proceedings  of  the 
Congresses  of  1776,  and  a  limited  number  of  letters, 
as  he  had  arranged  them.  Through  St.  George 
Tucker  she  offered  the  work  to  the  Harpers  and 
through  her  son  to  other  publishers,3  but  was  unable 
to  come  to  a  satisfactory  agreement  with  any  of  them. 
Francis  Preston  Blair,  the  publisher  of  the  Congress- 
sional  Globe,  offered  to  publish  the  work,  but  doubted 
whether  much  profit  would  accrue  and  suggested 
that  her  best  plan  would  be  to  fix  a  sum  to  cover 
the  profit  she  expected  and  offer  the  manuscript  to 
Congress  at  that  price.  He  promised  to  assist  her 

1  See  the  testimony  of    an  eye-witness,  James  Barbour,  in  his    Eulogium, 
Washington,  1836. 

2  See  his  will,  dated  April  15,  1835. 

3  St.  George  Tucker  and  Mrs.  Madison,  August  23,  1836.     N.  Y.  Public  Li 
brary  (Lenox)  MSS. 


xxxiv  IN  TROD  UCTION. 

in  securing  the  appropriation.1  She  had,  however,  al 
ready  offered  the  papers  to  the  government  in  her  letter 
of  November  15,  1836,  to  President  Jackson.  A  copy 
of  this  letter  was  laid  before  Congress  in  a  special 
message  dated  December  6,  1836.  Madison's  neigh 
bor  and  friend,  James  Barbour,  acted  as  her  agent 
and  told  her  that  $100,000,  the  sum  she  at  first  said 
she  expected,  was  out  of  the  question,2  but  that  she 
could  get  $30,000  for  the  papers.  This  amount  was 
appropriated  by  Act  of  March  3,  i83;.3  July  9,  1838, 
Congress  authorized  the  publication  of  the  papers.4 
Henry  D.  Gilpin,  of  Pennsylvania,  then  Solicitor  of 
the  Treasury,  was  selected  as  the  editor,  and  the  work 
was  published  in  three  volumes  in  Washington  in 
1840  under  the  title  of  The  Madison  Papers.  May 
31,  1848,  Mrs.  Madison  being  then,  through  domestic 
misfortunes,  in  distressed  circumstances,  Congress  ap 
propriated  $25,000  to  purchase  all  the  remaining 
manuscripts  of  Madison's  in  her  hands.5  This,  with 
the  first  purchase,  forms  the  magnificent  collection  of 
Madison's  writings  now  deposited  in  the  Department 
of  State.  August  18,  1856^  Congress  authorized  the 
printing  of  the  papers  of  the  second  purchase,  and  a 
part  of  them  appeared  as  The  Works  of  James 
Madison,  published  in  four  volumes  in  Washington 
in  1865. 

Mr.  J.  C.  McGuire,  of  Washington,  a  family  con- 

1  Francis  Preston  Blair  to  Mrs.  Madison  Nov.  26,  1836.       N.  Y.  Public  Li 
brary  (Lenox)  MSS. 

2  James  Barbour   to   Mrs.    Madison,    December   22,    1836.     N.    Y.    Public 
Library  (Lenox)  MSS. 

3  Stats,  at  Large,  v.,  171.  5  Ibid.,  ix.,  235. 

4  Ibid.,  300.  6  Ibid.,  117. 


IN  TROD  UCTION.  xxxv 

nection  of  the  Madisons,  who  amassed  in  the  course 
of  his  life  an  extraordinary  collection  of  Madisoni- 
ana,  printed  in  [859  (Washington)  "  exclusively  for 
private  distribution  "  a  limited  edition  in  one  volume 
of  Madison's  letters  under  the  title  Selections  from 
the  Private  Correspondence  of  James  Madison  from 
1812  to  1836.  It  contained  about  one  hundred 
letters. 

The  originals  of  a  few  of  the  letters  printed  in  The 
Madison  Papers  have  been  withheld  from  the  editor, 
and  he  has  been  obliged  to  reproduce  them  as  they 
were  printed,  in  the  first  volume  of  this  edition,  indi 
cating  their  source  as  he  has  that  of  every  other  paper 
appearing  in  these  volumes.  These  sources  are 
widely  scattered  and  embrace  various  public,  private, 
and  official  depositories,  which  have  been  generously 
opened  to  the  editor. 

But  two  lives  of  Madison  have  been  published  :  one 
a  large  fragment  in  three  volumes,  entitled  History 
of  the  Life  and  Times  of  James  Madison,  by  William 
C.  Rives,  the  first  volume  of  which  was  published  in 
1859  (Boston,  Little,  Brown  &  Co.),  and  the  third  in 
1868;  the  other  by  S.  H.  Gay,  in  the  American 
Statesman  Series  (Boston,  1884).  Of  Rives's  work  it 
must  be  said  that  it  is  a  misfortune  it  was  never 
finished.  It  embraces  only  that  part  of  Madison's 
career  preceding  the  administration  of  John  Adams. 
It  is  redundant  and  heavy,  and  the  stilted  style  be 
trays  the  diplomatic  rather  than  literary  training  of 
the  author.  But  it  is  a  painstaking  work,  executed  con 
scientiously  and  after  an  exhaustive  and  able  study  of 


xxxvi  IN  TROD  UCTION. 

the  sources  of  material,  printed  and  imprinted.  The 
standpoint  is  uncritical,  and  Mr.  Rives  shows  an  ex 
treme  partiality  for  the  subject  of  his  work. 

None  of  these  remarks  is  applicable  to  Mr.  Gay's 
short  Life.  With  ample  unused  material  available,  his 
study  does  not  seem  to  have  gone  beyond  the  printed 
resources  of  any  good  public  library,  and  his  attitude 
towards  Madison  and  all  public  men  of  his  school  is 
extremely  unsympathetic.  It  is  enough  to  say  of  his 
work  that  it  is  wholly  inadequate  to  its  subject. 

GAILLARD  HUNT. 
FALLS  CHURCH,  VA., 
August  29, 1 900. 


CHRONOLOGY  OF  JAMES  MADISON. 
1751-1783- 


I751-  Born  at  Port  Conway,  King  George  County,  Virginia,     / 

March  16.  at  the  house  of  fas  maternal  grandmother. 
I751-  Removed  to  Montpelier  in  Orange  County. 

6  Sent  to  school   to  Donald  Robertson  in  King  and 

Queen  County. 

1765-9.          Under  the  private  tuition  of  Rev.  Thomas  Martin. 
1769.  Enters  Princeton. 


.  Graduates  from  Princeton. 

1772.  Returns  to  Montpelier. 

1773.  At  home  teaching  his  younger  brothers  and  sisters. 

774'  Visits  New  Jersey  and  Pennsylvania. 


Chosen  a  member  of  County  Committee  of  Orange. 

1775.  Assists  in  enlisting  for  defense. 

1775.  Writes  the  address  "  To  Captain  Patrick  Henry  and 
May  9.  the  Gentlemen  Independents  of  Hanover." 

1776.  Elected  a  member  for  Orange  County  of  the  Virginia 
April.  Convention. 

Takes  his  seat  in  the  Convention. 


6 

1776.  Appointed  on  the  Committee  to  draft  a  Declaration 

May  16.  of  Rights  and  Plan  of  Government  for  Virginia. 

-      '  Offers  his  amendment  for  greater  religious  liberty. 

Oct  6  Takes  his  seat  in   the  House  of  Delegates. 


xxxviii  CHRONOLOGY  OF 


1776.  Meets  Thomas  Jefferson. 

I  *7*7*7 

. '  Loses  re-election  to  the  House  of  Delegates. 

1777.  Elected  by  the  General  Assembly  to  the  Governor's 
Nov.  13.  Council. 

Takes  his  seat  in  the  Governor's  Council. 

g  At  Williamsburg,  lodging  with  his  cousin,  Rev.  James 
Madison. 

1779.  Chosen  by  the  General  Assembly  a  representative  in 
Dec.  14.  the  Continental  Congress. 

March  20  Takes  his  seat  in  the  Continental  Congress. 

1780.  Instructions  to  John  Jay  on  "  Boundaries  and  Free 
Oct.  17.  Navigation  of  the  Mississippi." 

1780.  Proposes   a   discontinuance    of    emissions   of   paper 

Nov.  money. 

1780.  Requests  instructions  from  General  Assembly  on  the 
Dec.  13.  Mississippi  question  jointly  with  Bland. 

1781.  Still  in  Philadelphia. 

gl  Receives    Benjamin     Harrison,    "  Delegate     Extra 
ordinary  "  from  Virginia. 

1781.  Discusses  project  for  applying  coercive  measures  to 

April  16.  the  States. 

1781.  Brings  subject  of  Virginia  land  cession  before  Con- 
April,  gress  again. 

Qci  '  This  subject  again. 

Nov '  13  Suggests  that  Virginia  compliment  Lafayette. 

1782.  Still  in  Philadelphia. 

1782.  The  new  bank  authorized  by  Congress  opened.     His 

Jan.  7.  distressing  personal  finances. 

1782.  ... 

l^ja  1  he  Virginia  cession  again. 

July's  Reports  instructions  to  Adams  at  The  Hague. 

1782.  The  Virginia  cession  under  debate.     He  urges  com- 

Sept.  promise. 


*  JAMES  MADISON.  xxxix 

JT  Begins  his  reports  of  debates  in  Congress. 

1782.  Raises  objection  to  the  mode  of  executing  the  orders 

Nov.  12.     of  Congress. 

Moves  that  Secretary  of  Foreign  Affairs  be  author- 
Nov  21      *zec^  to   keep  foreign   ministers    advised    of   events    in 

Congress. 

1782.  Reports  in  favor  of  ratifying  Franklin's  order  liberat- 

Nov.  22.    ing  Cornwallis  in  exchange  for  Laurens. 
1782.  Moves  that  Congress  give  credit  for  State  emissions 

Nov.  26.    of  paper  money. 

1782.  Appointed  on  Committee  to  confer  with  members  of 

Dec.  4.       Pennsylvania  legislature. 

Dec  '7  Speaks  on  subject  of  depreciation  of  currency. 

1782.  Presents  report  on  publication  in  a  Boston  paper  of 

Dec.  12.     secret  proceedings  of  Congress. 

1782.  Presents  answer  to  Rhode  Island's  objections  to  pro- 

Dec.  16.     posed  impost. 

1782.  Communicates  to  Congress  Virginia's  repeal  of  the 

Dec.  24.     impost  law. 

Urges  instructions  to  ministers  to  endeavor  to  secure 
Dec  '31      commercial   freedom   with   Great  Britain  and  depen 
dencies. 
'783.  Still  in  Philadelphia. 

Jan  8  Contends  against  taxation  by  valuation  of  land. 

1783. 

Tan  17          Moves  application  for  further  loans  in  Europe. 

Jan  23  Reports  list  of  books  proper  for  Congress  to  buy. 

Tan  28  Moves  the  necessity  of  permanent  funds. 

Feb  '7  Brings  up  question  of  ascertaining  valuation  of  land. 

F  b  21  Speaks  on  the  subject  of  general  revenue. 

Feb  28  Speaks  on  same  subject. 


xl  CHRONOLOGY  OF  JAMES  MADISON. 


19.    sPeaks  on  the  treaty  of  Peace- 

1783.  Seconds  motion  to  disclose  to  Spain  intended  British 

March  22.  expedition  against  Florida  confided  to  Adams. 

1783.  Defends  the  conduct  of  the  American  ministers  to 

March  26.  negotiate  treaty  of  peace. 

1783.  Advocates   assuming   expenses  of  the  States  in  the 

March  27.  war. 

1783.  Appointed   on  committee  with   Hamilton  to  report 

April  3.      arrangements  in  consequence  of  peace. 

1783.  Opposes  appointment  of  a  committee  on  the  western 

April  9.      country. 

1783.  Reports  amendment  providing  for  determining  ex- 

April  17.    penses  of  the  States. 

A  ril  26         Address  to  the  States  on  the  subject  of  revenue. 

1783.  Accompanying  James  Floyd  and  his  daughter,  Cath- 

April  27.    erine,  to  Brunswick. 

Returns  to  Philadelphia. 


THE  WRITINGS 


OF 


JAMES  MADISON 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 

JAMES  MADISON. 


TO  REV.   THOMAS   MARTIN.1  MAD.  MSS. 

NASSAU  HALL,  August  16  [i7]6g. 

REV  SIR — I  am  not  a  little  affected  at  hearing  of 
your  misfortune,  but  cannot  but  hope  the  cure  may  be 
so  far  accomplished  as  to  render  your  journey  not  in 
convenient.  Your  kind  Advice  &  friendly  cautions 
are  a  favour  that  shall  be  always  gratefully  remem 
bered,  &  I  must  beg  leave  to  assure  you  that  my 
happiness,  which  you  and  your  brother  so  ardently 
wish  for,  will  be  greatly  augmented  by  both  your 
enjoyments  of  the  like  blessing. 

I  have  been  as  particular  to  my  father  as  I  thought 
necessary  for  this  time,  as  I  send  him  an  account  of 
the  Institution,  &c  &c.,  and  of  the  College  wrote  by 
Mr.  Blair,  the  Gentleman  formerly  elected  President 
of  this  place  you  will  likewise  find  two  pamphlets 
entitled  Britannia's  intercession  for  John  Wilks,  &c., 
which,  if  you  have  not  seen  it,  perhaps  may  divert  you. 

1  The  established  ministei  of  the  parish,  Madison's  tutor  before  he  went  to 
Princeton.  He  lived  with  the  family  at  Montpelier. — Rives's  Life  and  Times  of 
James  Madison,  vol.  i.,  10. 


2  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1769 

I  am  perfectly  pleased  with  my  present  situation  ;  and 
the  prospect  before  me  of  three  years'  confinement, 
however  terrible  it  may  sound,  has  nothing  in  it,  but 
what  will  be  greatly  alleviated  by  the  advantages  I 
hope  to  derive  from  it. 

The  Grammars,  which  Mf  Houston  procured  for 
you  amount  at  2/10  each  to  i;/.  Your  brothers  ac 
count  with  Plumb,  to  6/7.  and  Sawneys  expence  4/2 
the  whole  i..  7..  9,  Inclosed  you  have  i5/.  the  over 
plus  of  which  you  may  let  Sawney  have  to  satisfy 
those  who  may  have  been  at  any  trouble  on  my 
account. 

The  near  approach  of  examination  occasions  a  sur 
prising  application  to  study  on  all  sides,  and  I  think 
it  very  fortunate  that  I  entered  College  immediately 
after  my  arrival,  tho'  I  believe  there  will  not  be  the 
least  danger  of  my  getting  an  Irish  hint  as  they  call  it, 
yet  it  will  make  my  future  studies  somewhat  easier, 
and  I  have  by  that  means  read  over  more  than  half 
Horace  and  made  myself  pretty  well  acquainted  with 
Prosody,  both  which  will  be  almost  neglected  the  two 
succeeding  years. 

The  very  large  packet  of  Letters  for  Carolina  I  am 
afraid  will  be  incommodious  to  your  brother  on  so 
long  a  journey,  to  whom  I  desire  my  compliments 
may  be  presented  and  conclude  with  my  earnest  re 
quest  for  a  continuance  of  both  your  friendships,  and 
sincere  wishes  for  your  recovery,  and  an  agreeable 
journey  to  your  whole  Company. 

I  am,  sir,  your  obligd  friend  and  HI  Ser. 

JAMES  MADISON. 
P.  S.     Sawney   tells    me   that   your    Mother   and 


1769]  JAMES  MADISON.  3 

Brothers  are  determined  to  accompany  you  to  Vir 
ginia  ;  my  friendship  and  regard  for  you  entitle  them 
to  my  esteem,  and  with  the  greatest  sincerity  I  wish, 
after  a  pleasant  journey,  they  may  find  Virginia 
capable  of  giving  them  great  Happiness. 


TO  JAMES  MADISON.1  MAD.  MSS. 

NASSAU  HALL,  September  30th  69. 

HON°  SIR, — I  received  your  letter  by  Mr.  Rosse- 
krans,  and  wrote  an  answer ;  but  as  it  is  probable 
this  will  arrive  sooner  which  I  now  write  by  Doctor 
Witherspoon,  I  shall  repeat  some  circumstances  to 
avoid  obscurity. 

On  Wednesday  last  we  had  the  usual  commence 
ment.  Eighteen  young  Gentlemen  took  their  Bach 
elor's  degrees,  and  a  considerable  number  their 
Master's  Degrees.  The  degree  of  Doctor  of  Law 
was  bestowed  on  Mr.  Dickenson  the  Farmer  and 
Mr.  Galloway,2  the  Speaker  of  the  Pennsylvania  As 
sembly,  a  distinguishing  mark  of  Honour,  as  there 
never  was  any  of  that  kind  done  before  in  America. 
The  Commencement  began  at  10  O'Clock,  when  the 
President  walked  first  into  the  Church,  a  board  of 

1  Madison's  father  was,  during  the  earlier  part  of  his  son's  career,  his  chief  cor 
respondent.     He  was  a  planter  of  substantial  estate  without  being  wealthy. 
Although  he  is  represented  as  not  having  received  much  education  the  few  of 
his  letters  which  are  extant  show  that  he  wrote  with  tolerable  correctness.     He 
was  County  Lieutenant  of  Orange  and  wielded  an  influence  in  local  affairs 
which  was  considerable.     He  inherited  Montpelier  from  his  father,  Ambrose 
Madison. 

2  "  This  gentleman  afterwards  tarnished  all  his  honors  by  defection  from  the 
American  cause." — Rives,  i.,  18. 


4  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1769 

Trustees  following,  and  behind  them  those  that  were 
to  take  their  Master's  degrees,  and  last  of  all,  those 
that  were  to  take  their  first  Degrees  ;  after  a  short 
prayer  by  the  President  the  Head  Oration,  which  is 
always  given  to  greatest  Scholar  by  the  President  & 
Tutors,  was  pronounced  in  Latin  by  Mr.  Samuel 
Smith,1  son  of  a  Presbyterian  Minister  in  Pennsyl 
vania.  Then  followed  the  other  Orations,  Disputes, 
and  Dialogues,  distributed  to  each  according  to  his 
merit,  and  last  of  all  was  pronounced  the  Valedictory 
oration  by  Mr.  John  Henry  son  of  Gentleman  in 
Maryland.  This  is  given  to  the  greatest  Orator. 
We  had  a  very  great  assembly  of  People,  a  consider 
able  number  of  whom  came  from  N  York  those  at 
Philadelphia  were  most  of  them  detained  by  Races 
which  were  to  follow  on  the  next  day. 

Since  Commencement  the  Trustees  have  been  sit 
ting  about  Business  relative  to  the  College,  and  have 
chosen  for  Tutors  for  the  ensuing  year,  for  the  junior 
class  Mr.  Houston  from  N  Carolina  in  the  room  of 
Mr.  Peream.  for  the  Freshman  class,  Mr.  Reeve  a 
gentleman  who  has  for  several  years  past  kept  a 
School  at  Elizabeth  Town,  in  the  room  of  Mr.  Pem- 
berton  :  The  Sophomore  Tutor  Mr.  Thomson  still 
retains  his  place,  remarkable  for  his  skill  in  the 
Sophomore  Studies,  having  taken  care  of  that  class 
for  several  years  past.  Mr.  Halsey  was  chose  Junior 
Tutor  but  refused.  The  Trustees  have  likewise  ap- 

1  Delegate  from  Maryland  to  the  Continental  Congress,  1778-81,  and  again  in 
1784-7  ;  Senator  from  Maryland,  1789-97  ;  Governor  of  the  State  from  1797  to- 
his  death,  Dec.  16,  1798. 


1769]  JAMES  MADISON.  5 

pointed  Mr.  Caldwell  a  minister  at  Elizabeth  Town 
to  take  a  journey  through  the  Southern  Provinces  as 
far  as  Georgia  to  make  collections  by  which  the  Col 
lege  Fund  may  be  enabled  to  increase  the  Library, 
provide  an  apparatus  of  mathematical  and  Philoso 
phical  Instruments  &  likewise  to  support  Professors 
which  would  be  a  great  addition  to  the  advantages 
of  this  College.  Doctr  Witherspoon's  business  to 
Virginia  is  nearly  the  same  as  I  conjecture  and  per 
haps  to  form  some  acquaintance  to  induce  Gentlemen 
to  send  their  sons  to  this  College. 

I  am  very  sorry  to  hear  of  the  great  drought  that 
has  prevailed  with  you,  but  am  in  some  hopes  the 
latter  part  of  the  year  may  have  been  more  season 
able  for  you[r]  crops.  Your  caution  of  frugality  on 
consideration  of  the  dry  weather  shall  be  carefully 
observed  ;  but  I  am  under  a  necessity  of  spending 
much  more  than  I  was  apprehensive,  for  the  purchas 
ing  of  every  small  trifle  which  I  have  occasion  for 
consumes  a  much  greater  sum  than  one  would  sup 
pose  from  a  calculation  of  the  necessary  expences. 

I  feel  great  satisfaction  from  the  assistance  my 
Uncle  has  received  from  the  Springs,  and  I  flatter 
myself  from  the  continuance  of  my  mother's  health 
that  Dr.  Shore's  skill  will  effectually  banish  the  cause 
of  her  late  indisposition. 

I  recollect  nothing  more  at  present  worth  relating, 
but  as  often  as  opportunity  and  anything  worthy 
your  attention  shall  occur,  be  assured  you  shall  hear 
from  your  affectionate  son. 

JAMES  MADISON. 


6  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1770 

TO  JAMES  MADISON.  MAD.  MSS. 

NASSAU  HALL,  July  23?  1770 

HON?  SIR, — I  receiv'd  yours  dated  June  4th  &  have 
applied  to  Mr  Hoops  as  you  directed  ;  he  says  you 
must  suit  yourself  in  paying  him,  &  if  you  should  let 
him  have  a  bill  of  Exchange  it  must  be  on  your  own 
terms.  Forty  pounds  ^"40.  New  Jersey  Currency  is 
the  Sum  I  shall  have  of  him  before  I  get  home,  my 
frugality  has  not  been  able  to  keep  it  below  that, 
consistent  with  my  staying  here  to  the  best  advan 
tage.  I  shall  be  glad,  if  it  should  be  convenient  for 
you,  to  have  my  next  year's  stock  prepared  for  me 
against  I  come  home,  for  I  shall  not  be  able  to  stay 
in  Virginia  more  than  4  weeks  at  most.  Half  Jos — 
pass  here  to  the  greatest  advantage.  I  have  spoken 
to  several  of  the  present  senior  class  about  living 
with  you  as  Tutor,  but  they  will  determine  on 
nothing  unless  they  know  what  you  would  allow 
them,  as  it  would  not  be  proper  for  them  to  remain 
in  suspense  'till  I  should  return  here  ;  If  you  should 
receive  this  time  enough  to  send  me  an  answer  by 
the  middle  of  September  &  let  me  know  the  most 
you  would  be  willing  to  give,  I  think  there  would  be 
a  greater  probability  of  my  engaging  one  for  you.  In 
closed  are  the  measure  of  my  Neck  &  rists.  I  believe 
my  Mother  need  not  hurry  herself  much  about  my 
shirts  before  I  come  for  I  shall  not  want  more  than 
three  or  four  at  most.  I  should  chuse  she  would  not 
have  them  ruffled  'till  I  am  present  myself.  I  have 
not  yet  procured  a  horse  for  my  Journey,  but  think 
you  had  better  not  send  me  one  as  I  cant  wait  long 


1771]  JAMES  MADISON.  ^ 

enough  to  know  whether  or  not  you'll  have  an  oppor 
tunity  without  losing  my  chance  most  of  the  horses 
being  commonly  engaged  by  the  Students  sometime 
before  vacation  begins.  If  I  should  set  off  from  this 
place  as  soon  as  I  expect  you  may  look  for  me  in 
October  perhaps  a  little  before  the  middle  if  the 
weather  should  be  good. 

We  have  no  publick  news  but  the  base  conduct  of 
the  Merchants  in  N.  York  in  breaking  through  their 
spirited  resolutions  not  to  import,  a  distinct  account 
of  which  I  suppose  will  be  in  the  Virginia  Gazette 
before  this  arrives.  Their  Letter  to  the  Merchants 
in  Philadelphia  requesting  their  concurrence  was 
lately  burnt  by  the  students  of  this  place  in  the  col 
lege  yard,  all  of  them  appearing  in  their  black  Gowns 
&  the  bell  Tolling.  The  number  of  Students  has  in 
creased  very  much  of  late,  there  are  about  an  hundred 
&  fifteen  in  College  &  the  Grammar  School  twenty- 
two  commence  this  Fall  all  of  them  in  American 
Cloth. 

With  my  love  to  all  the  Family,  I  am,  etc. 


TO  JAMES  MADISON.  MAD.  MSS. 

PRINCETON  October  gth  1771. 

HOND  SIR, — In  obedience  to  your  requests  I 
hereby  send  you  an  answer  to  your's  of  the  25th  of 
Sept.  which  I  received  this  morning.  My  Letter  by 
Dr.  Witherspoon  who  left  this  place  yesterday  week 
contains  most  of  what  you  desire  to  be  informed.  I 
am  exceedingly  rejoiced  to  hear  of  the  happy  deliver 
ance  of  my  Mother  &  would  fain  hope  your  rheu- 


8  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1771 

matic  pains  will  not  continue  much  longer.  The  Bill 
of  exchange  was  very  acceptable.  Though  I  cannot 
say  I  have  been  as  yet  very  much  pressed  by  my 
creditors.  Since  I  got  the  Bill  I  have  been  making 
a  calculation  of  my  past  &  future  expences  &  find  it 
nothing  more  than  a  bare  competency  the  reason  of 
which  I  dare  say  you  will  not  ascribe  to  extravagance 
when  you  read  my  letter  of  last  week.  If  I  come 
home  in  the  Spring  the  purchase  of  a  horse  &  travel 
ling  expences  I  am  apprehensive  will  amount  to  more 
than  I  can  reserve  out  of  my  present  stock  for  those 
purposes  so  that  it  would  not  be  amiss  perhaps  if  you 
were  to  send  a  few  Half-Jos :  by  Dr  Witherspoon  or 
Col?  Lewis's  sons  if  they  return,  or  some  safe  hand 
afterwards  as  best  suits  you.  I  should  be  glad  if 
your  health  &  other  circumstances  should  enable  you 
to  visit  D.  Witherspoon  during  his  stay  in  Virginia. 
I  am  persuaded  you  would  be  much  pleased  with  him 
&  that  he  would  be  very  glad  to  see  you.  If  you 
should  not  be  able  to  see  him  nor  send  to  him  Col° 
Lewis  or  any  other  Gentleman  in  Fredericksburgh 
would  advance  what  money  I  am  to  have  at  the  least 
intimation  from  you.  If  you  should  ever  send  me 
any  Bills  hereafter,  it  will  be  best  for  you  to  make 
them  payable  to  Df  Witherspoon,  which  will  give 
him  an  opportunity  to  endorse  them  &  greatly  help 
me  in  getting  them,  if  it  should  so  happen  that  you 
see  him,  please  to  mention  it  to  him.  I  am  sorry 
Mr.  Chew's  mode  of  Conveyance  will  not  answer  in 
Virginia.  I  expect  to  hear  from  him  in  a  few  days 
by  return  of  a  man  belonging  to  this  Town  from 


1772]  JAMES  MADISON.  9 

New  London  &  shall  then  acquaint  him  with  it  and 
get  it  remedied  by  the  methods  you  propose.  Mr. 
James  Martin  was  here  at  Commencement  and  had 
an  opportunity  of  hearing  from  his  Brothers  &  friends 
in  Carolina  by  a  young  man  lately  come  from  thence 
to  this  College  however  I  shall  follow  your  directions 
in  writing  to  him  immediately  &  visiting  him  as  soon 
as  I  find  it  convenient. 

You  may  tell  M?  Martin  he  left  his  Family  at 
home  all  well.  If  you  think  proper  that  I  should 
come  back  to  this  place  after  my  journey  to  Virginia 
in  the  Spring  &  spend  the  Summer  here  you  may 
send  the  cloth  for  my  coat  which  I  am  extremely 
pleased  with  &  could  have  wished  it  had  come  time 
enough  to  have  used  this  Summer  past,  if  you  chuse 
rather  1  should  remain  in  Virginia  next  Summer  it 
will  be  unnecessary. 

I  am,  etc. 


TO  WILLIAM  BRADFORD,  JR.1 
(At  the  Coffee-House,  Philadelphia. — By  the  Post.} 

ORANGE,  VIRGINIA,  November  9,  1772. 

MY  DEAR  B., — You  moralize  so  prettily,  that  if  I 
were  to  judge  from  some  parts  of  your  letter  of  Octo- 

1  From  Madison's  works.  This  and  the  following  Bradford  letters  are  not 
found  in  the  Madison  MSS.  Bradford  was  successively  Major  in  the  Pennsyl 
vania  militia,  in  command  of  a  company  in  Col.  Hampton's  regiment  of  regu 
lar  troops,  and  Deputy  Muster  Master-General,  with  rank  of  Lieutenant-Colonel, 
during  the  Revolution  ;  Attorney-General  of  Pennsylvania  in  1780,  Judge  of  the 
Supreme  Court  of  the  State  in  1791,  and  Attorney-General  of  the  United  States 
in  1794. 


io  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1772 

her  1 3,  I  should  take  you  for  an  old  philosopher  that 
had  experienced  the  emptiness  of  earthly  happiness  ; 
and  I  am  very  glad  that  you  have  so  early  seen 
through  the  romantic  paintings  with  which  the  world 
is  sometimes  set  off  by  the  sprightly  imaginations  of 
the  ingenious.  You  have  happily  supplied,  by  read 
ing  and  observation,  the  want  of  experiment  ;  and 
therefore  I  hope  you  are  sufficiently  guarded  against 
the  allurements  and  vanities  that  beset  us  on  our  first 
entrance  on  the  theatre  of  life.  Yet,  however  nice 
and  cautious  we  may  be  in  detecting  the  follies  of 
mankind,  and  framing  our  economy  according  to  the 
precepts  of  Wisdom  and  Religion,  I  fancy  there  will 
commonly  remain  with  us  some  latent  expectation  of 
obtaining  more  than  ordinary  happiness  and  pros 
perity  till  we  feel  the  convincing  argument  of  actual 
disappointment.  Though  I  will  not  determine  whether 
we  shall  be  much  the  worse  for  it  if  we  do  not  allow 
it  to  intercept  our  views  towards  a  future  state,  be 
cause  strong  desires  and  great  hopes  instigate  us 
to  arduous  enterprizes,  fortitude,  and  perseverance. 
Nevertheless,  a  watchful  eye  must  be  kept  on  our 
selves,  lest  while  we  are  building  ideal  monuments  of 
renown  and  bliss  here,  we  neglect  to  have  our  names 
enrolled  in  the  annals  of  Heaven.  These  thoughts 
come  into  my  mind  because  I  am  writing  to  you,  and 
thinking  of  you.  As  to  myself,  I  am  too  dull  and  in 
firm  now  to  look  out  for  any  extraordinary  things  in 
this  world,  for  I  think  my  sensations  for  many  months 
past  have  intimated  to  me  not  to  expect  a  long  or 
healthy  life  ;  though  it  may  be  better  with  me  after 


1772]  JAMES  MADISON.  n 

some  time,  [but]  I  hardly  dare  expect  it,  and  there 
fore  have  little  spirit  and  alacrity  to  set  about  any 
thing  that  is  difficult  in  acquiring  and  useless  in 
possessing  after  one  has  exchanged  time  for  eternity. 
But  you  have  health,  youth,  fire,  and  genius,  to  bear 
you  along  through  the  high  track  of  public  life,  and 
so  may  be  more  interested  and  delighted  in  improving 
on  hints  that  respect  the  temporal  though  momen 
tous  concerns  of  man. 

I  think  you  made  a  judicious  choice  of  History  and 
the  science  of  morals  for  your  winter's  study.  They 
seem  to  be  of  the  most  universal  benefit  to  men  of 
sense  and  taste  in  every  post,  and  must  certainly  be 
of  great  use  to  youth  in  settling  the  principles  and 
refining  the  judgment,  as  well  as  in  enlarging  know 
ledge  and  correcting  the  imagination.  I  doubt  not 
but  you  design  to  season  them  with  a  little  divinity 
now  and  then,  which,  like  the  philosopher's  stone,  in 
the  hands  of  a  good  man,  will  turn  them  and  every 
lawful  acquirement  into  the  nature  of  itself,  and  make 
them  more  precious  than  fine  gold. 

As  you  seem  to  require  that  I  should  be  open  and 
unreserved,  (which  is  indeed  the  only  proof  of  true 
friendship,)  I  will  venture  to  give  you  a  word  of 
advice,  though  it  be  more  to  convince  you  of  my  af 
fection  for  you  than  from  any  apprehension  of  your 
needing  it.  Pray  do  not  suffer  those  impertinent  fops 
that  abound  in  every  city  to  divert  you  from  your 
business  and  philosophical  amusements.  You  may 
please  them  more  by  admitting  them  to  the  enjoy 
ment  of  your  company,  but  you  will  make  them 


12  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1772 

respect  and  admire  you  more  by  showing  your  indig 
nation  at  their  follies,  and  by  keeping  them  at  a  be 
coming  distance.  I  am  luckily  out  of  the  way  of  such 
troubles,  but  I  know  you  are  surrounded  with  them  ; 
for  they  breed  in  towns  and  populous  places  as  natur 
ally  as  flies  do  in  the  shambles,  because  there  they 
get  food  enough  for  their  vanity  and  impertinence. 

I  have  undertaken  to  instruct  my  brothers  and 
sisters  in  some  of  the  first  rudiments  of  literature  ; 
but  it  does  not  take  up  so  much  of  my  time  but  I 
shall  always  have  leisure  to  receive  and  answer  your 
letters,  which  are  very  grateful  to  me,  I  assure  you  ; 
and  for  reading  any  performances  you  may  be  kind 
enough  to  send  me,  whether  of  Mr.  Freneau  1  or  any 
body  else.  I  think  myself  happy  in  your  correspon 
dence,  and  desire  you  will  continue  to  write  as  often 
as  you  can,  as  you  see  I  intend  to  do  by  the  early  and 
long  answer  I  send  you.  You  are  the  only  valuable 
friend  I  have  settled  in  so  public  a  place,  and  I  must 
rely  on  you  for  an  account  of  all  literary  transactions 
in  your  part  of  the  world. 

I  am  not  sorry  to  hear  of  Livingston's  2  getting  a 

1  Nov.  22,  1772,  Philip  Freneau  wrote  to  Madison  from  Somerset  Co.,  Md., 
where  he  was,  as  he  expressed  it,  teaching  school,  sleeping,  and  writing  poetry  : 
"  I  should  have  been  glad  to  have  heard  from  you  before  now  ;  while  I  was  at 
College  I  had  but  a  short  participation  of  your  agreeable  friendship,  and  the 
few  persons  I  converse  with  and  yet  fewer,  whose  conversation  I  delight  in, 
makes  me  regret  the  Loss  of  it." — Mad.  MSB.  It  was  chiefly  through  Madi 
son's  agency  that  Freneau  was  subsequently  appointed  translating  clerk  of  the 
State  Department,  a  position  which  he  held  while  he  was  editing  the  National 
Gazette  and  leading  the  abuse  of  Washington.  See  ^Edanus  Burke's  letter  to 
Madison  concerning  him  in  The  American  Historical  Review  for  January,  1898, 
p.  279. 

'  Brokholst  Livingston,  afterwards  Judge  of  the  Supreme  Court  of  the  United 
States. 


1772]  JAMES  MADISON.  13 

degree.  I  heartily  wish  him  well,  though  many  would 
think  I  had  but  little  reason  to  do  so  ;  and  if  he 
would  be  sensible  of  his  opportunities  and  encourage 
ments,  I  think  he  might  still  recover.  Lucky  (?)  and 
his  company,  after  their  feeble  yet  wicked  assault 
upon  Mr.  Erwin,  in  my  opinion,  will  disgrace  the 
catalogue  of  names ;  but  they  are  below  contempt, 
and  I  spend  no  more  words  about  them. 

And  now,  my  friend,  I  must  take  my  leave  of  you, 
but  with  such  hopes  that  it  will  not  be  long  before  I 
receive  another  epistle  from  you,  as  make  me  more 
cheerfully  conclude  and  subscribe  myself 

Your  sincere  and  affectionate  friend. 

Your  direction  was  right ;  however,  the  addition  of 
"  Jr."  to  my  name  would  not  be  improper. 


1772.       ACT   FOR  OPENING  &  KEEPING  IN  REPAIR  PUBLIC 

ROADS.1  MAD.  MSS> 

Freeholders  of  each  Township  to  chuse  annually  two  supervi 
sors  of  the  High  ways. 

The  supervisors  to  lay  a  rate  (appeal  to  lie  to  Quarter  Sessions 
for  party  grieved)  not  exceeding  pd  in  the  pound  on  real  &  per 
sonal  estate  &  to  last  county  assessm1  to  be  employed  in  opening, 

1  This  act  repeals  an  act  requiring  the  personal  labor  of  the  inhabitants  for 
repairing  roads.  [Note  in  MS.] 

This  draft  never  reached  a  maturer  stage.  The  "  Act  for  the  more  effectu 
ally  keeping  the  publick  roads  and  bridges  in  repair  "  (November,  1762,  jrf  George 
III.}  put  the  building  and  repair  of  roads  in  the  hands  of  surveyors  of  public 
roads,  or,  where  the  building  was  let  out,  required  bonds  from  the  constructors. 
The  act  was  to  run  for  three  years  and  was  renewed,  November,  1766  (jth  George 
///.),  for  five  years.  Having  run  out  it  was  revived,  February,  1772  (i2tk 
George  III.),  and  renewed  for  two  years. — Hening's  Statutes  at  Large,  vii,  577  ; 
viii,  192,  542. 


i4  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1772 

clearing,  mending  &  repairing  the  several  high  ways  within  their 
respective  Townships. 

Where  roads  divide  2  townships,  to  be  repaired  at  joint  ex 
pense,  and  supervisors 

Vacancy  in  supervisorship  by  death  refusal  to  act  or  removal  to 
be  supplied  by  3  or  more  Justices  of  peace. 

Supervisors  to  receive  i2d  in  the  pound  for  collecting,  &  4 
shilH5  per  day  during  the  overseeing  employ?  &  directing  the 
workmen  on  the  public  roads. 

Tenants  of  non  resident  Landlords  liable  for  rates  to  be  de 
ducted  from  their  rents,  saving  contracts. 

Supervisors  reqd  as  often  as  roads  out  of  repair  or  new  roads  to 
be  opened,  to  have  sufficient  n°  of  labourers  to  work  upon,  open, 
amend,  clear  &  repair  the  same  in  the  most  effectual  manner,  &  to 
purchase  wood,  &  other  materials  necessary.  Supervisors  &  per 
sons  havg  his  order,  empowered  to  enter  on  adjoining  lands,  to 
cut  ditches  &  drains  as  he  shall  find  necessary,  doing  as  little 
damage  as  possible,  which  drains  shall  not  be  stopped  by  owner 
under  penalty  of  5  pd-s  for  each  offence — also  to  dig  gravel  sand  or 
stones,  or  take  loose  stones  on  sd  land  or  cut  trees  necessary,  doing 
as  little  damage  as  possible,  &  the  sd  materials  to  remove  without 
let,  paying  or  tendency  to  owner  the  agreed  value,  or  in  case 
cannot  agree,  value  to  be  set  by  two  indifferent  freeholders. 

Penalty  of  3/.  on  persons  working  on  high  way,  asking  de 
mand*  or  extorting  money  or  other  thing  from  travellers, 
to  be  recovered  by  supervisor  before  the  Justice  of  peace  &  ap 
plied  to  use  of  roads,  &  in  case  of  Supervisors  conivance,  he  to 
forfeit  2o/.  to  by  any  person  whatever  $  to  prosecutor,  J-  to 
use  of  roads. 

Supervisors  neglecting  or  refusing  to  perform  duty,  to  be  fined 
^3  for  every  offence,  to  be  recovered  in  same  way  before  Justice 
of  peace  &  applied  to  use  of  roads  allowing  appeal  to  Supervisor 
to  Court  of  Quarter  Sessions  which  on  petition  of  party  grieved 
shall  take  final  order  therein  as  shall  appear  Just  &  reasonable. 
Electors  at  time  of  chusing  supervisors  to  chuse  four  freeholders 
yearly,  to  settle  ace*  of  supervisors  whose  office  shall  then  be  about 
to  expire  :  &  the  person  or  persons  who  shall  have  served  the 
office  of  supervisor  for  preceding  year,  shall  on  25*  March  yearly 


1773]  JAMES  MADISON.  15 

or  6  days  after  make  up  &  produce  fair  ace*?  of  all  sums  expended, 
&  come  to  his  hands  :  wc.h  ace1-5  shall  be  entered  in  a  book  to  be 
kept  for  that  purpose,  &  shall  be  attested  on  oath  or  affirmation 
before  Justice  of  peace  if  req?  by  s?  freeholder  or  3  of  them — 
sd.  freeholders  or  3  of  them  to  allow  such  charges  &  sums  only  as 
they  shall  deem  reasonable  ;  money  remaining  in  hands  of  pre- 
cedg.  supervisors  to  be  paid  by  order  of  s?  freeholders  to  succeed 
ing  supervisors  :  in  case  of  the  reverse,  succeeding  supervisors  to 
reimburse  by  like  order,  out  of  the  first  money  coming  to  their 
hands — supervisors  fail?  to  produce  ace*  or  to  pay  surplusage  or 
deliver  book  of  ace!  to  successor  or  in  his  hands  may  on  com 
plaint  by  s^  freeholders  to  any  Justice  of  peace,  be  by  him 
committed  to  county  goal,  till  he  comply. 

Person  sued  for  executing  this  ac*  may  plead  gen!  issue,  &  give 
it  &  special  matter  in  evidence  ;  &  if  dft  or  prosecutor  be  non 
suit,  or  suffer  a  discontinuance  or  if  a  verd*  pass  ag5.*  him,  dfts 
shall  have  treble  costs  to  be  recovered  as  in  other  cases  of  costs 
given  to  dfts.  &  no  such  suit  or  prosecution  tained  unless 

comenced  within  six  months  after  cause  given,  or  unless  security 
be  first  for  the  charges. 


TO   WILLIAM    BRADFORD,  JR. 

ORANGE  COUNTY,  VIRGINIA,  April  28,  1773. 

DEAR  B., — I  received  your  letter  dated  March  the 
ist  about  a  week  ago  ;  and  it  is  not  more  to  obey 
your  demands  than  to  fulfil  my  own  desires  that  I 
give  you  this  early  answer.  I  am  glad  you  disclaim 
all  punctiliousness  in  our  correspondence.  For  my 
own  part  I  confess  I  have  not  the  face  to  perform 
ceremony  in  person,  and  I  equally  detest  it  on  paper ; 
though  as  Tully  says,  It  cannot  blush.  Friendship, 
like  all  truth,  delights  in  plainness  and  simplicity,  and 
it  is  the  counterfeit  alone  that  needs  ornament  and 


16  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1773 

ostentation.  I  am  so  thoroughly  persuaded  of  this, 
that  when  I  observe  any  one  over  complaisant  to  me 
in  his  professions  and  promises,  I  am  tempted  to  in 
terpret  his  language  thus  :  "  As  I  have  no  real  esteem 
for  you,  and  for  certain  reasons  think  it  expedient  to 
appear  well  in  your  eye,  I  endeavor  to  varnish  false 
hood  with  politeness,  which  I  think  I  can  do  in  so 
ingenious  a  manner  that  so  vain  a  blockhead  as  you 
cannot  see  through  it." 

I  would  have  you  write  to  me  when  you  feel  as  you 
used  to  do,  when  we  were  under  the  same  roof,  and 
you  found  it  a  recreation  and  release  from  business 
and  books  to  come  and  chat  an  hour  or  two  with  me. 
The  case  is  such  with  me  that  I  am  too  remote  from 
the  post  to  have  the  same  choice,  but  it  seldom  hap 
pens  that  an  opportunity  catches  me  out  of  a  humor 
of  writing  to  my  old  Nassovian  friends,  and  you  know 
what  place  you  hold  among  them. 

I  have  not  seen  a  single  piece  against  the  Doctor's 
address.  I  saw  a  piece  advertised  for  publication  in 
the  Philadelphia  Gazette,  entitled  "  Candid  remarks," 
&c.,  and  that  is  all  I  know  about  it.  These  things 
seldom  reach  Virginia,  and  when  they  do,  I  am  out  of 
^'the  way  of  them.  I  have  a  curiosity  to  read  those 
(authors  who  write  with  "all  the  rage  of  impotence," 
|  not  because  there  is  any  excellence  or  wit  in  their 
writings,  but  because  they  implicitly  proclaim  the 
merit  of  those  they  are  railing  against,  and  give  them 
an  occasion  of  shewing  by  their  silence  and  contempt 
that  they  are  invulnerable.  I  am  heartily  obliged  to 
you  for  your  kind  offer  of  sending  me  some  of  these 
performances.  I  should  also  willingly  accept  Freneau's 


1774]  JAMES  MADISON.  17 

works,  and  the  "  Sermons  to  Doctors  in  Divinity," 
which  I  hear  are  published,  and  whatever  else  you 
reckon  worth  reading.  Please  to  note  the  cost  of  the 
articles,  for  I  will  by  no  means  suffer  our  acquaint 
ance  to  be  an  expense  on  your  part  alone,  and  I  have 
nothing  fit  to  send  you  to  make  it  reciprocal.  In  your 
next  letter  be  more  particular  as  to  yourself,  your  in 
tentions,  present  employments,  &c.,  Erwin,  McPher- 
son,  &c.,  the  affairs  of  the  college.  Is  the  lottery 
like  to  come  to  anything  ?  There  has  happened  no 
change  in  my  purposes  since  you  heard  from  me  last, 
My  health  is  a  little  better,  owing,  I  believe,  to  more 
activity  and  less  study,  recommended  by  physicians. 
I  shall  try,  if  possible,  to  devise  some  business  that 
will  afford  me  a  sight  of  you  once  more  in  Philadel 
phia  within  a  year  or  two.  I  wish  you  would  resolve 
the  same  with  respect  to  me  in  Virginia,  though  within 
a  shorter  time.  I  am  sorry  my  situation  affords  me 
nothing  new,  curious,  or  entertaining,  to  pay  you  for 
your  agreeable  information  and  remarks.  You,  being 
at  the  fountain  head  of  political  and  literary  intelli 
gence,  and  I  in  an  obscure  corner,  you  must  expect  to 
be  greatly  loser  on  that  score  by  our  correspondence. 
But  as  you  have  entered  upon  it,  I  am  determined  to 
hold  you  to  it,  and  shall  give  you  some  very  severe 
admonitions  whenever  I  perceive  a  remissness  or 
brevity  in  your  letters.  I  do  not  intend  this  as  a 
beginning  of  reproof,  but  as  a  caution  to  you  never  to 
make  it  necessary  at  all. 

If  Mr.  Horton  is  in  Philadelphia,  give  him  my  best 
thanks  for  his  kindness  in  assisting  Mr.  Wallace  to  do 
some  business  for  [ ?]  not  long  ago. 


i8  THE   WRITINGS  OF  [1774 

I  must  re-echo  your  pressing  invitation  to  [ ?] 

do  with  the  more  confidence  as  I  have  complied. 
I  am,  dear  sir,  your,  most  unfeignedly. 


TO  WILLIAM  BRADFORD,  JR. 

January  the  24th,  1774. 

MY  WORTHY  FRIEND, — Yours  of  the  25th  of  last 
month  came  into  my  hands  a  few  days  past.  It  gave 
singular  pleasure,  not  only  because  of  the  kindness 
expressed  in  it,  but  because  I  had  reason  to  ap 
prehend  the  letter  you  received  last  from  me  had 
miscarried,  and  I  should  fail  in  procuring  the  in 
telligence  I  wanted  before  the  trip  I  designed  in  the 
spring. 

I  congratulate  you  on  your  heroic  proceedings  in 
Philadelphia  with  regard  to  the  tea.1  I  wish  Boston 
may  conduct  matters  with  as  much  discretion  as  they 
seem  to  do  with  boldness.  They  seem  to  have  great 
trials  and  difficulties  by  reason  of  the  obduracy  and 
ministerialism  of  their  Governor.  However,  political 
contests  are  necessary  sometimes,  as  well  as  military, 
to  afford  exercise  and  practice,  and  to  instruct  in  the 
art  of  defending  liberty  and  property.  I  verily  be- 

1  "  Even  at  Philadelphia,  which  had  been  so  long  celebrated,  for  the  ex 
cellency  of  its  police  and  government,  and  the  temperate  manners  of  its  inhabi 
tants,  printed  papers  were  dispersed,  warning  the  pilots  on  the  river  Delaware, 
not  to  conduct  any  of  these  tea  ships  into  their  harbour,  which  were  only  sent 
out  for  the  purpose  of  enslaving  and  poisoning  all  the  Americans  ;  at  the  same 
time,  giving  them  plainly  to  understand  it  was  expected,  that  they  would  apply 
their  knowledge  of  the  river,  under  the  colour  of  their  profession,  in  such 
a  manner,  as  would  effectually  secure  their  country  from  so  imminent  a  danger." 
— Annual  Register,  xvii.,  49. 


1774]  JAMES  MADISON.  19 

lieve  the  frequent  assaults  that  have  been  made  on 
America  (Boston  especially)  will  in  the  end  prove  of 
real  advantage. 

/  If  the  Church  of  England  had  been  the  established 
and  general  religion  in  all  the  northern  colonies  as  it 
has  been  among  us  here,  and  uninterrupted  tranquillity 
had  prevailed  throughout  the  continent,  it  is  clear  to  / 
me  that  slavery  and  subjection  might  and  would  have 
been  gradually  insinuated  among  us.  Union  of  re 
ligious  sentiments  begets  a  surprising  confidence,  and 
ecclesiastical  establishments  tend  to  great  ignorance 
and  corruption  ;  all  of  which  facilitate  the  execution  of 
mischievous  projects. 

But  away  with  politics  !  Let  me  address  you  as  a 
student  and  philosopher,  and  not  as  a  patriot,  now. 
I  am  pleased  that  you  are  going  to  converse  with  the 
Edwards  and  Henrys  and  Charleses,  &c.,  &c.,  who 
have  swayed  the  British  sceptre,  though  I  believe  you 
will  find  some  of  them  dirty  and  unprofitable  com 
panions,  unless  you  will  glean  instruction  from  their 
follies,  and  fall  more  in  love  with  liberty  by  beholding 
such  detestable  pictures  of  tyranny  and  cruelty. 

'  I  was  afraid  you  would  not  easily  have  loosened 
your  affection  from  the  belles  lettres.  A  delicate 
taste  and  warm  imagination  like  yours  must  find  it 
hard  to  give  up  such  refined  and  exquisite  enjoyments 
for  the  coarse  and  dry  study  of  the  law.  It  is  like 
leaving  a  pleasant  flourishing  field  for  a  barren  desert ; 
perhaps  I  should  not  say  barren  either,  because  the 
law  does  bear  fruit,  but  it  is  sour  fruit,  that  must  be 
gathered  and  pressed  and  distilled  before  it  can  bring 


20  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1774 

pleasure  or  profit.  I  perceive  I  have  made  a  very 
awkward  comparison  ;  but  I  got  the  thought  by  the 
end,  and  had  gone  too  far  to  quit  it  before  I  per 
ceived  that  it  was  too  much  entangled  in  my  brain  to 
run  it  through  ;  and  so  you  must  forgive  it.  I  myself 
used  to  have  too  great  a  hankering  after  those  amus 
ing  studies.  Poetry,  wit,  and  criticism,  romances, 
plays,  &c.,  captivated  me  much;  but  I  began  to  dis 
cover  that  they  deserve  but  a  small  portion  of  a  mor 
tal's  time,  and  that  something  more  substantial,  more 
durable,  and  more  profitable,  befits  a  riper  age.  It 
would  be  exceedingly  improper  for  a  laboring  man  to 
have  nothing  but  flowers  in  his  garden,  or  to  determine 
to  eat  nothing  but  sweet  meats  and  confections. 
Equally  absurd  would  it  be  for  a  scholar  and  a  man 
of  business  to  make  up  his  whole  library  with  books 
of  fancy,  and  feed  his  mind  with  nothing  but  such 
luscious  performances. 

When  you  have  an  opportunity  and  write  to  Mr. 
Brackenridge,1  pray  tell  him  I  often  think  of  him,  and 
long  to  see  him,  and  am  resolved  to  do  so  in  the 
spring.  George  Luckey  was  with  me  at  Christmas, 
and  we  talked  so  much  about  old  affairs  and  old 
friends,  that  I  have  a  most  insatiable  desire  to  see  you 
all.  Luckey  will  accompany  me,  and  we  are  to  set  off 
on  the  loth  of  April,  if  no  disaster  befalls  either  of  us. 

I  want  again  to  breathe  your  free  air.  I  expect  it 
will  mend  my  constitution  and  confirm  my  principles. 

1  Hugh  Henry  Brackenridge,  a  classmate  of  Madison's.  In  conjunction 
with  Philip  Franeau  he  wrote  a  poetical  dialogue,  called  "  The  Rising  Glory  of 
America,"  which  was  read  at  the  graduating  exercises  at  Princeton  and  printed 
in  1772. 


1774]  JAMES  MADISON.  21 

I  have  indeed  as  good  an  atmosphere  at  home  as  the 
climate  will  allow ;  but  have  nothing  to  brag  of  as  to 
the  state  and  liberty  of  my  country.  Poverty  and 
luxury  prevail  among  all  sorts  ;  pride,  ignorance,  and 
knavery  among  the  priesthood,  and  vice  and  wicked 
ness  among  the  laity.  This  is  bad  enough,  but  it  is 
not  the  worst  I  have  to  tell  you.  That  diabolical, 
hell-conceived  principle  of  persecution  rages  among 
some ;  and  to  their  eternal  infamy,  the  clergy  can 
furnish  their  quota  of  imps  for  such  business.  This 
vexes  me  the  worst  of  anything  whatever.  There 
are  at  this  time  in  the  adjacent  country  not  less  than 
five  or  six  well-meaning  men  in  close  jail  for  publishing 
their  religious  sentiments,  which  in  the  main  are  very 
orthodox.  I  have  neither  patience  to  hear,  talk,  or 
think  of  anything  relative  to  this  matter  ;  for  I  have 
squabbled  and  scolded,  abused  and  ridiculed,  so  long 
about  it  to  little  purpose,  that  I  am  without  common 
patience.  So  I  must  beg  you  to  pity  me,  and  pray 
for  liberty  of  conscience  to  all. 

I  expect  to  hear  from  you  once  more  before  I  see 
you,  if  time  will  admit  ;  and  want  to  know  when  the 
synod  meets,  and  where ;  what  the  exchange  is  at,  and 
as  much  about  my  friends  and  other  matters  as  you 
can  [tell,]  and  think  worthy  of  notice  Till  I  see  you, 

Adieu  ! 

N.  B.  Our  correspondence  is  too  far  advanced  to 
require  apology  for  bad  writing  and  blots. 

Your  letter  to  Mr.  Wallace  is  yet  in  my  hands,  and 
shall  be  forwarded  to  you  as  soon  as  possible.  I  hear 
nothing  from  him  by  letter  or  fame. 


22  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1774 

TO     WILLIAM     BRADFORD,    JR. 

VIRGINIA,  ORANGE  COUNTY,  APRIL  i,  1774. 

MY  WORTHY  FRIEND, — I  have  another  favor  to 
acknowledge  in  the  receipt  of  your  kind  letter  of 
March  the  4th.  I  did  not  intend  to  have  written 
again  to  you  before  I  obtained  a  nearer  communication 
with  you  ;  but  you  have  too  much  interest  in  my 
inclinations  ever  to  be  denied  a  request. 

Mr.  Brackenridge's  illness  gives  me  great  uneasiness  ; 
I  think  he  would  be  a  loss  to  America.  His  merit  is 
rated  so  high  by  me  that  I  confess,  if  he  were  gone,  I 
could  almost  say  with  the  poet,  that  his  country  could 
furnish  such  a  pomp  for  death  no  more.  But  I  solace 
myself  from  Finley's  ludicrous  descriptions  as  you  do. 

Our  Assembly  is  to  meet  the  first  of  May,  when  it 
is  expected  something  will  be  done  in  behalf  of  the 
dissenters.  Petitions,  I  hear,  are  already  forming 
among  the  persecuted  Baptists,  and  I  fancy  it  is  in  the 
thoughts  of  the  Presbyterians  also,  to  intercede  for 
greater  liberty  in  matters  of  religion.  For  my  own 
part,  I  cannot  help  being  very  doubtful  of  their  suc 
ceeding  in  the  attempt.  The  affair  was  on  the  carpet 
during  the  last  session  ;  but  such  incredible  and  ex 
travagant  stories  were  told  in  the  House  of  the  mon 
strous  effects  of  the  enthusiasm  prevalent  among  the 
sectaries,  and  so  greedily  swallowed  by  their  enemies, 
that  I  believe  they  lost  footing  by  it.  And  the  bad 
name  they  still  have  with  those  who  pretend  too  much 
contempt  to  examine  into  their  principles  and  conduct, 
and  are  too  much  devoted  to  the  ecclesiastical  estab 
lishment  to  hear  of  the  toleration  of  dissentients,  I  am 


1774]  JAMES  MADISON.  23 

apprehensive,  will  be  again  made  a  pretext  for 
rejecting  their  request. 

The  sentiments  of  our  people  of  fortune  and  fashion 
on  this  subject  are  vastly  different  from  what  you  have 
been  used  to.1  That  liberal,  catholic,  and  equitable 
way  of  thinking,  as  to  the  rights  of  conscience,  which 
is  one  of  the  characteristics  of  a  free  people,  and  so 
strongly  marks  the  people  of  your  province,  is  but 
little  known  among  the  zealous  adherents  to  our 
hierarchy.  We  have,  it  is  true,  some  persons  in  the 
Legislature  of  generous  principles  both  in  Religion 
and  Politics ;  but  number,  not  merit,  you  know,  is 
necessary  to  carry  points  there.  Besides,  the  clergy 
are  a  numerous  and  powerful  body,  have  great  influ 
ence  at  home  by  reason  of  their  connection  with  and 
dependence  on  the  Bishops  and  Crown,  and  will 
naturally  employ  all  their  art  and  interest  to  depress 
their  rising  adversaries  ;  for  such  they  must  consider 
dissenters  who  rob  them  of  the  good  will  of  the 
people,  and  may,  in  time,  endanger  their  livings  and 
security. 

You  are  happy  in  dwelling  in  a  land  where  those 
inestimable  privileges  are  fully  enjoyed ;  and  the 
public  has  long  felt  the  good  effects  of  this  religious 
as  well  as  civil  liberty.  Foreigners  have  been  en 
couraged  to  settle  among  you.  Industry  and  virtue 
have  been  promoted  by  mutual  emulation  and  mutual 
inspection  ;  commerce  and  the  arts  have  flourished ; 

1  Tucker,  in  his  life  of  Jefferson,  states  it  as  Madison's  opinion,  "  That  the 
proportion  of  dissenters  in  Virginia,  at  the  breaking  out  of  the  Revolution, 
was  considerably  less  than  one  half  of  those  who  professed  themselves  members 
of  any  church."  Rives,  i.,  55,  n. 


24  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1774 

and  I  cannot  help  attributing  those  continual  exertions 
of  genius  which  appear  among  you  to  the  inspiration 
of  liberty,  and  that  love  of  fame  and  knowledge  which 
always  accompany  it.  Religious  bondage  shackles 
and  debilitates  the  mind,  and  unfits  it  for  every  noble 
enterprise,  every  expanded  prospect.  How  far  this  is 
the  case  with  Virginia  will  more  clearly  appear  when 
the  ensuing  trial  is  made. 

I  am  making  all  haste  in  preparing  for  my  journey. 
It  appears  as  if  it  would  be  the  first  of  May  before  I 
can  start,  which  I  can  more  patiently  bear,  because  I 
may  possibly  get  no  company  before  that  time ;  and 
it  will  answer  so  exactly  with  the  meeting  of  the 
synod.  George  Luckey  talks  of  joining  me  if  I  can 
wait  till  then.  I  am  resolutely  determined  to  come 
if  it  is  in  my  power.  If  anything  hinders  me,  it  will 
be  most  likely  the  indisposition  of  my  mother,  who 
is  in  a  very  low  state  of  health  ;  and  if  she  should 
grow  worse,  I  am  afraid  she  will  be  more  unwilling 
to  part  with  my  brother,  as  she  will  be  less  able  to 
bear  the  separation.  If  it  should  unfortunately  hap 
pen  that  I  should  be  forced  off  or  give  out  coming, 
Luckey  on  his  return  to  Virginia  will  bring  me  what 
ever  publications  you  think  worth  sending,  and  among 
others  [Caspapini's  ?]  letters. 

But  whether  I  come  or  not,  be  assured  I  retain  the 
most  ardent  affection  and  esteem  for  you,  and  the 
most  cordial  gratitude  for  your  many  generous  kind 
nesses.  It  gives  me  real  pleasure  when  I  write  to 
you  that  I  can  talk  in  this  language  without  the  least 
affectation,  and  without  the  suspicion  of  it,  and  that 
if  I  should  omit  expressing  my  love  for  you,  your 


1774]  JAMES  MADISON.  25 

friendship  can  supply  the  omission  ;  or  if  I  make  use 
of  the  most  extravagant  expressions  of  it,  your  cor 
responding  affection  can  believe  them  to  be  sincere. 
This  is  a  satisfaction  and  delight  unknown  to  all  who 
correspond  for  business  and  conveniency,  but  richly 
enjoyed  by  all  who  make  pleasure  and  improvement 
the  business  of  their  communications. 

Farewell, 

J.  M. 

P.  S.     You  need  no  longer  direct  to  the  care  of 
Mr.  Maury. 


TO     WILLIAM     BRADFORD,    JR. 

July  i,  1774. 

DEAR  SIR, — I  am  once  more  got  into  my  native 
land,  and  into  the  possession  of  my  customary  em 
ployments,  solitude  and  contemplation ;  though  I 
must  confess  not  a  little  disturbed  by  the  sound  of 
war,  blood  and  plunder,  on  the  one  hand,  and  the 
threats  of  slavery  and  oppression  on  the  other.  From 
the  best  accounts  I  can  obtain  from  our  frontiers,  the 
savages  are  determined  on  the  extirpation  of  the  in 
habitants,  and  no  longer  leave  them  the  alternative 
of  death  or  captivity.  The  consternation  and  timidity 
of  the  white  people,  who  abandon  their  possessions 
without  making  the  least  resistance,  are  as  difficult  to 
be  accounted  for  as  they  are  encouraging  to  the  enemy. 
Whether  it  be  owing  to  the  unusual  cruelty  of  the 
Indians,  the  want  of  necessary  implements  or  ammu 
nition  for  war,  or  to  the  ignorance  and  inexperi- 


26  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1774 

ence  of  many  who,  since  the  establishment  of 
peace,  have  ventured  into  those  new  settlements,  I 
can  neither  learn,  nor  with  any  certainty  conjecture. 
However,  it  is  confidently  asserted  that  there  is  not  an 
inhabitant  for  some  hundreds  of  miles  back  which 
have  been  settled  for  many  years  except  those  who 
are  [forted  ?]  in  or  embodied  by  their  military  com 
manders.  The  state  of  things  has  induced  Lord 
Dunmore,  contrary  to  his  intentions  at  the  dissolution 
of  the  Assembly,  to  issue  writs  for  a  new  election  of 
members,  whom  he  is  to  call  together  on  the  nth  of 
August. 

As  to  the  sentiments  of  the  people  of  this  Colony 
with  respect  to  the  Bostonians,  I  can  assure  you  I 
find  them  very  warm  in  their  favor.  The  natives  are 
very  numerous  and  resolute,  are  making  resolves  in 
almost  every  county,  and  I  believe  are  willing  to  fall 
in  with  the  other  Colonies  in  any  expedient  measure, 
even  if  that  should  be  the  universal  prohibition  of 
trade.  It  must  not  be  denied,  though,  that  the 
Europeans,  especially  the  Scotch,  and  some  interested 
merchants  among  the  natives,  discountenance  such  pro 
ceedings  as  far  as  they  dare  ;  alledging  the  injustice 
and  perfidy  of  refusing  to  pay  our  debts  to  our  gener 
ous  creditors  at  home.  This  consideration  induces 
some  honest,  moderate  folks  to  prefer  a  partial  pro 
hibition,  extending  only  to  the  importation  of  goods. 

We  have  a  report  here  that  Governor  Gage  has 
sent  Lord  Dunmore  some  letters  relating  to  public 
matters  in  which  he  says  he  has  strong  hopes  that  he 
shall  be  able  to  bring  things  at  Boston  to  an  amicable 
settlement.  I  suppose  you  know  whether  there  be 


1775]  JAMES  MADISON.  27 

any  truth  in  the  report,  or  any  just  foundation  for 
such  an  opinion  in  Gage. 

It  has  been  said  here  by  some,  that  the  appointed 
fast  was  disregarded  by  every  Scotch  clergyman, 
though  it  was  observed  by  most  of  the  others  who 
had  timely  notice  of  it.  I  cannot  avouch  it  for  an 
absolute  certainty,  but  it  appears  no  ways  incredible. 

I  was  so  lucky  as  to  find  Dean  Tucker's  tracts 1  on 
my  return  home,  sent  by  mistake  with  some  other 
books  imported  this  spring.  I  have  read  them  with 
peculiar  satisfaction  and  illumination  with  respect  to 
the  interests  of  America  and  Britain.  At  the  same 
time  his  ingenious  and  plausible  defence  of  parlia 
mentary  authority  carries  in  it  such  defects  and  mis 
representations,  as  confirm  me  in  political  orthodoxy 
—after  the  same  manner  as  the  specious  arguments 
of  Infidels  have  established  the  faith  of  inquiring 
Christians. 

I  am  impatient  to  hear  from  you  ;  and  do  now 
certainly  [earnestly  ?]  renew  the  stipulation  for  that 
friendly  correspondence  which  alone  can  comfort  me 
in  the  privation  of  your  company.  I  shall  be  punctual 
in  transmitting  you  an  account  of  everything  that  can 
be  acceptable,  but  must  freely  absolve  you  from  as 
strict  an  obligation,  which  your  application  to  more 
important  business  will  not  allow,  and  which  my 
regard  for  your  ease  and  interests  will  not  suffer  me 
to  enjoin.  I  am,  dear  sir,  your  faithful  friend. 


1  On  the  dispute  between  England  and  America,  recommending  as  a  practical 
solution,  a  voluntary  separation.     Rives,  i.,  35. 


28  THE   WRITINGS  OF  [1775 

TO     WILLIAM     BRADFORD,  JR. 

VIRGINIA,  ORANGE  COUNTY,  January  20,  1775. l 

MY  WORTHY  FRIEND, —  *  *  * 
;  We  are  very  busy  at  present  in  raising  men  and 
procuring  the  necessaries  for  defending  ourselves  and 
our  friends  in  case  of  a  sudden  invasion.  The  ex- 
tensiveness  of  the  demands  of  the  Congress,  and 
the  pride  of  the  British  nation,  together  with  the 
wickedness  of  the  present  ministry,  seem,  in  the  judg 
ment  of  our  politicians,  to  require  a  preparation  for 
extreme  events.  There  will,  by  the  Spring  I  expect, 
be  some  thousands  of  well-trained,  high-spirited  men 
ready  to  meet  danger  whenever  it  appears,  who  are 
influenced  by  no  mercenary  principles,  but  bearing 
their  own  expenses,  and  having  the  prospect  of  no 
recompense  but  the  honor  and  safety  of  their  country. 

I  suppose  the  inhabitants  of  your  Province  are 
more  reserved  in  their  behavior,  if  not  more  easy  in 
their  apprehension,  from  the  prevalence  of  Quaker 
principles  and  politics.  The  Quakers  are  the  only 
people  with  us  who  refuse  to  accede  to  the  Continental 
association.  I  cannot  forbear  suspecting  them  to  be 
under  the  control  and  direction  of  the  leaders  of  the 
party  in  your  quarter ;  for  I  take  those  of  them  that 
we  have  to  be  too  honest  and  simple  to  have  any 
sinister  or  secret  views,  and  I  do  not  observe  anything 
in  the  association  inconsistent  with  their  religious 
principles.  When  I  say  they  refuse  to  accede  to  the 

1  The  first  portion  of  this  letter  is  devoted  to  a  discussion  of  his  friend  Brack- 
enridge's  poem,  of  which  he  disapproves.  "  In  short,  the  theme  is  not  interest 
ing  enough,  nor  the  dress  sufficiently  ^  la  mode  to  attract  the  notice  of  the 
generality." 


1775]  JAMES  MADISON.  29 

association,  my  meaning  is  that  they  refuse  to  sign  it ; 
that  being  the  method  used  among  us  to  distinguish 
friends  from  foes,  and  to  oblige  the  common  people  to 
a  more  strict  observance  of  it.  I  have  never  heard 
whether  the  like  method  has  been  adopted  in  the 
other  Governments. 

I  have  not  seen  the  following  in  print,  and  it  seems 
to  be  so  just  a  specimen  of  Indian  eloquence  and 
mistaken  valor,  that  I  think  you  will  be  pleased  with 
it.  You  must  make  allowance  for  the  unskilfulness 
of  the  interpreters. 

The  speech  of  Logan,  a  Shawanese  Chief,  to 
Lord  Dunmore  : 

"  I  appeal  to  any  white  man  to  say,  if  ever  he  entered 
Logan's  cabin  hungry,  and  I  gave  him  not  meat ;  if 
ever  he  came  cold  or  naked,  and  I  gave  him  not  cloth 
ing.  During  the  course  of  the  last  long  and  bloody 
war,  Logan  remained  idle  in  his  tent,  an  advocate  for 
peace ;  nay,  such  was  my  love  for  the  whites,  that 
those  of  my  country  pointed  at  me  as  they  passed  by, 
and  said  '  Logan  is  the  friend  of  white  men.'  I  had 
even  thought  to  live  with  you  but  for  the  injuries  of 
one  man.  Col.  Cressop,  the  last  spring,  in  cold  blood 
and  unprovoked,  cut  off  all  the  relations  of  Logan, 
not  sparing  even  my  women  and  children.  There 
runs  not  a  drop  of  my  blood  in  the  veins  of  any 
human  creature.  This  called  on  me  for  revenge.  I 
have  sought  it ;  I  have  killed  many ;  I  have  fully 
glutted  my  vengence.  For  my  country  I  rejoice  at 
the  beams  of  peace  ;  but  do  not  harbor  a  thought  that 
mine  is  the  joy  of  fear.  Logan  never  felt  fear.  He 


3o  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1775 

will  not  turn  on  his  heel  to  save  his  life.     Who  is  there 
to  mourn  for  Logan  ? — not  one  !  " 

If  you  should  see  any  of  our  friends  from  Prince 
ton  a  little  before  the  time  of  your  intending  to  write 
to  me,  and  could  transmit  any  little  intelligence 
concerning  the  health,  &c.,  of  my  little  brother 
there,  it  would  be  very  acceptable  to  me,  and  very 
gratifying  to  a  fond  mother  ;  but  I  desire  it  may 
only  be  done  when  it  will  cost  you  less  than  five 
words. 

We  had  with  us  a  little  before  Christmas  the  Rev. 
Moses  Allen,  on  his  return  from  Boston  to  Charles- 
town.  He  told  me  he  came  through  Philadelphia, 
but  did  not  see  you,  though  he  expresses  a  singular 
regard  for  you,  and  left  his  request  with  me  that  you 
would  let  him  hear  from  you  whenever  it  is  convenient, 
promising  to  return  the  kindness  with  punctuality. 
He  travelled  with  considerable  equipage  for  a  dissent 
ing  ecclesiastic,  and  seems  to  be  willing  to  superadd 
the  airs  of  the  fine  gentleman  to  the  graces  of  the 
spirit.  I  had  his  company  for  several  days,  during 
which  time  he  preached  two  sermons  with  general 
approbation.  His  discourses  were  above  the  common 
run  some  degree ;  and  his  appearance  in  the  pulpit  on 

on  the  whole  was  no  discredit  to  [ ?]    He  retains 

too  much  of  his  pristine  levity,  but  promises  amend 
ment.  I  wish  he  may  for  the  sake  of  himself,  his 
friends,  and  his  flock.  I  only  add  that  he  seems  to  be 
one  of  those  geniuses  that  are  formed  for  shifting  in 
the  world  rather  than  shining  in  a  college,  and  that  I 
really  believe  him  to  possess  a  friendly  and  generous 
disposition. 


1775]  JAMES  MADISON.  31 

You  shall  ere  long  hear  from  me  again.     Till  then, 
Vive,  vale  et  Lcetare. 


ADDRESS       '  TO    CAPTAIN      PA^RICKHENRY     AND      THE 
GENTLEMEN    INDEPENDENTS    OF     HANOVER.1 


May  9,  1775. 

"  GENTLEMEN  :  We,  the  committee  for  the  county 
of  Orange,  having  been  fully  informed  of  your  season 
able  and  spirited  proceedings  in  procuring  a  compen 
sation  for  the  powder  fraudulently  taken  from  the 
country  magazine  by  command  of  Lord  Dunmore, 
and  which  it  evidently  appears  his  lordship,  notwith 
standing  his  assurances,  had  no  intention  to  restore, 
entreat  you  to  accept  their  cordial  thanks  for  this 
testimony  of  your  zeal  for  the  honor  and  interest  of 
your  country,  We  take  this  opportunity  also  to  give 
it  as  our  opinion  that  the  blow  struck  in  the  Massa 
chusetts  government  is  a  hostile  attack  on  this  and 
ever  other  Colony,  and  a  sufficient  warrant  to  use 
violence  and  reprisal  in  all  cases  in  which  it  may  be 
for  our  security  and  welfare. 

"JAMES  MADISON,   Chairman. 
JAMES  TAYLOR,  THOMAS  BARBOUR, 

ZACHARIAH  BURNLEY,     ROWLAND  THOMAS, 
JAMES  MADISON,  JR.,        WILLIAM  MOORE, 
JAMES  WALKER,  LAWRENCE  TALIAFERRO, 

HENRY  SCOTT,  THOMAS  BELL." 

1  From  Rives's  Life  of  Madison.  Madison  was  without  doubt,  Rives  says, 
the  author  of  the  address.  —  Rives,  i.,  94,  95. 


32  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1776 

INDEPENDENCE  AND  CONSTITUTION  OF  VIRGINIA.1 

MAD.  MSS. 
JOURNAL  OF  THE 
VIRGINIA   CONVEN- 

*  TION  IN  1776.  May  10.  A  representation*  from  the  Committee 

g  of   the   County  of   Augusta  was   presented   to  the  Convention, 

5  setting  forth  the  present  unhappy  situation  of  the  country  ;  and 

g-'  from  the  ministerial  measures  of  vengeance  now  pursuing,  repre- 

g4  senting  the  necessity  of  making  the  confederacy  of  the  United 

•rt   Colonies  the  most  perfect,  independent,  and  lasting,  and  of  framing 

an  equal,  free,  and  liberal  Government  that  may  bear  the  test  of 

all  future  ages  :  ordered  that  the  said  representation  be  referred 

to  the  committee  on  the  State  of  the  Colony,  [quere,  as  to  the 

date  of  this  representation,  and  whether  the  document  be  on  the 

public  files.] 

May.  15.  The  Convention,  one  hundred  and  twelve  members 
being  present,  unanimously  agreed  as  follows  "  Forasmuch  as  all 
endeavours  of  the  United  Colonies,  by  the  most  decent  represen 
tations  and  petitions  to  the  king  and  parliament  of  Great  Britain, 
to  restore  peace  and  security  to  America  under  the  British  Gov 
ernment,  and  a  reunion  with  that  people  upon  just  and  liberal 
terms,  instead  of  a  redress  of  grievances,  have  produced — from  an 

1  The  whole  of  this  paper  was  transcribed  by  Madison  after  his  retirement  to 
private  life.  An  exhaustive  establishment  of  George  Mason's  authorship  of  the 
Declaration  of  Rights  as  a  whole  may  be  found  in  Kate  Mason  Rowland's  Life 
of  George  Mason.  The  authorship  of  the  clause  concerning  religious  liberty, 
which,  as  the  draft  shows,  was  originated  by  Madison,  is  in  dispute.  Edmund 
Randolph  attributed  it  to  Patrick  Henry,  but  Miss  Rowland  insists  that 
Mason  wrote  it.  See  Life  of  George  Mason,  i.,  241  et  seq.  ;  also  Conway's 
Edmund  Randolph,  158.  Madison  introduced  his  amendment  in  the  conven 
tion  itself,  but  if  he  spoke  upon  it,  which  is  improbable,  as  he  was  then  mastered 
by  his  modesty  and  youth,  there  is  no  record  of  it.  The  Plan  of  Government, 
from  which  the  Constitution  was  evolved,  was,  according  to  unsupported  tradi 
tion,  written  by  Meriwether  Smith  (see  Madison's  letter  to  Mason's  grandson,  29 
December,  1827).  In  the  construction  of  the  Constitution  itself  Mason's  was 
the  master  hand,  and  it  is  highly  probable  that  he  also  wrote  the  Plan.  See 
Miss  Rowland's  Life  of  George  Mason  ;  also  for  an  earlier  impression  of  Madi 
son,  Madison  to  Washington,  Oct.  18,  1787,  where  he  incidentally  speaks  of  the 
Constitution  as  having  been  drawn  by  Mason  ;  and  his  letter  to  Judge  Wood 
ward,  Sept.  n,  1824  ;  also  Rives,  i.,  163  n. 


1776]  JAMES  MADISON.  33 

imperious  and  vindictive  administration  increased  insult,  oppres 
sion,  and  a  vigorous  attempt  to  effect  our  total  destruction  :  By  a 
late  act,  all  these  colonies  are  declared  to  be  in  rebellion,  and  out 
of  the  protection  of  the  British  crown,  our  properties  subjected 
to  confiscation,  our  people  when  captivated,  compelled  to  join  in 
the  murder  and  plunder  of  their  relations  and  countrymen,  and 
all  former  rapine  and  oppression  of  Americans  delared  legal  and 
just.  Fleets  and  armies  are  raised,  and  the  aid  of  foreign  troops 
engaged  to  assist  these  destructive  purposes.  The  king's  repre 
sentative  in  this  colony  hath  not  only  witheld  all  the  powers  of 
Government  from  operating  for  our  safety,  but  having  retired  on 
board  an  armed  ship,  is  carrying  on  a  piratical  and  savage  war 
against  us,  tempting  our  slaves,  by  every  artifice,  to  resort  to  him, 
and  training  and  employing  them  against  their  masters.  In  this 
state  of  extreme  danger  we  have  no  alternative  left,  but  an  abject 
submission  to  the  will  of  those  overbearing  tyrants,  or  a  total 
separation  from  the  crown  and  Government  of  Great  Britain,  uni 
ting  and  exerting  the  strength  of  all  America  for  defence,  and 
forming  alliances  with  foreign  powers  for  commerce  and  aid 
in  war  :  wherefore,  appealing  to  the  SEARCHER  OF  HEARTS,  for 
the  sincerity  of  former  declarations  expressing  our  desire  to 
preserve  the  connexion  with  that  nation,  and  that  we  are  driven  ? 
from  that  inclination  by  their  wicked  councils,  and  the  eternal 
laws  of  self-preservation  ; 

Resolved  unanimously,  That  the  delegates  appointed  to  represent 
this  colony  in  General  congress,  be  instructed  to  propose  to  that 
respectable  body,  to  declare  the  United  Colonies,  free  and  inde 
pendent  States,  absolved  from  all  allegiance  to,  or  dependence' 
upon,  the  crown  or  Parliament  of  Great  Britain  ;  and  that  they 
give  the  assent  of  this  Colony  to  such  declaration,  and  to  whatever 
measures  may  be  thought  proper  and  necessary  by  the  congress 
for  forming  foreign  alliances,  and  a  confederation  of  the  colonies, 
at  such  times,  and  in  the  manner,  as  to  them  shall  seem  best : 
Provided,  that  the  power  of  forming  Government  for,  and  the 
regulations  of  the  internal  concerns  of  each  colony,  be  left  to  the 
respective  colonial  legislatures. 

Resolved  unanimously,  that  a  committee  be  appointed  to  prepare 
a  DECLARATION  OF  RIGHTS,  and  such  a  plan  of   Government 

VOL.  I. — 3. 


34  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1776 

as  will  be  most  likely  to  maintain  peace  and  order  in  this  colony, 
and  secure  substantial  and  equal  liberty  to  the  people. 

And  a  committee  was  appointed  of  the  following  members  : 
viz  Archibald  Gary,  Meriwether  Smith,  Mr  Mercer,  Mr.  Henry 
Lee,  Mr  Treasurer — [Robert  Carter  Nicholas]  Mr  Henry,  Mr 
Dandridge,  Mr  Edmund  Randolph,  Mr  Gilmer,  Mr  Bland,  Mr 
Diggs,  Mr  Carrington,  Mr  Thomas  Ludwell  Lee,  Mr  Cabell, 
Mr  Jones,  Mr  Blair,  Mr  Fleming,  Mr  Tazewell,  Mr  Richard  Gary, 
Mr  Bullitt,  Mr  Watts,  Mr  Banister,  Mr  Page,  Mr  Starke,  Mr  David 
Mason,  Mr  Adams,  Mr  Read,  and  Mr  Thomas  Lewis. 

May  1 6.  Ordered  that  Mr  Madison,  Mr  Rutherford  and  M' 
Watkins  be  added  to  the  Committee  appointed  to  prepare  a 
Declaration  of  Rights  and  a  plan  of  Government. 

May.  1 8.  Ordered  that  George  Mason  be  added  to  that 
Committee. 

[It  is  inferred  that  he  was  not  before  present  ;  especially  as  his 
name  is  not  on  any  one  of  the  numerous  committees  of  ante 
cedent  appointment.  His  distinguished  talents,  if  present,  could 
not  have  been  overlooked.] 

May  21.  Ordered  that  Mr  Bowyer  be  added  to  the  committee 
appointed  to  prepare  a  Declaration  of  Rights  and  plan  of 
Government. 

May  27.  Mr.  Gary  reported  a  Declaration  of  Rights,  which 
was  ordered  to  be  printed  for  the  perusal  of  the  members.  [See 
a  printed  copy  in  the  hands  of  J.  M.] 

Ordered :  that  Mr  Curie  and  Mr  Holt  be  added  to  the 
committee  appointed  to  prepare  a  Declaration  of  Rights  and 
plan  of  Government. 

June  10.  The  Declaration  of  Rights,  reported  from  a  com 
mittee  of  the  whole,  with  several  amendments. 

June  ii.  The  Amendments  to  the  Declaration  of  Rights  agreed 
to,  and  the  whole  ordered  to  be  transcribed  for  a  third  read 
ing. 

June  12.  The  Amended  Declaration  of  Rights  agreed  to  nem: 
con.  [See  the  copy  below.] 

June  24.  Mr  Gary  reported  from  the  appointed  committee 
"a  plan  of  Government  for  this  Colony,"  which  was  ordered  to 
be  read  a  second  time. 


i776] 


JAMES  MADISON. 


35 


June  26.  In  committee  of  the  whole  on  the  reported  plan  of 
Gov-  progress  made  and  reported. 

Jane  27.  In  committee  of  the  whole  on  the  Plan,  &  pro 
gress  reported. 

June  28.  The  plan  reported  from  the  Committee  of  the 
whole,  with  amendments,  &  ordered  to  be  transcribed  &  read 
a  third  time. 

June  29.     Resolved  unanimously  that  the  said  plan  do  pass. 


(As  printed  by  order  of  the 
convention) 

The  following  declaration  * 
was  reported  to  the  convention 
by  the  committee  appointed  to 
prepare  the  same,  and  referred 
to  the  consideration  of  a  com 
mittee  of  the  whole  conven 
tion  ;  and  in  the  meantime,  is 
ordered  to  be  printed  for  the 
perusal  of  the  members. 

A  DECLARATION  OF 
RIGHTS  made  by  the  Repre 
sentatives  of  the  good  people  of 
VIRGINIA,  assembled  in  full  and 
free  Convention  ;  which  rights 
do  pertain  to  us,  and  our  pos 
terity,  as  the  basis  and  founda 
tion  of  Government. 

i.  That  all  men  are  born 
equally  free  and  independent, 
and  have  certain  inherent  nat 
ural  rights,  of  which  they  can 
not,  by  any  compact,  deprive 
their  posterity  ;  among  which 
are  the  enjoyment  of  life  and 
liberty,  with  the  means  of  ac 
quiring  and  possessing  prop- 

*  It  was  drafted  by  George  Mason. 


As  agreed  to  by  the  Con 
vention. 

A  DECLARATION  OF 
RIGHTS,  made  by  the  repre 
sentatives  of  the  good  people  of 
VIRGINIA,  assembled  in  full  and 
free  convention  ;  which  rights 
do  pertain  to  them,  and  their 
posterity,  as  the  basis  and 
foundation  of  Government. 

i.  That  all  men  are  by  nature 
equally  free  and  independent, 
and  have  certain  inherent  rights, 
of  which,  when  they  enter  into 
a  state  of  society,  they  can  not 
by  any  compact,  deprive  or 
divest  their  posterity  :  namely, 
the  enjoyment  of  life  and  lib 
erty,  with  the  means  of  acquir- 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[1776 


erty,  and  pursuing  and  obtaining 
happiness  and  safety. 

2.  That  all  power  is  vested 
in,    and  consequently   derived 
from  the  people  ;   that  magis 
trates    are    their   trustees   and 
servants,  and  at  all  times  amen 
able  to  them. 

3.  That  Government  is,  or 
ought  to  be,  instituted  for  the 
common  benefit,  protection,  and 
security,  of  the  people,  nation 
or  community  :   of  all  the  vari 
ous  modes  and  forms  of  Gov 
ernment  that  is  best,  which  is 
capable  of  producing  the  great 
est   degree    of    happiness   and 
safety,  and  is  most  effectually 
secured  against  the  danger  of 
mal-administration ;    and    that 
whenever  any  government  shall 
be  found   inadequate   or   con 
trary    to    these    purposes,    a 
majority  of  the  community  hath 
a  n     indubitable,     unalienable, 
and   indefeasible   right,  to   re 
form,    alter,    or   abolish   it,  in 
such  manner  as  shall  be  judged 
most  conducive  to  the   public 
weal. 

4.  That   no  man,  or   set  of 
men,  are  entitled  to  exclusive 
or  separate  emoluments  or  priv 
ileges  from  the  community,  but 
i  n    consideration    o  f    publick 
services  ;  which  not  being  de 
scendible  or  hereditary,  the  idea 


ing  &  possessing  property,  and 
preserving  and  obtaining  hap 
piness  and  safety. 
2.  The  same. 


3.  The  same. 


4.  That  no  man  or  set  of 
men,  are  entitled  to  exclusive  or 
separate  emoluments  or  privi 
leges  from  the  community,  but 
in  consideration  of  public  serv 
ices  ;  which  not  being  descend 
ible,  neither  ought  the  offices 


1776] 


JAMES  MADISON. 


37 


of  a  man  born  a  magistrate,  a 
legislator,  or  a  judge,  is  unnat 
ural  and  absurd. 

5.  That  the  legislative  and 
executive  powers  of  the  state 
should  be  separate  and  distinct 
from  the  judicative  ;  and  that 
the  members  of  the  two  first, 
may  be  restrained  from  oppres 
sion,  by  feeling  and  participa 
ting  the  burdens  of  the  people, 
they  should,  at  fixed  periods,  be 
reduced  to  a  private  station,  re 
turn  into  that  body  from  which 
they  were  originally  taken,  and 
the  vacancies  be  supplied  by 
frequent,  certain  and  regular 
elections. 


6.  That  elections  of  members 
to  serve  as  representatives  of 
the  people,  in  assembly,  ought 
to  be  free  ;  and  that  all  men, 
having  sufficient  evidence  of 
permanent  common  interest 
with  and  attachment  to,  the 
community,  have  the  right  of 
suffrage. 


of  magistrate,  legislator  or  judge 
to  be  hereditary. 

5.  That  the  Legislative  and 
executive  powers  of  the  State 
should  be  separate  and  distinct 
from    the  judiciary ;    and  that 
the  members  of  the  two  first 
may  be  restrained  from  oppres 
sion,  by  feeling  and  participa 
ting  the  burdens  of  the  people, 
they  should  at  fixed  periods  be 
reduced   to   a   private   station, 
return    into    that    body    from 
which    they    were    originally 
taken,    and    the   vacancies    be 
supplied   by   frequent,    certain 
and  regular  elections,  in  which 
all  or  any  part  of  the  former 
members,  to  be  again  eligible 
or  ineligible  as  the  laws  shall 
direct. 

6.  That  elections  of  members 
to    serve  as  representatives  of 
the  people,  in  assembly,  ought 
to  be  free ;   and  that  all  men 
having   sufficient    evidence    of 
permanent  common  interest 
with,    and   attachment   to,    the 
community  have   the   right   of 
suffrage,  and  cannot  be  taxed 
or  deprived  of  their  property 
for  public   uses,  without  their 
own  consent,  or  that  of  their 
representatives  so  elected,  nor 
bound  by  any  law  to  which  they 
have  not  in  like  manner  assented 
for  the  public  good. 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[1776 


7  That  no  part  of  a  man's 
property  can  be  taken  from 
him,  or  applied  to  publick  uses, 
without  his  own  consent,  or 
that  of  his  legal  representatives  ; 
nor  are  the  people  bound  by 
any  laws  but  such  as  they  have, 
in  like  manner,  assented  to,  for 
their  common  good. 

8.  That  all  power  of  suspend 
ing  laws,  or  the  execution   of 
laws,  by  any  authority  without 
consent  of  the  representatives 
of   the  people,   is  injurious  to 
their  rights,  and  ought  not  to 
be  exercised. 

9.  That   laws   having    retro 
spect  to  crimes,  and  punishing 
offences,  committed  before  the 
existence  of  such  laws,  are  gen 
erally  oppressive,  and  ought  to 
be  avoided. 

10.  That   in    all    capital    or 
criminal  prosecutions,  as  man 
hath    a   right    to   demand    the 
cause  and  nature  of  his  accusa 
tion,  to  be  confronted  with  the 
accusers   or   witnesses,  to   call 
for  evidence  in  his  favour,  and 
to  a  speedy  trial  by  an  impartial 
jury  of  his   vicinage  ;   without 
whose   unanimous   consent   he 
cannot  be  found  guilty,  nor  can 
he  be  compelled  to   give   evi 
dence  against  himself  ;  that  no 
man  be  deprived  of  his  liberty, 
except  by  the  law  of  the  land, 
or  the  judgment  of  his  peers. 


7.  That  all  power  of  suspend 
ing  laws,  or  the  execution  of 
laws,  by  any  authority  without 
consent  of  the  representatives 
of  the  people,  is  injurious  to 
their  rights,  and  ought  not  to 
be  exercised. 


8.  That  in  all  capital  or 
criminal  prosecutions,  as  man 
hath  a  right  to  demand  the 
cause  and  nature  of  his  accusa 
tion,  to  be  confronted  with  the 
accusers  and  witnesses,  to  call 
for  evidence  in  his  favour,  and 
to  a  speedy  trial  by  an  impartial 
jury  of  the  vicinage,  without 
whose  unanimous  consent  he 
cannot  be  found  guilty  ;  nor 
can  he  be  compelled  to  give  evi 
dence  against  himself,  that  no 
man  be  deprived  of  his  liberty 
except  by  the  law  of  the  land,  or 
the  judgment  of  his  peers. 


1776] 


JAMES  MADISON. 


39 


11.  That  excessive  bail  ought 
not  to  be  required,  nor  exces 
sive   fines   imposed,  nor   cruel 
and   unusual   punishments    in 
flicted. 

12.  That     warrants     unsup 
ported    by   evidence,    whereby 
any  officer  or  messenger   may 
be  commanded  or  required  to 
search  suspected  places,  or  to 
seize  any  person  or  persons,  his 
or  their  property,  not  particu 
larly    described,    are    grievous 
and  oppressive,  and  ought  not 
to  be  granted. 

13.  That  in  controversies  re 
specting  property,  and  in  suits 
between    man    and    man,   the 
ancient  trial  by  jury  is  prefer 
able  to  any  other,  and  ought  to 
be  held  sacred. 

14.  That  the  freedom  of  the 
press  is  one  of  the  great  bul 
warks  of  liberty,  and  can  never 
be  restrained  but  by  despotick 
governments. 

15.  That    a    well    regulated 
militia,  composed  of  the  body 
of  the  people,  trained  to  arms, 
is  the  proper,  natural,  and  safe 
defence  of  a  free   state  ;   that 
standing  armies  in  time  of  peace, 
should  be  avoided  as  dangerous 
to  liberty  ;  and  that  in  all  cases, 
the  military  should   be   under 
strict     subordination    to,    and 
governed  by  the  civil  power. 

16.  That  the  people  have  a 


9.  The  same  as  N?  n. 


10.  That    general    warrants, 
whereby    any   officer   or   mes 
senger  may  be  commanded  to 
search  suspected   places   with 
out   evidence   of    a   fact  com 
mitted,  or  to  seize  any  person 
or  persons  not  named,  or  whose 
offence     is     not     particularly 
described    and    supported    by 
evidence  are  greivous  and  op- 
presive   and   ought   not  to   be 
granted. 

11.  The  same  as  N?  13. 


12.  The  same  as  N?  14. 


13.  The  same  as  N°  15. 


14.  That  the  people  have  a 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[1776 


right  to  uniform  Government ; 
and  therefore,  that  no  Govern 
ment  separate  from,  or  inde 
pendent  of  the  Government  of 
Virginia,  ought  of  right,  to  be 
erected  or  established,  within 
the  limits  thereof. 

17.  That     no    free    govern 
ment,  or  the  blessings  of  lib 
erty,  can  be  preserved  to  any 
people,  but  by  a  firm  adherence 
to  justice,  moderation,  temper 
ance,  frugality  and  virtue,  and 
by  frequent  recurrence  to  fun 
damental  principles. 

1 8.  That    Religion,     or    the 
duty   which    we    owe    to    our 
CREATOR,  and  the  manner  of 
discharging  it,  can  be  directed 
only  by  reason  and  conviction, 
not  by  force  or  violence  :    and 
therefore,  that  all  men  should 
enjoy  the  fullest  toleration 
in  the  exercise  of  religion,  ac 
cording  to  the  dictates  of  con 
science,    unpunished,  and   un 
restrained    by   the   magistrate, 
unless  under  colour  of  religion, 
any  man  disturb  the  peace,  the 
happiness,  or  safety  of  Society. 
And  that  it  is  the  mutual  duty 
of  all  to  practice  Christian  for 
bearance,    love,     and    charity, 
towards  each  other.* 

*  On  the  printed  paper  here  literally 
copied,  is  a  manuscript  variation  of  this 
last  article  making  it  read  "  That  Re 
ligion  or  the  duty  we  owe  our  Creator, 


right  to  uniform  Government  : 
and  therefore  that  no  govern 
ment  separate  from  or  inde 
pendent  of  the  Government  of 
Virginia,  ought  to  be  erected 
or  established  within  the  limits 
thereof. 


15.  The  same  as  N?  17. 


16.  That  Religion,  or  the 
duty  we  owe  to  our  CREATOR, 
and  the  manner  of  discharging 
it  can  be  directed  only  by 
reason  and  conviction,  not  by 
force  or  violence,  and  therefore 
all  men  are  equally  entitled  to 
the  free  exercise  of  religion, 
according  to  the  dictates  of 
conscience  ;  and  that  it  is  the 
mutual  duty  of  all  to  practice 
Christian  forbearance  love  and 
charity  towards  each  other. 


1776] 


JAMES  MADISON. 


(Copy  of  a  printed  paper,  in 
the  hands  of  J.  M.) 

A    PLAN    OF    GOVERN 
MENT 

Laid  before  the  Committee  of 
the  House,  which  they  have 
ordered  to  be  printed  for  the 
perusal  of  the  members.* 

and  the  manner  of  discharging  it,  being 
under  the  direction  of  reason  and  con 
viction  only,  not  of  violence  or  com 
pulsion,  all  men  are  equally  entitled  to 
the  full  and  free  exercise  of  it,  accord 
ing  to  the  dictates  of  conscience  ;  and 
therefore  that  no  man  or  class  of  men, 
ought,  on  account  of  religion  to  be  in 
vested  with  peculiar  emoluments  or 
privileges,  nor  subjected  to  any  penal 
ties  or  disabilties,  unless  under  colour 
of  religion,  the  preservation  of  equal 
liberty  and  the  existence  of  the  State 
be  manifestly  endangered." 

This  variation  is  in  the  handwriting 
of  J.  M.  and  is  recollected  to  have 
been  brought  forward  by  him  with  a 
view,  more  particularly  to  substitute 
for  the  idea  expressed  by  the  term 
''toleration,"  an  absolute  and  equal 
right  in  all  to  the  exercise  of  religion 
according  to  the  dictates  of  conscience. 
The  proposal  was  moulded  into  the  last 
article  in  the  Declaration,  as  finally 
established,  from  which  the  term  "  tol 
eration"  is  excluded.  [Note  in  MS.] 

*  An  alteration  in  the  handwriting 
of  J.  M.  erases  "  of  the  House"  and 
inserts  after  "committee,"  appointed 
for  that  purpose  ;  and  adds,  at  the  end, 
after  "  members,"  of  the  House  making 
the  whole  read — Laid  before  the  com 
mittee  appointed  for  that  purpose, 
which  they  have  ordered  to  be  printed 


Copy  of  the  Constitution  as 
finally  agreed  to  by  the  con 
vention  of  1776. 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[1776 


i.  Let  the  Legislative,  execu 
tive  and  judicative  departments 
be  separate  and  distinct,  so 
that  neither  exercise  the  pow 
ers  properly  belonging  to  the 
other. 


2.  Let  the  legislative  be 
formed  of  two  distinct  branches, 
who,  together,  shall  be  a  com 
plete   legislature.      They   shall 
meet   once,   or    oftener,   every 
year,  and  shall    be  called  the 
GENERAL  ASSEMBLY  OF 
VIRGINIA. 

3.  Let  one  of  these  be  called 
the  Lower  House  of  Assembly, 
and  consist  of  two  delegates,  or 
representatives,  chosen  for  each 
county  annually,  by  such  men 
as  have  resided  in  the  same  for 

for  the  perusal  of  the  members  of  the 
House. 

From  this  correction,  it  appears  that 
what  was  laid  before  the  Committee 
was  printed  by  its  order  not  by  that 
of  the  convention,  as  was  done  in  the 
case  of  the  ' '  Declaration  of  Rights  " 
reported  by  Mr.  Gary,  from  the  ap 
pointed  committee  :  nor  is  there  in  the 
Journal  any  order  for  printing  any  plan 
of  Government  reported  to  the  Con 
vention,  from  a  committee.  [Note  in 
MS.] 


The  Legislative,  Executive 
and  Judiciary  Departments, 
shall  be  separate  and  distinct, 
so  that  neither  exercise  the 
powers  properly  belonging  to 
the  others  ;  nor  shall  any  per 
son  exercise  the  powers  of 
more  than  one  of  them  at  the 
same  time  except  that  the  Jus 
tices  of  the  county  courts 
shall  be  eligible  to  either  House 
of  Assembly 

The  Legislative  shall  be 
formed  of  two  distinct  branches, 
who 


1776] 


JAMES  MADISON. 


43 


one  year  last  past,  are  freehold 
ers  of  the  county,  possess  an  es 
tate  of  inheritance  of  land  in 
Virginia,  of  at  least  one  thou 
sand  pounds  value,  and  are  up 
wards  of  twenty  four  years  of 
age. 

4.  Let  the  other  be  called  the 
Upper  House  of  Assembly,  and 
consist  of  twenty  four  members, 
for  whose  election,  let  the  differ 
ent  counties  be  divided  into 
twenty  four  districts,  and  each 
county  of  the  respective  district, 
at  the  time  of  the  election  of  its 
delegates  for  the  Lower  House, 
choose  twelve  deputies,  or  sub- 
electors,  being  freeholders  re 
siding  therein,  and  having  an 
estate  of  inheritance  of  lands 
within  the  district,  of  at  least  five 
hundred  pounds  value:  Incase 
of  dispute,  the  qualifications  to 
be  determined  by  the  majority 
of  the  said  deputies.  Let  these 
deputies  choose  by  ballot,  one 
member  of  the  Upper  House  of 
Assembly,  who  is  a  freeholder 
of  the  district,  hath  been  a  res 
ident  therein  for  one  year  last 
past,  possesses  an  estate  of  in 
heritance  of  lands  in  Virginia, 
of  at  least  two  thousand  pounds 
value,  and  is  upwards  of  twenty 
eight  years  of  age.  To  keep  up 
this  Assembly  by  rotation,  let 
the  districts  be  equally  divided 
into  four  classes  and  numbered. 


44 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[1776 


At  the  end  of  one  year,  after  the 
general  election.  Let  the  six 
members  elected  by  the  first 
division  be  displaced,  rendered 
ineligible  for  four  years,  and  the 
vacancies  be  supplied  in  the 
manner  aforesaid.  Let  this  ro 
tation  be  applied  to  each  divi 
sion  according  to  its  number, 
and  continued  in  due  order 
annually. 

5.  Let  each  House  settle  its 
own  rules  of  proceeding,  direct 
writs  of  election  for  supplying 
intermediate  vacancies;  and  let 
the  right  of  suffrage  both  in  the 
election   of    members    for   the 
Lower  House,  and  of  deputies 
for  the  districts,  be  extended  to 
those  having  leases  for  land,  in 
which   there  is    an    unexpired 
term  of  seven  years,  and  to  every 
Housekeeper  who  hath  resided 
for  one  year  last  past,  in  the 
county,  and  hath  been  the  father 
of  three  children  in  this  country. 

6.  Let  all  laws  originate  in  the 
Lower  House,  to  be  approved 
or    rejected,     by     the    Upper 
House  ;  or  to  be  amended  with 
the  consent  of  the  Lower  House, 
except  money  bills,  which  in  no 
instance  shall  be  altered  by  the 
Upper  House,  but  wholly  ap 
proved  or  rejected. 

7.  Let  a  Governour,  or  Chief 
Magistrate  be  chosen  annually 
by  joint  ballot  of  both  Houses; 


1776] 


JAMES  MADISON. 


45 


who  shall  not  continue  in  that 
office  longer  than  three  years 
successively,  and  then  be  ineli 
gible  for  the  next  three  years. 
Let  an  adequate,  but  moderate 
salary,  be  settled  on  him,  during 
his  continuance  in  office  ;  and 
let  him,  with  the  advice  of  a 
council  of  State,  exercise  the 
executive  powers  of  Govern 
ment,  and  the  power  of  proroug- 
ing  or  adjourning  the  General 
Assembly,  or  of  calling  it  upon 
emergencies,  and  of  granting 
reprieves  or  pardons,  except  in 
cases  where  the  prosecution 
shall  have  been  carried  on  by 
the  Lower  House  of  Assembly. 

8.  Let  a  privy  Council,  or 
Council  of  State,  consisting  of 
eight  members,  be  chosen  by 
joint  ballot  of  both  Houses  of 
Assembly,  promiscuously,  from 
their  own  members,  or  the  peo 
ple  at  large,  to  assist  in  the  ad 
ministration  of  Government. 

Let  the  Governor  be  Presi 
dent  of  this  council ;  but  let 
them  annually  choose  one  of 
their  own  members,  as  Vice- 
President,  who,  in  case  of  the 
death  or  absence  of  the  Gover- 
nour,  shall  act  as  Lieutenant 
Governour.  Let  three  mem 
bers  be  sufficient  to  act,  and 
their  advice  be  entered  of  re 
cord  in  their  proceedings. 
Let  them  appoint  their  own 


46 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[1776 


clerk,  who  shall  have  a  salary 
settled  by  law,  and  take  an  oath 
of  secrecy,  in  such  matters  as 
he  shall  be  directed  to  conceal, 
unless  called  upon  by  the 
Lower  House  of  Assembly  for 
information.  Let  a  sum  of 
money,  appropriated  to  that 
purpose,  be  divided  annually 
among  the  members,  in  propor 
tion  to  their  attendance  :  and 
let  them  be  incapable,  during 
their  continuance  in  office,  of 
sitting  in  either  House  of  As 
sembly.  Let  two  members  be 
removed  by  ballot  of  their  own 
Board,  at  the  end  of  every  three 
years,  and  be  ineligible  for  the 
three  next  years.  Let  this  be 
regularly  continued,  by  rota 
tion,  so  as  that  no  member  be 
removed  before  he  hath  been 
three  years  in  the  council  :  and 
let  these  vacancies,  as  well  as 
those  occasioned  by  death  or 
incapacity,  be  supplied  by  new 
elections,  in  the  same  manner 
as  the  first. 

9.  Let   the  Governour,  with 
the  advice  of  the  Privy  council, 
have   the   appointment   of   the 
Militia  officers,  and  the   Gov 
ernment  of   the  militia,  under 
the  laws  of  the  country. 

10.  Let   the  two  Houses  of 
Assembly,  by  joint  ballot,   ap 
point  judges   of    the   supreme 
court,     judges     in     chancery, 


1776] 


JAMES  MADISON. 


47 


judges  of  Admiralty,  and  the 
attorney-general,  to  be  commis 
sioned  by  the  Governour,  and 
continue  in  office  during  good 
behaviour.  In  case  of  death  or 
incapacity,  let  the  Governour, 
with  the  advice  of  the  privy 
council,  appoint  persons  to  suc 
ceed  in  office  pro  tempore  to  be 
approved  or  displaced  by  both 
Houses.  Let  these  officers 
have  fixed  and  adequate  sal 
aries,  and  be  incapable  of  hav 
ing  a  seat  in  either  House  of 
Assembly,  or  in  the  Privy 
Council  ;  except  the  Attorney- 
general,  and  the  treasurer,  who 
may  be  permitted  to  a  seat  in 
the  Lower  House  of  Assembly. 

11.  Let  the  Governour,  and 
Privy  Council,  appoint  justices 
of  the  peace  for  the  counties. 
Let  the  clerks  of  all  the  courts, 
the   sheriffs   and   coroners,   be 
nominated,   by    the    respective 
courts,   approved  by  the  Gov 
ernour  and  Privy  Council,  and 
commissioned    by    the   Gover 
nour.     Let  the  clerks  be  con 
tinued  during  good  behaviour, 
and  all   fees   be   regulated   by 
law.     Let  the  justices  appoint 
constables. 

12.  Let  the  Governour,  any 
of  the  Privy  Counsellors,  judges 
of  the   supreme  court,  and  all 
other   officers    of    government, 
for  mal-administration,  or  cor- 


48 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[1776 


ruption,  be  prosecuted  by  the 
Lower  House  of  Assembly  (to 
be  carried  on  by  the  attorney- 
General,  or  such  other  person 
as  the  House  may  appoint)  in 
the  supreme  court  of  common 
law.  If  found  guilty,  let  him 
or  them  be  either  removed 
from  office  ;  or  for  ever  dis 
abled  to  hold  any  office  under 
the  Government ;  or  subjected 
to  such  pains  or  penalties  as 
the  laws  shall  direct. 

13.  Let  all  commissions  run 
in  the  name   of   the    Common 
wealth    of    Virginia,    and     be 
tested  by  the  Governour,  with 
the  seal  of  the  commonwealth 
annexed.     Let  writs  run  in  the 
same  manner,  and  be  tested  by 
the  clerks  of  the  several  courts. 
Let  indictments  conclude, 
Against  the  peace  and  dignity  of 
the  commonwealth. 

14.  Let   a   treasurer  be   ap 
pointed  annually,  by  joint  ballot 
of  both  Houses. 

15.  In    order    to    introduce 
this  government,  let  the  repre 
sentatives   of   the  people,  now 
met    in    Convention,     choose 
twenty  four  members  to  be  an 
upper   House ;    and    let    both 
Houses,  by  joint  ballot,  choose 
a  Governour  and  Privy  Coun 
cil  ;  the  upper  House  to  con 
tinue  until  the  last  day  of  March 
next  ;    and   the   other  officers, 


1777]  JAMES  MADISON.  49 


until  the  end  of  the  succeeding 
session  of  Assembly.  In  case 
of  vacancies,  the  President  to 
issue  writs  for  new  elections.* 


TO   JAMES   MADISON.  MAD.  MSS. 

ORANGE,  March,  Saturd?  1777. l 

HOND.  SIR,     *     *     * 

The  following  odd  affair  has  furnished  the  G  of 
this  county  with  some  very  unexpected  business. 

Two  persons  travelling  from  Phil3:  to  the  South 
ward  one  of  them  a  Frenchman  and  an  officer  in  the 
Continental  army  and  the  other  a  man  of  decent  figure 
came  to  the  G  House  on  the  evening  of  the  G  day 
and  immediately  inquired  for  a  member  of  the  Com 
mittee  ;  and  being  withdrawn  with  several  members 
into  a  private  room  they  gave  information,  that  they 
fell  in  with  a  man  on  the  road  a  few  miles  from  the 
G  house  who,  in  the  course  of  Conversation  on  pub 
lic  affairs  gave  abundant  proof  of  his  being  an  adher 
ent  to  the  King  of  G.  B.  and  a  dangerous  Enemy  to 
the  State,  that  he  ran  into  the  most  outrageous  abuse 
of  our  proceedings  and  on  their  threatening  to  inform 

*  It  is  not  known  with  certainty  from  whom  this  first  draught  of  a  Plan 
of  Government  proceeded.  There  is  a  faint  tradition  that  Meriwether  Smith 
spoke  of  it  as  originating  with  him.  What  is  remembered  by  J.  M.  is,  that 
George  Mason  was  the  most  prominent  member  in  discussing  and  developing 
the  Constitution  in  its  passage  through  the  convention.  The  Preamble  is  known 
to  have  been  furnished  by  Thomas  Jefferson.  [Note  in  MS.] 

1  The  first  paragraph  of  this  letter  relates  to  family  affairs,  his  brother  Anthony 
having  ague  and  a  swelling  in  the  arm.  "  I  ventured  however  to  have  a  pretty 
large  quantity  of  blood  taken  from  him  and  had  his  arm  kept  moist  by  the  usual 
Poultices,  which  has  answered  every  purpose." 


50  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1777 

ag'  him  in  the  most  daring  manner  bid  defiance  to 
Committees  or  whoever  should  pretend  to  judge  or 
punish  him.  They  said  the  man  they  alluded  to  had 
come  with  them  to  the  G  House,  and  they  made  no 
doubt  but  they  could  point  him  out  in  the  Crowd. 
On  their  so  doing  the  culprit  appeared  to  be  Benjamin 
Haley.  As  the  Committee  had  no  jurisdiction  in  the 
case  it  was  referred  to  a  justice  of  the  Peace.  Every 
one  seemed  to  be  agreed  that  his  conduct  was  a  direct 
violation  of  Law  and  called  aloud  for  public  notice  ; 
but  the  witnesses  being  travellers  and  therefore  un 
able  to  attend  at  a  Trial,  it  was  thought  best  not  to 
undertake  a  Prosecution  which  promised  nothing  but 
impunity  and  matter  of  triumph  to  the  offender.  Here 
the  affair  dropped  and  every  one  supposed  was  entirely 
at  an  end.  But  as  the  Frenchman  was  accidentally 
passing  through  the  room  where  Haley  was,  he  took 
occasion  to  admonish  the  people  of  his  being  a  dis 
affected  person  and  upbraided  him  for  his  Tory  prin 
ciples.  This  introduced  a  debate  which  was  continued 
for  some  time  with  great  heat  on  the  part  of  the 
Frenchman  and  great  insolence  on  the  part  of  Haley. 
At  the  request  of  the  latter  they  at  length  both  ap 
peared  before  a  Justice  of  the  peace.  Haley  at  first 
evaded  the  charges  of  his  antagonist,  but  after  some 
time,  said  he  scorned  to  be  counterfeit,  and  in  answer 
to  some  questions  that  were  put  to  him,  signified  that 
we  were  in  the  state  of  rebellion  and  had  revolted 
from  our  lawful  Sovereign  and  that  if  the  King  had 
justice  done  him  his  authority  would  still  be  in  exer 
cise  among  us.  This  passed  in  the  presence  of  20 


1778]  JAMES  MADISON.  51 

or  30  persons,  and  rendered  the  Testimony  of  the 
Travellers  needless.  A  warrant  for  arresting  him 
was  immediately  issued  and  executed.  The  criminal 
went  through  his  examination  in  which  his  very  Pleas 
seemed  to  aggravate  his  guilt.  Witnesses  were  sum 
moned  sworn  and  their  evidences  taken.  And  on  his 
obstinate  refusal  to  give  security  for  his  appearance, 
He  was  committed  to  close  gaol.  This  happened 
about  8  O'Clock.  I  have  since  heard  he  begged  afr 
one  O'Clock  in  the  morning  to  be  admitted  to  bail  & 
went  home  but  not  without  threats  of  revenge  and 
making  public  declaration  that  he  was  King  George's 
man.  I  have  stated  the  case  thus  particularly  not 
only  for  your  own  satisfaction,  but  that  you  may,  if 
an  opportunity  occurs,  take  the  advice  of  some  Gentle 
man  skilled  in  the  Law,  on  the  most  proper  and  legal 
mode  of  proceeding  against  him. 

Ambrose  requests  you  will  enquire  whether  any 
pretty  neat  Shoe  Boots  may  be  had  in  Fred?  and  the 
price  of  them. 


TO  JAMES   MADISON.  MAD.  MSS. 

WILLIAMSBURG  Jan*  23d  1778 

HOND  SIR, — I  got  safe  to  this  place  on  Tuesday 
following  the  day  I  left  home,  and  at  the  earnest  in 
vitation  of  my  kinsman  Mr  Madison  1  have  taken  my 
lodgings  in  a  Room  of  the  Presidents  house,  which  is 
a  much  better  accomodation  than  I  could  have  prom 
ised  myself.  It  wouldjbe  very  agreeable  to  me  if  I 

1  Rev.  James  Madison,  President  of  William  and  Mary. 


52  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1778 

were  enabled  by  such  varieties  as  our  part  of  the 
Country  furnishes,  particularly  dried  fruit  &c  &c  which 
M?  Madison  is  very  fond  of  to  make  some  little  returns 
for  the  culinary  favours  I  receive.  Should  any  op 
portunity  for  this  purpose  offer  I  hope  they  will  be 
sent.  You  will  see  by  the  inclosed  Acd  of  Sales  what 
money  you  have  in  Mr.  Lee's  hands,  and  if  you  chuse 
to  draw  for  it,  you  can  transmit  me  your  Bills  for  sale— 
You  will  be  informed  in  due  time  by  Advertisement 
from  the  Governor  what  is  proper  to  be  done  with 
the  Shoes  &c  &c  collected  for  the  Army.  You  will  be 
able  to  obtain  so  circumstantial  an  ace*  of  public  affairs 
from  Majf  Moore  that  I  may  save  myself  the  trouble 
of  anticipating  it — Majf  Moore  also  has  for  my  Mother 
14  oz  of  Bark — The  other  Articles  wanted  by  the 
family  are  not  at  present  to  be  had.  When  ever  I 
meet  with  them  I  shall  provide  and  transmit  them, 
I  hope  you  will  not  forget  my  parting  request  that  I 
might  hear  frequently  from  home,  and  whenever  my 
brother 1  returns  from  the  Army  I  desire  he  may  be 
informed.  I  shall  expect  he  will  make  up  by  letter 
the  loss  of  intelligence  I  sustain  by  my  removal  out 
of  his  way.  With  the  sincerest  affection  for  yourself 
&  all  others  who  I  ought  particularly  to  remember  on 
this  occasion. 

I  am  Dear  Sir  your  Affects  son 

I  find  on  enquiry  that  Mr  Benjamin  Winslow  is  dis 
continued  in  the  military  appointment  given  him  by 
the  Governour  &  Council.  I  promised  to  let  him 

1  Ambrose  Madison,  four  years  younger  than  James,  joined  the  army  at  the 
outbreak  of  hostilities. 


1778]  JAMES  MADISON.  53 

know  this  by  letter  but  my  being  as  yet  unprovided 
with  paper  makes  it  necessary  to  leave  this  informa 
tion  for  him  with  you.  J.  M  Jr 

Although  I  well  know  how  inconvenient  and  dis 
agreeable  it  is  to  you  to  continue  to  act  as  Lieutenant 
of  the  County1  I  cannot  help  informing  you  that  a 
resignation  at  this  juncture  is  here  supposed  to  have 
a  very  unfriendly  aspect  on  the  execution  of  the 
Draught  and  consequently  to  betray  at  least  a  want 
of  patriotism  and  perseverence.  This  is  so  much  the 
case  that  a  recommendation  of  Cony  Lt.  this  day 
received  by  the  Govf,  to  supply  the  place  of  one  who 
had  resigned  to  the  Court,  produced  a  private  verbal 
message  to  the  old  L*  to  continue  to  act  at  least  as 
long  as  the  present  measures  were  in  execution. 

J  M  J' 


TO  JAMES   MADISON.  MAD.  MSS. 

WILLIAMSBG  March  6*  78 

HOND  SIR, — Since  I  wrote  to  you  by  Mi"  Cave  I 
have  taken  the  freedom  to  give  an  order  on  Mr  Lee 
who  is  at  present  at  Nants  for  money  due  to  you  in 
favour  of  the  Revd  Mr  Madison  who  wanted  to  pro 
cure  from  Europe  a  few  literary  curiosities  by  means 
of  a  French  gentleman  just  setting  out  on  public 
Business  for  this  State,  addressed  to  the  management 
of  My  Lee.  I  take  the  opportunity  by  Mr  Harrison 

1  "  His  father  was  still  the  county  lieutenant  of  Orange  ;  but  having  reached 
an  age  when  the  duties  of  the  office  were  felt  to  be  burdensome  to  declining 
years,  he  wished  to  relieve  himself  of  them  in  favor  of  a  successor,  who  should 
be  younger  and  more  capable  of  exertion." — Rives,  i.,  191. 


54  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1778 

from  Culpeper  of  giving  you  the  earliest  notice  of  this 
circumstance  that  you  may  not  dispose  of  your  Bills 
to  any  other  person.  As  some  little  return  for  the 
favour  I  am  daily  receiving  from  Mr  Madison  I  shall 
not  charge  him  more  than  the  legal  rate  of  exchange 
for  the  money.  I  have  sent  for  a  few  Books  also  on 
my  own  account  and  Mr  Lee  is  requested  to  transmit 
whatever  late  publications  relate  to  G.  B.  or  the 
present  state  of  European  Politics.  If  any  Balance 
should  remain  after  these  purposes  are  provided  for 
Capt.  le  Maire  the  french  Gentlm  alluded  to  has 
engaged  to  lay  it  out  for  us  in  linen  &c.  We  have 
no  news  here  that  can  be  depended.  It  is  said  by 
Mr  King  who  is  just  from  Petersbg  that  a  Gentleman 
was  at  that  place  who  informed  that  sundry  persons 
had  arrived  at  Edenton  (which  he  was  travelling 
from)  from  Providence  Island  who  affirmed  that  they 
saw  in  Providence  a  London  Paper  giving  an  account 
that  Burgoyne's  disaster  had  produced  the  most  vio 
lent  fermentation  in  England  that  the  Parliament  had 
refused  to  grant  the  supplies  for  carrying  on  the  war 
and  that  a  motion  for  acknowledging  our  Independ 
ence  was  overruled  by  a  small  majority  only.  The 
People  who  bring  this  news  to  Edenton,  as  the  story 
goes,  were  prisoners  wth  the  Enemy  at  Providence, 
where  they  were  released  by  a  New  England  privateer 
which  suddenly  landed  her  men  took  possession  of  the 
small  fort  that  commanded  the  Harbour  and  secured 
several  vessels  that  lay  in  it  one  of  which  was  given 
up  to  these  men  to  bring  them  to  the  Continent.  I 
leave  you  to  form  your  own  Judgment  as  to  the  cred- 


1779]  JAMES  MADISON.  55 

ibility  of  this  report — I  wish  it  carried  stronger  marks 
of  truth. 

The  Govr  has  just  recd  a  letter  from  the  Cap*  of 
french  frigate  I  mentioned  in  my  last  informing  him 
of  his  safe  arrival  in  N.  C.  with  a  rich  Cargo  of 
various  useful  and  important  Articles,  which  will  be 
offered  for  sale  to  us.  The  frigate  belongs  to  a 
Company  at  Nantes  in  France — We  also  hear  but  in 
a  less  authentic  manner  that  7000  Tents  have  arrived 
at  Martinique  on  their  way  from  France  to  the  Grand 
Army  (?) — Salt  at  South.  Quay  sells  at  ^3-1  a 
[illegible]  and  is  falling — A  letter  from  York-Town 
this  moment  read  informs  us  that  an  Exchange  of 
Prisoners  is  at  last  agreed  on  between  W  [ashington]. 
&  H  [owe]. 

I  wish  much  to  hear  from  you,  and  shall  continue 
to  write  by  every  opportunity. 

I  am  Dr  Sir  with  my  constant  good 
wishes  &c  &c 

Yr  affect"  son 


TO  JAMES  MADISON.  MAD.  MSS. 

WlLLIAMSBURG,  DeCr.    8l.h,   I77Q. 

HONORED  SIR, — Having  an  opportunity  by  M^  Col 
lins  I  add  a  few  lines  to  those  I  sent  by  Col.  Burnley 
on  the  Subject  of  your's  by  him.  The  Assembly  have 
not  yet  concluded  their  plan  for  complying  with  the 
requisitions  from  Congress.  It  may  be  relied  on  that 
that  cannot  be  done  without  very  heavy  taxes  on 
every  species  of  property.  Indeed  it  is  thought  ques- 


56  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1779 

tionable  whether  it  will  not  be  found  absolutely  im 
possible.  No  exertions  however  ought  to  be  omitted 
to  testify  our  Zeal  to  support  Congress  in  the  prose 
cution  of  the  War.  It  is  also  proposed  to  procure  a 
large  sum  on  loan  by  stipulating  to  pay  the  Interest 
in  Tob?  A  Tax  on  This  article  necessary  for  that 
purpose  is  to  be  collected.  Being  very  imperfectly 
acquainted  with  the  proceedings  of  the  Assembly  on 
this  matter  I  must  refer  you  for  the  particulars  to  the 
return  of  Maj"  Moore,  or  some  future  opportunity. 
The  law  for  escheats  &  forfeitures  will  be  repealed  as 
it  respects  orphans,  &c.  The  effects  of  the  measures 
taken  by  the  Assembly  on  the  credit  of  our  money  & 
the  prices  of  things  cannot  be  predicted.  If  our  ex 
pectations  had  not  been  so  invariably  disappointed 
they  ought  to  be  supposed  very  considerable.  But 
from  the  rapid  progress  of  depreciation  at  present  and 
the  universal  struggle  among  sellers  to  bring  up  prices, 
I  cannot  flatter  myself  with  the  hope  of  any  great 
reformation.  Corn  is  already  at  £20  &  rising.  Tob? 
is  also  rising.  Pork  will  probably  command  any  price. 
Imported  goods  exceed  everything  else  many  hundreds 
per  cent. 

I  am  much  at  a  loss  how  to  dispose  of  Willey.1  I 
cannot  think  it  would  be  expedient  in  the  present  state 
of  things  to  send  him  out  of  the  State.  From  a  new 
arrangement  of  the  college  here  nothing  is  in  future 
to  be  taught  but  the  higher  &  rarer  branches  of 
Science.  The  preliminary  studies  must  therefore  be 
pursued  in  private  Schools  or  Academies.  If  the 

1  The  youngest  of  James  Madison's  three  brothers. 


1779]  JAMES  MADISON.  57 

Academy  at  Prince  Edward  is  so  far  dissolved  that 
you  think  his  return  thither  improper,  I  would  recom 
mend  his  being  put  under  the  instruction  of  Mr. 
Maury1  rather  than  suffer  him  to  be  idle  at  home. 
The  languages  including  English,  Geography,  &  arith 
metic  ought  to  be  his  employment  till  he  is  prepared 
to  receive  a  finish  to  his  education  at  this  place. 

By  the  late  change  also  in  the  college,  the  former 
custom  of  furnishing  the  table  for  the  President  & 
professors  is  to  be  discontinued.  I  am  induced  by 
this  consideration  to  renew  my  request  for  the  Flour 
mentioned  so  often  to  you.  It  will  perhaps  be  the 
only  opportunity  I  may  have  of  requiting  received  & 
singular  favours,  and,  for  the  reason  just  assigned  will 
be  extremely  convenient.  I  wish  to  know  without  any 
loss  of  time  how  far  this  supply  may  be  reckoned.  5 
or  600  lb ,  at  least  I  pursuade  myself  may  be  spared 
from  your  stock  without  encroaching  on  your  own  con 
sumption.  Perhaps  Mr.  R.  Burnley  would  receive 
and  store  it  for  me.  Capt.  W™  Anderson  I 
believe  also  lives  at  that  place  and  would  probably  do 
any  favour  of  that  sort.  I  am  desired  by  a  Gentleman 
here  to  procure  for  him  2  Bear  Skins  to  cover  the  foot 
of  his  Chariot.  If  they  can  be  bought  anywhere  in 
your  neighborhood  I  beg  you  or  Ambrose  will  take 
the  trouble  to  inquire  for  them  &  send  them  to  Capt. 
Anderson  at  Hanover  Town.  If  the  flour  should  come 
down  the  same  opportunity  will  serve  for  them. 

1  Rev.  James  Maury,  of  Fredericksville,  Louisa  Co.  He  was  Jefferson's 
teacher — "  a  correct  classical  scholar,  with  whom  I  continued  two  years."  See 
Jefferson  s  Writings  (Ford),  I,  3,  and  n. 


58  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1780 

Captain  Anderson  may  be  informed  that  they  are  for 
Mr.  Norton.  If  they  can  be  got  without  too  much 
trouble  I  should  be  glad  of  succeeding,  as  he  will  rely 
on  my  promise  to  procure  them  for  him. 

Having  nothing  to  add  under  the  head  of  news,   I 
subscribe  myself  y5  dutiful  son.1 


TO  JAMES  MADISON.  MAD.  MSS. 

PHILADELPHIA,  Monday  March  2ot]?,  i7So.2 

HOND  SIR, — The  extreme  badness  of  the  roads  and 
frequency  of  rains  rendered  my  journey  so  slow  that  I 
did  not  reach  this  place  till  Saturday  last.  The  only 
public  intelligence  I  have  to  communicate  is  that  the 
great  and  progressive  depreciation  of  the  paper  cur 
rency  had  introduced  such  disorder  and  perplexity 
into  public  affairs  for  the  present  and  threatened  to  load 
the  United  States  with  such  an  intolerable  burden  of 
debt,  that  Congress  have  thought  it  expedient  to  con 
vert  the  200,000,000  of  Dollars  now  in  circulation  into 
a  real  debt  of  5,000,000  by  establishing  the  exchange 
at  40  for  i  :  and  taxes  for  calling  it  in  during  the  ensu 
ing  year,  are  to  be  payable  at  the  option  of  the  people 
in  Specie  or  paper  according  to  that  difference.  In 
order  to  carry  on  public  measures  in  future  money  is  to 
be  emitted  under  the  combined  faith  of  Congress  and 
the  several  States,  secured  on  permanent  and  specific 

1  A  short  postscript,  partly  mutilated,  relates  to  a  warrant  on  "  S.  Young's 
Claim." 

2  Monday,  March  20,  1780,  "  Mr.  James  Madison,  jun.  a  delegate  from  Vir 
ginia,  attended  and  produced  credentials  of  his  appointment,  which  were  read." 
— Journals  of  Congress,  iii.,  444. 


1780]  JAMES  MADISON.  59 

funds  to  be  provided  by  the  latter.  This  scheme  was 
finally  resolved  on  on  Saturday  last.  It  has  not  yet 
been  printed  but  will  be  immediately.  I  shall  transmit 
a  copy  to  you  by  the  first  opportunity.  The  little 
time  I  have  been  here  makes  it  impossible  for  me  to 
enter  into  a  particular  delineation  of  it.  It  will  prob 
ably  create  great  perplexity  and  complaints  in  many 
private  transactions.  Congress  have  recommended  to 
the  States  to  repeal  their  tender  laws,  and  to  take 
measures  for  preventing  injustice  as  much  as  possible. 
It  is  probable  that  in  the  case  of  loans  to  the  public, 
the  state  of  depreciation  at  the  time  they  were  made 
will  be  the  rule  of  payment,  but  nothing  is  yet  decided 
on  that  point.  I  expect  to  be  more  at  leisure  to  write 
fully  by  next  post. 


TO    THOMAS    JEFFERSON.1 

PHILADELPHIA,  March  27,  1780. 

DEAR  SIR, — Nothing  under  the  title  of  news  has  oc 
curred  since  I  wrote  last  week  by  express,  except  that 
the  enemy  on  the  first  of  March  remained  in  the  neigh 
bourhood  of  Charleston,  in  the  same  posture  as  when 
the  preceding  account  came  away.  From  the  best  in 
telligence  from  that  quarter,  there  seems  to  be  great 
encouragement  to  hope  that  Clinton's  operations  will 
be  again  frustrated.  Our  great  apprehensions  at 
present  flow  from  a  very  different  quarter.  Among 
the  various  conjunctures  of  alarm  and  distress  which 

1  Then  Governor  of  Virginia.     The  letter  is  from  the  Madison  papers  (1840). 
It  marks  the  beginning  of  the  correspondence  with  Jefferson. 


60  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1780 

have  arisen  in  the  course  of  the  Revolution,  it  is  with 
pain  I  affirm  to  you,  sir,  that  no  one  can  be  singled 
out  more  truly  critical  than  the  present.  Our  army 
threatened  with  an  immediate  alternative  of  disband 
ing  or  living  on  free  quarter ;  the  public  treasury 
empty ;  public  credit  exhausted,  nay  the  private 
credit  of  purchasing  agents  employed,  I  am  told,  as 
far  as  it  will  bear  ;  Congress  complaining  of  the  ex 
tortion  of  the  people  ;  the  people  of  the  improvidence 
of  Congress  ;  and  the  army  of  both  ;  our  .affairs  re 
quiring  the  most  mature  and  systematic  measures, 
and  the  urgency  of  occasions  admitting  only  of  tem 
porizing  expedients,  and  these  expedients  generating 
new  difficulties ;  Congress  recommending  plans  to 
the  several  States  for  execution,  and  the  States  sepa 
rately  rejudging  the  expediency  of  such  plans,  where 
by  the  same  distrust  of  concurrent  exertions  that  has 
damped  the  ardor  of  patriotic  individuals  must  pro 
duce  the  same  effect  among  the  States  themselves ; 
an  old  system  of  finance  discarded  as  incompetent 
to  our  necessities,  an  untried  and  precarious  one  sub 
stituted,  and  a  total  stagnation  in  prospect  between 
the  end  of  the  former  and  the  operation  of  the  latter. 
These  are  the  outlines  of  the  picture  of  our  public 
situation.  I  leave  it  to  your  own  imagination  to  fill 
them  up.  Believe  me,  sir,  as  things  now  stand,  if  the 
States  do  not  vigorously  proceed  in  collecting  the 
old  money,  and  establishing  funds  for  the  credit  of 
the  new,  that  we  are  undone  ;  and  let  them  be  ever 
so  expeditious  in  doing  this,  still  the  intermediate 
distress  to  our  army,  and  hindrance  to  public  affairs, 


1780]  JAMES  MADISON.  61 

are  a  subject  of  melancholy  reflection.  General 
Washington  writes  that  a  failure  of  bread  has  al 
ready  commenced  in  the  army  ;  and  that,  for  any 
thing  he  sees,  it  must  unavoidably  increase.  Meat 
they  have  only  for  a  short  season  ;  and  as  the  whole 
dependence  is  on  provisions  now  to  be  procured, 
without  a  shilling  for  the  purpose,  and  without  credit 
for  a  shilling,  I  look  forward  with  the  most  pungent 
apprehensions.  It  will  be  attempted,  I  believe,  to 
purchase  a  few  supplies  with  loan-office  certificates ; 
but  whether  they  will  be  received  is  perhaps  far  from 
being  certain  ;  and  if  received  will  certainly  be  a 
most  expensive  and  ruinous  expedient.  It  is  not 
without  some  reluctance  I  trust  this  information  to 
a  conveyance  by  post,  but  I  know  of  no  better  at 
present,  and  I  conceive  it  to  be  absolutely  necessary 
to  be  known  to  those  who  are  most  able  and  zealous 
to  contribute  to  the  public  relief. 


TO   THOMAS  JEFFERSON.1 

PHILADELPHIA,  May  6,  1780. 

DEAR  SIR, — I  am  sorry  that  I  can  give  you  no  other 
account  of  our  public  situation,  than  that  it  continues 
equally  perplexed  and  alarming  as  when  I  lately  gave 
you  a  sketch  of  it.  Our  army  has  as  yet  been  kept 
from  starving,  and  public  measures  from  total  stag 
nation,  by  draughts  on  the  States  for  the  unpaid 
requisitions.  The  great  amount  of  these  you  may 

1  From  the  Madison  papers  (1840). 


62  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1780 

judge  of  from  the  share  that  has  fallen  to  Virginia. 
The  discharge  of  debts  due  from  the  purchasing  de 
partments  has  absorbed  a  great  proportion  of  them, 
and  very  large  demands  still  remain.  As  soon  as  the 
draughts  amount  to  the  whole  of  the  monthly  requisi 
tions  up  to  the  end  of  March,  they  must  cease,  accord 
ing  to  the  new  scheme  of  finance.  We  must  then 
depend  wholly  on  the  emissions  to  be  made  in  pur 
suance  of  that  scheme,  which  can  only  be  applied  as 
the  old  emissions  are  collected  and  destroyed.  Should 
this  not  be  done  as  fast  as  the  current  expenditures 
require,  or  should  the  new  emissions  fall  into  a  course 
of  depreciation,  both  of  which  may  but  too  justly  be 
feared,  a  most  melancholy  crisis  must  take  place.  A 
punctual  compliance  on  the  part  of  the  States  with 
the  specific  supplies  will  indeed  render  much  less 
money  necessary  than  would  otherwise  be  wanted  ; 
but  experience  by  no  means  affords  satisfactory  en 
couragement  that  due  and  unanimous  exertions  will 
be  made  for  that  purpose, — not  to  mention  that  our 
distress  is  so  pressing  that  it  is  uncertain  whether 
any  exertions  of  that  kind  can  give  relief  in  time.  It 
occurs  besides,  that  as,  the  ability  of  the  people  to 
comply  with  the  pecuniary  requisitions  is  derived  from 
the  sale  of  their  commodities,  a  requisition  of  the 
latter  must  make  the  former  proportionably  more 
difficult  and  defective.  Congress  have  the  satisfac 
tion,  however,  to  be  informed  that  the  legislature  of 
Connecticut  have  taken  the  most  vigorous  steps  for 
supplying  their  quota  both  of  money  and  commodi 
ties  ;  and  that  a  body  of  their  principal  merchants 


1780]  JAMES  MADISON.  63 

have  associated  for  supporting  the  credit  of  the  new 
paper,  for  which  purpose  they  have,  in  a  public  ad 
dress,  pledged  their  faith  to  the  assembly  to  sell  their 
merchandize  on  the  same  terms  as  if  they  were  to  be 
paid  in  specie.  A  similar  vigor  throughout  the  Union 
may  perhaps  produce  effects  as  far  exceeding  our 
present  hopes,  as  they  have  heretofore  fallen  short  of 
our  wishes. 

It  is  to  be  observed  that  the  situation  of  Congress 
has  undergone  a  total  change  from  what  it  originally 
was.  Whilst  they  exercised  the  indefinite  power  of 
emitting  money  on  the  credit  of  their  constituents, 
they  had  the  whole  wealth  and  resources  of  the  con 
tinent  within  their  command,  and  could  go  on  with 
their  affairs  independently  and  as  they  pleased. 
Since  the  resolution  passed  for  shutting  the  press, 
this  power  has  been  entirely  given  up,  and  they  are 
now  as  dependent  on  the  States  as  the  King  of  Eng 
land  is  on  the  Parliament.  They  can  neither  enlist, 
pay  nor  feed  a  single  soldier,  nor  execute  any  other 
purpose,  but  as  the  means  are  first  put  into  their 
hands.  Unless  the  legislatures  are  sufficiently  atten 
tive  to  this  change  of  circumstances,  and  act  in  con 
formity  to  it,  every  thing  must  necessarily  go  wrong, 
or  rather  must  come  to  a  total  stop.  All  that  Con 
gress  can  do  in  future  will  be  to  administer  public 
affairs  with  prudence,  vigor  and  economy.  In  order 
to  do  which  they  have  sent  a  committee\to  Head- 
Quarters  with  ample  powers,  in  concert  Vith  the 
Commander-in-Chief  and  the  heads  of  the  iDepart- 
ments,  to  reform  the  various  abuses  which  prevail, 


64  THE   WRITINGS  OF  [1780 

and  to  make  such  arrangements  as  will  best  guard 
against  a  relapse  into  them. 


TO    THOMAS   JEFFERSON.1 

PHILADELPHIA,  June  2,  1780. 

DEAR  SIR, —  It  appears  from  sundry  accounts  from 
the  frontiers  of  New  York  and  other  Northern  States, 
that  the  savages  are  making  the  most  distressing 
incursions,  under  the  direction  of  British  agents,  and 
that  a  considerable  force  is  assembling  at  Montreal  for 
the  purpose  of  wresting  from  us  Fort  Schuyler,  which 
covers  the  northwestern  frontier  of  New  York.  It  is 
probable  the  enemy  will  be  but  too  successful  this 
campaign  in  exciting  their  vindictive  spirit  against 
us,  throughout  the  whole  frontier  of  the  United 
States.  The  expedition  of  General  Sullivan  against 
the  Six  Nations,  seems  by  its  effects  rather  to  have 
exasperated  than  to  have  terrified  or  disabled  them. 
And  the  example  of  those  nations  will  add  great 
weight  to  the  exhortations  addressed  to  the  more 
southern  tribes. 

Rivington  has  published  a  positive  and  particular 
account  of  the  surrender  of  Charleston  on  the  twelfth 
ultimo,  said  to  be  brought  to  New  York  by  the  Iris 
which  left  Charleston  five  days  after.  There  are, 
notwithstanding,  some  circumstances  attending  it 
which,  added  to  the  notorious  character  for  lying  of 
the  author,  leave  some  hope  that  it  is  fictitious.  The 

1  From  the  Madison  papers  (1840). 


i78o]  JAMES  MADISON.  65 

true  state  of  the  matter  will  probably  be  known  at 
Richmond  before  this  reaches  you. 

We  have  yet  heard  nothing  further  of  the  auxiliary 
armament  from  France.  However  anxiously  its 
arrival  may  be  wished  for,  it  is  much  to  be  feared  we 
shall  continue  to  be  so  unprepared  to  co-operate  with 
them,  as  to  disappoint  their  views,  and  to  add  to  our 
distress  and  disgrace.  Scarce  a  week,  and  sometimes 
scarce  a  day,  but  brings  us  a  most  lamentable  picture 
from  Head-Quarters.  The  army  are  a  great  part  of 
their  time  on  short  allowance,  and  sometimes  with 
out  any  at  all,  and  constantly  depending  on  the  pre 
carious  fruits  of  momentary  expedients.  General 
Washington  has  found  it  of  the  utmost  difficulty  to 
repress  the  mutinous  spirit  engendered  by  hunger 
and  want  of  pay  :  and  all  his  endeavours  could  not 
prevent  an  actual  eruption  of  it  in  two  Connecticut 
regiments,  who  assembled  on  the  parade  with  their 
arms,  and  resolved  to  return  home  or  satisfy  their 
hunger  by  the  power  of  the  bayonet.  We  have  no 
permanent  resource,  and  scarce  even  a  momentary 
one  left,  but  in  the  prompt  and  vigorous  supplies  of 
the  States.  The  State  of  Pennsylvania  has  it  in  her 
power  to  give  great  relief  in  the  present  crisis,  and  a 
recent  act  of  her  legislature  shows,  they  are  deter 
mined  to  make  the  most  of  it.  I  understand  they 
have  invested  the  Executive  with  a  dictatorial 
authority  from  which  nothing  but  the  lives  of  their 
citizens  are  exempted.  I  hope  the  good  resulting 
from  it  will  be  such  as  to  compensate  for  the  risk  of 
the  precedent. 


VOL.    I. — 5 


66  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1780 

TO    THOMAS    JEFFERSON.1 

PHILADELPHIA,  June  23,  1780. 

DEAR  SIR, — The  fact  is  confirmed  that  Clinton 
has  returned  to  New  York  with  part  of  the  Southern 
army,  and  has  joined  Kniphausen.  They  are  at 
present  manceuvering  for  purposes  not  absolutely 
known,  but  most  probably  in  order  to  draw  General 
Washington  to  an  action,  in  which  they  suppose  he 
might  be  disabled  from  giving  the  necessary  co-oper 
ation  to  the  French  armament.  Could  they  succeed 
in  drawing  him  from  his  strong  position,  the  result 
indeed  ought  to  be  exceedingly  feared.  He  is  weak 
in  numbers  beyond  all  suspicion,  and  under  as  great 
apprehension  from  famine  as  from  the  enemy.  Unless 
very  speedy  and  extensive  reinforcements  are  received 
from  the  Eastern  States,  which  I  believe  are  exerting 
themselves,  the  issue  of  the  campaign  must  be  equally 
disgraceful  to  our  councils  and  disgustful  to  our  allies. 
Our  greatest  hopes  of  being  able  to  feed  them  are 
founded  on  a  patriotic  scheme  of  the  opulent  mer 
chants  of  this  city,  who  have  already  subscribed 
nearly  £  ,  and  will  very  soon  complete  that  sum, 
the  immediate  object  of  which  is  to  procure  and  trans 
port  to  the  army  rations,  and  three 
hundred  hogsheads  of  rum.  Congress,  for  the  sup 
port  of  this  bank,  and  for  the  security  and  indemnifi 
cation  of  the  subscribers,  have  pledged  the  faith  of 
the  United  States,  and  agreed  to  deposit  bills  of 
exchange  in  Europe  to  the  amount  of  ,£150,000 

1  From  the  Madison  papers  (1840). 


1780]  JAMES  MADISON.  67 

sterling,  which  are  not,  however,  to  be  made  use  of, 
unless  other  means  of  discharging  this  debt  should 
be  inadequate. 


TO    EDMUND    PENDLETON.1 

PHILADELPHIA,  September  12,  1780.2 

DEAR  SIR, — Congress  have  at  length  entered  seri 
ously  on  a  plan  for  finally  ratifying  the  Confederation. 
Convinced  of  the  necessity  of  such  a  measure,  to  re 
press  the  hopes  with  which  the  probable  issue  of  the 
campaign  will  inspire  our  enemy,  as  well  as  to  give 
greater  authority  and  vigor  to  our  public  councils,  they 
have  recommended,  in  the  most  pressing  terms,  to  the 
States  claiming  unappropriated  back  lands,  to  cede  a 
liberal  portion  of  them  for  the  general  benefit.  As 
these  exclusive  claims  formed  the  only  obstacle  with 
Maryland,  there  is  no  doubt  that  a  compliance  with 
this  recommendation  will  bring  her  into  the  Confed 
eration.  How  far  the  States  holding  the  back  lands 
may  be  disposed  to  give  them  up,  cannot  be  so  easily 
determined.  From  the  sentiments  of  the  most  intel 
ligent  persons  which  have  come  to  my  knowledge,  I 

1  From  the  Madison  papers  (1840).     Pendleton  was  chosen  President  of  the 
Virginia  Court  of  Appeals  in  1779,  and  held  the  office  until  his  death  in  1803. 

2  It  would  appear  that  shortly  before  this  date  Madison  was  offered  an  oppor 
tunity  of  representing  the  United  States  abroad.     His  kinsman,  Rev.  James 
Madison,  wrote  to  him  from  Williamsburg,  August  3,  1780  : 

"  But  is  it  true  that  I  had  like  to  have  lost  my  valuable  Correspondent  & 
Friend.  We  hear  that  you  have  refused  an  important  place  in  a  foreign  Em 
bassy. — If  so,  yr.  Refusal  does  you  Honour,  but  at  your  Time,  I  think,  it 
wf  have  been  ye  highest  Gratification  to  a  Person  who  w?  have  viewed  y«  Im 
provement  &  yf  [torn  out]  with  a  philosophical  Eye. — And  no  Doubt  all 
ys.  Honours  America  could  confer  w?in  Time  have  succeeded." — Mad.  MSS. 


68  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1780 

own  I  am  pretty  sanguine  that  they  will  see  the  neces 
sity  of  closing  the  Union,  in  too  strong  a  light  to 
oppose  the  only  expedient  that  can  accomplish  it. 

Another  circumstance,  that  ought  greatly  to  encour 
age  us  under  disappointed  expectations  from  the 
campaign,  is  the  combination  of  the  maritime  powers 
in  support  of  their  neutral  rights,  and  particularly  the 
late  insolent  and  provoking  violation  of  those  rights 
by  the  English  ships  at  St.  Martin's.  It  is  not  prob 
able  that  the  injured  will  be  satisfied  without  repara 
tions  and  acknowledgments  which  the  pride  of  Britain 
will  not  submit  to  ;  and  if  she  can  once  be  embroiled 
in  an  altercation  with  so  formidable  a  league,  the 
result  must  necessarily  be  decisive  in  our  favor.  In 
deed  it  is  not  to  be  supposed,  after  the  amazing 
resources  which  have  been  seen  in  Great  Britain, 
when  not  only  deprived  of,  but  opposed  by,  her 
ancient  Colonies,  and  the  success  of  the  latter  in  re 
sisting  for  so  long  a  time  the  utmost  exertion  of  these 
resources  against  her,  that  the  maritime  powers,  who 
appear  to  be  so  jealous  of  their  rights,  will  ever  suffer 
an  event  to  take  place  which  must  very  soon  expose 
them  to  be  trampled  on  at  the  pleasure  of  Great 
Britain. 


TO    JOSEPH    JONES.1 

PHILADELPHIA,  September  19,  1780. 

DEAR  SIR, — Yesterday  was  employed  by  Congress 
in   discussing   the    resolutions  you    left   with    them. 

1  From  the  Madison  papers  (1840).  Jones  served  in  Congress  from  1780  to 
1783,  and  was  temporarily  absent  in  Virginia  during  September  and  October. 
See  Letters  of  Joseph  Jones  >  Department  of  State,  1889. 


1780]  JAMES  MADISON.  69 

The  first  and  second  were  passed  after  undergoing 
sundry  alterations.1  The  clause  in  the  second  for 
allowing  the  expense  of  maintaining  civil  government 
within  the  ceded  territory,  was  struck  out  by  the 
committee,  and  an  attempt  to  get  it  re-inserted  in  the 
House  was  negatived.  It  was  surmised,  that  so  in 
definite  an  expression  might  subject  Congress  to  very 
exorbitant  claims.  With  respect  to  Virginia,  I  be 
lieve  that  expense  has  not  been  so  considerable  as  to 
be  much  worth  insisting  on.  The  principal  expenses 
may  properly  be  included  under  the  military  head. 
The  consideration  of  the  last  resolution,  annulling 
Indian  purchases,  was  postponed,  with  an  intention,  I 
believe,  of  not  resuming  it.  It  is  supposed  by  some 
to  be  unnecessary  ;  by  others,  to  be  improper,  as  im 
plying  that  without  such  previous  assurance  Congress 
would  have  a  right  to  recognize  private  claims  in 
a  territory  expressly  given  up  to  them  for  the  com 
mon  benefit.  These  motives  prevailed,  I  am  per 
suaded,  with  more  than  the  real  view  of  gratifying 
private  interest  at  the  public  expense.  The  States 
may  annex  what  conditions  they  please  to  their  ces 
sions,  and  by  that  means  guard  them  against  mis 
application  ;  or  if  they  only  annul  all  pretended 
purchases  by  their  own  laws  before  the  cessions  are 
made,  Congress  are  sufficiently  precluded,  by  their 
own  general  assurance  that  they  shall  be  applied 

1  "  I  think  you  acted  very  prudently  in  declining  to  press  on  the  part  of  Vir 
ginia  the  Resolutions  I  left  for  the  consideration  of  Congress.  Had  I  been 
present,  I  should  have  done  the  same,  as  I  had  no  intention  when  they  were  of 
fered  that  Virginia  should  appear  anxious  about  them." — Jones  to  Madison, 
October  9,  1780,  Letters  of  Joseph  Jones ,  30. 


70  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1780 

to  the  common  benefit,  from  admitting  any  private 
claims  which  are  opposed  to  it. 

The  Vermont  business  has  been  two  days  under 
agitation  and  nothing  done  in  it,  except  rejecting 
a  proposition  for  postponing  the  determination  of 
Congress  till  Commissioners  should  enquire  into 
the  titles  and  boundaries  of  New  Hampshire  and 
New  York.  Congress  having  bound  themselves  so 
strongly  by  their  own  act  to  bring  it  to  an  issue 
at  this  time,  and  are  pressed  by  New  York  so  closely 
with  this  engagement,  that  it  is  not  possible  any 
longer  to  try  evasive  expedients.  For  my  own  part, 
if  a  final  decision  must  take  place,  I  am  clearly  of 
opinion  that  it  ought  to  be  made  on  principles  that 
will  effectually  discountenance  the  erection  of  new 
Governments  without  the  sanction  of  proper  author 
ity,  and  in  a  style  marking  a  due  firmness  and 
decision  in  Congress. 


TO  EDMUND  PENDLETON.  MAD.  MSS. 

PHILAD?  Sep1:   igth  1780 

DEAR  SIR, — I  was  in  hopes  when  I  wrote  my  last 
that  I  should  be  able  by  this  post  to  congratulate  you 
on  the  arrival  of  the  French  fleet  from  the  W.  Indies 
But  so  far  is  this  from  being  the  case  that  it  comes 
from  authority  which  seems  to  have  a  just  claim  to 
our  faith  that  Admiral  Rodney  is  actually  at  the 
Hook  with  12  sail  of  the  line  &  4  frigates.  It  is  still 
said  however  that  a  french  fleet  is  somewhere  on  the 
coast.  The  arrival  of  Rodney  is  certainly  an  evi- 


1780]  JAMES  MADISON.  71 

dence  that  it  had  quited  the  Islands  and  was  sus 
pected  to  be  coming  hither.  It  is  also  given  out  at 
New  York  that  a  reinforcement  of  4000  troops  will 
arrive  next  month  from  England.  Another  part  of 
our  reports  is  that  5  or  6000  troops  will  embark  at 
N.  York  on  the  25th  inst.  for  Virg?  or  S.  Carolina: 
but  it  is  not  to  be  supposed  that  such  a  measure  will 
be  hazarded  in  the  present  ticklish  state  of  things — 
22  sail  of  the  Quebec  fleet  are  carried  prizes  into  N. 
England. 

I  am  D*  Sir  with  sincere  respect 
Y^  ob<  friend  &  servt. 

P.  S.  The  mortality  in  this  place  exceeds  any 
thing  ever  remembered.  The  only  person  of  note 
that  occurs  at  present  is  the  Lady  of  President  Reid 
who  fell  a  victim  to  it  yesterday  morning. 


TO  EDMUND  PENDLETON.  MAD.  MSS. 

PHILAD*  Sep?  26h  1780. 

DEAR  SIR, — Yesterday's  post  disappointed  me  of 
the  pleasure  of  a  line  from  you.  I  hope  the  next  will 
not  fail  to  make  amends  for  it. 

I  have  nothing  to  add  to  the  inclosed  paper  except 
that  Ternay  is  yet  unreinforced,  Graves  at  Sea  no 
one  knows  where,  or  for  what  purpose,  and  Rodney 
with  10  ships  of  the  line  still  at  the  Hook,  though 
according  to  some  private  accounts  he  also  is  gone  to 
sea.  In  this  state  of  uncertainty  conjectures  &  specu 
lations  abound  as  usual.  I  shall  not  trouble  you  with 
them,  because,  as  far  as  they  are  founded  in  reason 


72  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1780 

they  will  be  much  better  formed  by  yourself.  We 
hear  nothing  further  of  an  intended  visit  from  N.  Y. 
to  Virginia.  With  sincere  respect  &  regard 

I  am  D^  S^  Yrs  &c. 


TO  EDMUND  PENDLETON.  MAD.  MSS. 

PHIL*  Oc1.  3?  1780. 

DEAR  SIR, — I  had  the  pleasure  of  receiving  yours 
of  the  25  ul°  yesterday  and  am  sorry  it  is  not  in  my 
power  to  gratify  your  hopes  with  any  prospect  of  a 
successful  issue  to  this  campaign.  The  reports  of  the 
approach  or  arrival  of  a  French  fleet  continue  to  be 
circulated,  and  to  prove  groundless.  If  any  foreign 
operations  are  undertaken  on  the  continent  it  will  prob 
ably  be  against  the  Floridas  by  the  Spaniards.  A  Span 
ish  Gentleman  who  resides  in  this  City  has  received 
information  from  the  Governor  of  Cuba  that  an  arma 
ment  would  pass  from  the  Havannah  to  Pensacola 
towards  the  end  of  last  month,  and  that  10  or  12 
ships  of  the  line  and  as  many  thousand  troops  would 
soon  be  in  readiness  for  an  expedition  against  St. 
Augustine.  It  would  be  much  more  for  the  credit 
of  that  nation  as  well  as  for  the  common  good,  if 
instead  of  wasting  their  time  &  resources  in  these 
separate  and  unimportant  enterprises,  they  would  join 
heartily  with  the  French  in  attacking  the  Enemy 
where  success  would  produce  the  desired  effect. 

The  enclosed  papers  contain  all  the  particulars  which 
have  been  received  concerning  the  apostacy  &  plot  of 
Arnold.  A  variety  of  his  iniquitous  jobs  prior  to 


1 7  So]  JAMES  MADISON.  73 

this  chef  d'ceuvre  of  his  villainy,  carried  on  under 
cover  of  his  military  authority,  have  been  detected 
among  his  papers,  and  involve  a  number  of  persons 
both  within  &  without  the  Enemies  lines.  The 
embarkation  lately  going  on  at  N.  York,  and  given 
out  to  be  destined  for  Virginia  or  Rhode  Island,  was 
pretty  certainly  a  part  of  the  plot  against  W.  Point ; 
although  the  first  representation  of  it  has  not  yet 
been  officially  contradicted. 
With  sincere  regard,  I  am,  etc. 


TO  EDMUND  PENDLETON.  MAD.  MSS. 

PHIL^  Oct*  lo1*  1780. 

DEAR  SIR, — Your  favor  of  the  first  Inst.  came  safe 
to  hand  yesterday.  The  enclosed  was  sent  to  Mr. 
Pendleton  who  is  still  in  town. 

All  we  know  of  the  several  fleets  in  the  American 
seas  is  that  Rodney  with  a  few  ships  is  at  N.  York, 
the  remainder  having  joined  Graves  &  Arbuthnot 
whom  we  know  nothing  about.  Ternay  is  still  at 
Rhode  Island.  The  main  French  fleet  under  Guichen 
left  the  West  Indies  about  the  time  first  mentioned 
with  a  large  fleet  of  merchantmen  under  its  convoy, 
and  has  not  since  been  heard  of.  The  residue  of  the 
french  fleet  is  in  the  W.  Indies  but  we  do  not  hear  of 
their  being  any  way  employed.  It  is  said  an  English 
expedition  is  preparing  at  Jamaica  against  some  of 
the  Spanish  settlements.  The  Spanish  expeditions 
against  the  Floridas  I  believe  I  mentioned  in  my 
last. 


74  THE   WRITINGS  OF  [1780 

We  have  private  accounts,  through  a  channel  which 
has  seldom  deceived  that  a  very  large  embarkation 
is  still  going  on  at  N.  York.  I  hope  Virginia  will 
not  be  surprised,  in  case  she  should  be  the  meditated 
victim.  Andre  was  hung  as  a  spy  on  the  2d  inst. 
Clinton  made  a  frivolous  attempt  to  save  him  by 
pleading  the  passport  granted  by  Arnold.  He  sub 
mitted  to  his  fate  in  a  manner  that  showed  him  to  be 
worthy  of  a  better  one.  His  coadjutor  Smith  will 
soon  follow  him.  The  Hero  of  the  Plot,  although 
he  may  for  the  present  escape  an  ignominious  death 
must  lead  an  ignominious  life  which  if  any  of  his 
feelings  remain  will  be  a  sorer  punishment.  It  is 
said  that  he  is  to  be  made  a  Brigadier  and  employed 
in  some  predatory  expedition  against  the  Spaniards 
in  which  he  may  gratify  his  thirst  for  gold.  It  is 
said  with  more  probability  that  his  baseness  is  uni 
versally  despised  by  those  who  have  taken  advantage 
of  it,  and  y?  some  degree  of  resentment  is  mixed  with 
their  contempt  on  account  of  the  loss  of  their  darling 
officer  to  which  he  was  accessory. 

With  sincere  regard,  I  am,  etc. 


TO  EDMUND  PENDLETON.  MAD.  MSS. 

PHILAD^  Oct.   1780 

DEAR  SIR, — Your  favour  of  the  8^  which  ought  to 
have  been  here  on  Monday  week  did  not  arrive  till 
thursday  ;  that  of  the  17*  came  yesterday  according 
to  expectation.  I  know  not  how  to  account  for  your 
disappointment  on  the  last  post  day  having  not 


1780]  JAMES  MADISON.  75 

omitted   to    write  once  since  the  institution  of  our 
correspondence. 

Although  the  stroke  of  good  fortune  you  mention 
does  not  appear  to  have  been  duly  represented,  it 
was  only  mistaken  for  one  of  equal  importance  which 
I  doubt  not  is  fully  known  to  you  by  this  time.  Our 
joy  on  this  event  has  been  somewhat  abated  by  intel 
ligence  of  an  opposite  complexion  from  the  State  of 
N.  York.  Two  parties  from  Canada  composed  of 
regulars  tories  Canadians  and  savages  and  amounting 
to  about  1000  each  have  entered  their  frontiers,  the 
one  by  the  way  of  lake  George,  the  other  by  the  way 
of  the  Oneida  lake.  They  have  already  done  some 
mischief,  and  as  they  are  pursuing  their  incendiary 
plan,  will  involve  the  inhabitants  in  very  great  dis 
tress,  (it  being  now  the  eve  of  winter)  unless  a  speedy 
check  can  be  given  to  their  progress.  It  is  supposed 
that  this  expedition  was  intended  to  take  advantage 
of  the  consternation  in  that  state  expected  to  result 
from  the  success  of  Arnolds  treason. 

We  had  information  some  days  ago  from  Gen1 
Washington  that  a  fleet  with  about  2000  troops  on 
Board  had  fallen  down  towards  the  Hook,  which  it 
was  supposed  was  destined  either  for  Virginia  or  N. 
Carolina.  As  nothing  further  has  come  from  the 
General  it  is  to  be  inferred  that  they  have  not  yet 
sailed.  It  is  said  the  fleet  consisting  of  upwards  of 
100  sail  has  at  last  safely  arrived.  The  capture  of 
the  British  fleet  from  Jamaica  rests  upon  the  same 
evidence  as  mentioned  in  my  last.  I  am  Dr  Sr 
Affec  yr.  ob<  Serv' 


76  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1780 

P.  S.  The  President  has  just  communicated  a  let 
ter  from  Mr  Harrison  1  at  Cadiz  confirming  the  cap 
ture  of  the  B.  fleet.  Some  of  the  Pris[oners  were]  in 
that  bay  when  he  wrote.  The  number  taken  was  not 
kr\own.  The  fleet  amounted  to  60  or  70  sail,  having 
on  board  military  stores  provisions  dry  goods  &  1000 
Highland  troops  for  the  East  Indies.  You  will  have 
the  particulars  by  the  next  post.  5  or  6  ships  also 
attempting  to  get  into  Gibralter  with  provisions  have 
been  taken  by  the  Spanish  [illegible]  stationed  off 
that  place.  30  sail  of  French  merchantmen  had 
arrived  safe  from  S'  Domingo.  The  post  is  this 
moment  starting.  Adieu. 


TO    JOSEPH    JONES.2 

PHILADELPHIA,  October,  1780. 

DEAR  SIR, — I  wish  it  was  in  my  power  to  enable 
you  to  satisfy  the  uneasiness  of  people  with  respect 
to  the  disappointment  in  foreign  succours.  I  am 
sensible  of  the  advantage  which  our  secret  enemies 
take  of  it.  I  am  persuaded  also  that  those  who  ought 
to  be  acquainted  with  the  cause  are  sensible  of  it  ; 
and  as  they  give  no  intimations  on  the  subject,  it  is 
to  be  inferred  that  they  are  unable  to  give  any  that 
would  prevent  the  mischief.  It  is  so  delicate  a  sub 
ject,  that,  with  so  little  probability  of  succeeding,  it 
would  perhaps  be  hardly  prudent  to  suggest  it.  As 

1  Under  date  of  August  2,  1780,  George  Mason  wrote  to  Madison,   saying 
that  if  Congress  decided  to  appoint  a  consul  to  Spain  he  would  recommend 
Richard  Harrison  for  the  place. — Mad.  MSS. 

2  From  the  Madison  papers  (1840). 


i78o]  JAMES  MADISON.  77 

soon  as  any  solution  comes  out  you  shall  be  furnished 
with  it. 

We  continue  to  receive  periodical  alarms  from  the 
commissary's  and  quarter-master's  departments.  The 
season  is  now  arrived  when  provision  ought  to  be 
made  for  a  season  that  will  not  admit  of  transporta 
tion,  and  when  the  monthly  supplies  must  be  subject 
to  infinite  disappointments,  even  if  the  States  were  to 
do  their  duty.  But  instead  of  magazines  being  laid 
in,  our  army  is  living  from  hand  to  mouth,  with  a 
prospect  of  being  soon  in  a  condition  still  worse. 
How  a  total  dissolution  of  it  can  be  prevented  in  the 
course  of  the  winter  is,  for  any  resources  now  in  pros 
pect,  utterly  inexplicable,  unless  the  States  unani 
mously  make  a  vigorous  and  speedy  effort  to  form 
magazines  for  the  purpose.  But  unless  the  States 
take  other  methods  to  procure  their  specific  supplies 
than  have  prevailed  in  most  of  them,  the  utmost 
efforts  to  comply  with  the  requisitions  of  Congress 
can  be  only  a  temporary  relief.  This  expedient,  as  I 
take  it,  was  meant  to  prevent  the  emission  of  money. 
Our  own  experience,  as  well  as  the  example  of  other 
countries,  made  it  evident  that  we  could  not  by  taxes 
draw  back  to  the  treasury  the  emissions  as  fast  as 
they  were  necessarily  drawn  out.  We  could  not  fol 
low  the  example  of  other  countries  by  borrowing, 
neither  our  own  citizens  nor  foreigners  being  willing 
to  lend  as  far  as  our  wants  extended.  To  continue  to 
emit  ad  infinitum,  was  thought  more  dangerous  than 
an  absolute  occlusion  of  the  press.  Under  these  cir 
cumstances,  the  expedient  of  specific  requisitions  was 


78  THE   WRITINGS  OF  [1780 

adopted  for  supplying  the  necessities  of  the  war.  But 
it  is  clear  the  success  of  this  expedient  depends  on 
the  mode  of  carrying  it  into  execution.  If,  instead 
of  executing  it  by  specific  taxes,  State  emissions  or 
commissary's  and  quarter-master's  certificates,  which 
are  a  worse  species  of  emissions,  are  recurred  to, 
what  was  intended  for  our  relief  will  only  hasten  our 
destruction. 

As  you  are  at  present  a  legislator,1  I  will  take  the 
liberty  of  hinting  to  you  an  idea  that  has  occurred 
on  this  subject.  I  take  it  for  granted  that  taxation 
alone  is  inadequate  to  our  situation.  You  know  as 
well  as  I  do,  how  far  we  ought  to  rely  on  loans  to 
supply  the  defects  of  it.  Specific  taxes,  as  far  as  they 
go,  are  a  valuable  fund,  but  from  local  and  other  dif 
ficulties  will  never  be  universally  and  sufficiently 
adopted  :  purchases  with  State  money  or  certificates 
will  be  substituted.  In  order  to  prevent  this  evil, 
and  to  ensure  the  supplies,  therefore,  I  would  propose, 
that  they  be  diffused  and  proportioned  among  the 
people  as  accurately  as  circumstances  will  admit ;  that 
they  be  impressed  with  vigor  and  impartiality ;  and 
paid  for  in  certificates  not  transferable,  and  to  be 
redeemable,  at  some  period  subsequent  to  the  war,  at 
specie  value,  and  bearing  an  intermediate  interest. 
The  advantage  of  such  a  scheme  is  this,  that  it  would 
anticipate  during  the  war  the  future  revenues  of 
peace,  as  our  enemies  and  all  other  modern  nations 
do.  It  would  be  compelling  the  people  to  lend  the 

1  Jones  was  a  member  of  the  Virginia  Legislature  as  well  as  of  the  Continental 
Congress. 


i78o]  JAMES  MADISON.  79 

public  their  commodities,  as  people  elsewhere  lend 
their  money  to  purchase  commodities.  It  would  be 
a  permanent  resource  by  which  the  war  might  be 
supported  as  long  as  the  earth  should  yield  its 
increase.  This  plan  differs  from  specific  taxes  in  this, 
that  as  an  equivalent  is  given  for  what  is  received, 
much  less  nicety  would  be  requisite  in  apportioning 
the  supplies  among  the  people,  and  they  would  be 
taken  in  places  where  they  are  most  wanted.  It 
differs  from  the  plan  of  paying  for  supplies  in  State 
emissions  or  common  certificates,  in  this,  that  the 
latter  produce  all  the  evils  of  a  redundant  medium, 
whereas  the  former,  not  being  transferable,  cannot 
have  that  effect,  and  moreover  do  not  require  the 
same  degree  of  taxes  during  the  war. 


TO    JOSEPH    JONES.1 

PHILADELPHIA,  October  17,  1780. 

DEAR  SIR, — The  post  having  failed  to  arrive  this 
week,  I  am  deprived  of  the  pleasure  of  acknowledging 
a  line  from  you. 

Congress  have  at  length  been  brought  to  a  final 
consideration  of  the  clause  relating  to  Indian  pur 
chases,  [by  the  land  companies.]  It  was  debated 
very  fully  and  particularly,  and  was,  in  the  result, 
lost  by  a  division  of  the  House.  Under  the  first 
impression  of  the  chagrin,  I  had  determined  to  pro 
pose  to  my  colleagues  to  state  the  whole  matter  to 
the  Assembly,  with  all  the  circumstances  and  the 

1  From  the  Madison  papers  (1840). 


8o  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1780 

reasonings  of  the  opponents  to  the  measure  ;  but,  on 
cooler  reflection,  I  think  it  best  to  leave  the  fact  in 
your  hands,  to  be  made  use  of  as  your  prudence  may 
suggest.  I  am  the  rather  led  to  decline  the  first 
determination,  because  I  am  pretty  confident,  that, 
whatever  the  views  of  particular  members  might  be, 
it  was  neither  the  wish  nor  intention  of  many  who 
voted  with  them,  to  favor  the  purchasing  companies. 
Some  thought  such  an  assurance  from  Congress 
unnecessary,  because  their  receiving  the  lands  from 
the  States  as  vacant  and  unappropriated,  excluded  all 
individual  claims,  and  because  they  had  given  a 
general  assurance  that  the  cession  should  be  applied 
to  the  common  benefit.  Others  supposed  that  such 
an  assurance  might  imply,  that  without  it  Congress 
would  have  a  right  to  dispose  of  the  lands  in  any 
manner  they  pleased,  and  that  it  might  give  umbrage 
to  the  States  claiming  an  exclusive  jurisdiction  over 
them.  All  that  now  remains  for  the  ceding  States 
to  do,  is  to  annex  to  their  cessions  the  express  con 
dition,  that  no  private  claims  be  complied  with  by 
Congress.  Perhaps  it  would  not  be  going  too  far, 
by  Virginia,  who  is  so  deeply  concerned,  to  make  it  a 
condition  of  the  grant,  that  no  such  claim  be  admitted 
even  within  the  grants  of  others,  because,  when  they 
are  given  up  to  Congress,  she  is  interested  in  them 
as  much  as  others,  and  it  might  so  happen,  that  the 
benefit  of  all  other  grants,  except  her  own,  might  be 
transferred  from  the  public  to  a  few  landmongers.  I 
cannot  help  adding,  however,  that  I  hope  this  incident 
in  Congress  will  not  discourage  any  measures  of  the 


1780]  JAMES  MADISON.  81 

Assembly,  which  would  otherwise  have  been  taken 
[for  the  object]  of  ratifying  the  Confederation. 
Under  the  cautions  I  have  suggested,  they  may  still 
be  taken  with  perfect  security. 

Congress  have  promoted  Col.  Morgan  to  the  rank 
of  a  Brigadier,  on  the  representations  in  favor  of  it 
from  Governors  Rutledge,  and  Jefferson,  and  General 
Gates.  The  latter  is  directed  to  be  made  a  subject 
of  a  Court  of  Inquiry,  and  General  Washington  is  to 
send  a  successor  into  the  Southern  department.  The 
new  arrangement  of  the  army,  sent  to  the  General 
for  his  revision,  has  brought  from  him  many  judicious 
and  valuable  observations  on  the  subject,  which,  with 
the  arrangement,  are  in  the  hands  of  a  committee. 


TO  EDMUND  PENDLETON.  MAD.  MSS. 

PHILD*  Oc!  i7*h  1780 

DEAR  SIR, — The  Southern  post  having  not  yet 
arrived,  I  have  not  the  pleasure  of  acknowledging  the 
receipt  of  your  favor,  which  I  have  found  you  too 
punctual  to  doubt  has  been  [illegible]. 

The  best  news  I  have  to  give  you  is  contained 
in  the  enclosed  paper  in  a  letter  from  Eustatia,  which 
comes  from  a  person  known  to  many  Gentlemen  here 
who  say  it  may  be  fully  credited.  The  Saratoga 
a  Continental  vessel  of  16  guns  is  just  returned  from 
a  cruise  on  which  she  took  several  Jamaica  prizes 
with  a  prodigious  quantity  of  rum  &  sugar  on  board. 
She  parted  from  them  in  a  fog  near  the  coast,  and  as 
they  have  not  yet  been  heard  of  it  is  feared  they  have 
fallen  back  into  the  possession  of  the  Enemy. 


VOL.  I. — 6 


82  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1780 

Baron  Stuben  just  come  to  town  brings  a  report 
that  an  embarkation  left  N.  York  on  thursday,  but  no 
confirmation  has  yet  arrived  from  G!  Washington  or 
any  other  official  source. 

Adieu. 

By  a  letter  just  reel  from  the  continental  ag'  as 
stated  by  the  Commercial  Committee  the  capture  of 
the  British  fleet  by  the  Spaniards  is  brought  pretty 
nearly  to  certainty. 


INSTRUCTIONS  TO  JOHN  JAY.  CONT.  CONG. 

BOUNDARIES   AND    FREE   NAVIGATION    OF    THE   MISSISSIPPI.1 

[Oct.  17,  1780.] 

The  Committee  appointed  to  draught  a  letter  to  the  Ministers 
Plenipotentiary  at  the  Courts  of  Versailles  and  Madrid,  explain 
ing  the  reasons  and  principles  on  which  the  instructions  to  Mr 
Jay  of  the  4^  inst.  are  founded  report  the  following  to  M'  Jay,  a 
copy  of  which  with  the  resolution  directing  the  draught  to  be  also 
inclosed  to  Dr  Franklin 

SIR 

Congress  having  in  their  instructions  of  the  4th  inst ;  directed 
you  to  adhere  strictly  to  their  former  instructions  relating  to 
the  boundaries  of  the  United  States,  to  insist  on  the  navigation  of 
the  Mississippi  for  the  Citizens  of  the  United  States  in  com 
mon  with  the  subjects  of  his  Catholic  Majesty,  as  also  on  a  free 
port  or  ports  below  the  Northern  limit  of  W.  Florida  &  accessible 
to  Merchant  ships,  for  the  use  of  the  former,  and  being  sensible  of 
the  influence  which  these  claims  on  the  part  of  the  United  States 
may  have  on  your  negotiations  with  the  Court  of  Madrid,  have 
thought  it  expedient  to  explain  the  reasons  and  principles  on 

1  Endorsed  :  "  Report  of  Comee  appd  to  Draught  a  letter  to  the  Ministers 
tit  the  courts  of  Versailles  and  Madrid  &c."  The  whole  paper  is  in  Madison's 
hand. 


1780]  JAMES  MADISON.  83 

which  the  same  are  founded,  that  you  may  be  enabled  to  satisfy 
that  Court  of  the  equity  and  justice  of  their  intentions. 

With  respect  to  the  first  of  these  articles  by  which  the  river 
Miss  :  is  fixed  as  the  boundary  between  the  Spanish  settlements 
and  the  United  States,  it  is  unnecessary  to  take  notice  of  any  pre- 
tentions  founded  on  priority  of  discovery,  of  occupancy  or  on 
conquest.  It  is  sufficient  that  by  the  definitive  treaty  of  Paris 
1763  Art.  7  all  the  territory  now  claimed  by  the  United  States  was 
expressly  and  irrevocably  ceded  to  the  King  of  G.  Britain — and 
that  the  United  States  are  in  consequence  of  revolution  in  their 
Government  entitled  to  the  benefits  of  that  cession. 

The  first  of  these  positions  is  proved  by  the  treaty  itself.  To 
prove  the  last,  it  must  be  observed  that  it  is  a  fundamental  prin 
ciple  in  all  lawful  Governments  and  particularly  in  the  constitu 
tion  of  the  British  Empire,  that  all  the  rights  of  sovereignty  are 
intended  for  the  benefit  of  those  from  whom  they  are  derived  and 
over  whom  they  are  exercised.  It  is  known  also  to  have  been 
held  for  an  inviolable  principle  by  the  United  States  whilst  they 
remained  a  part  of  the  British  Empire,  that  the  Sovereignty  of  the 
King  of  England  with  all  the  rights  &  powers  included  in  it,  did 
not  extend  to  them  in  virtue  of  his  being  acknowledged  and 
obeyed  as  King  by  the  people  of  England  or  of  any  other  part  of 
the  Empire,  but  in  virtue  of  his  being  acknowledged  and  obeyed 
as  King  by  the  people  of  America  themselves  ;  and  that  this  prin 
ciple  was  the  basis,  first  of  their  opposition  to,  and  finally  of  their 
abolition  of,  his  authority  over  them.  From  these  principles  it 
results  that  all  the  territory  lying  within  the  limits  of  the  States 
as  fixed  by  the  Sovereign  himself,  was  held  by  him  for  their  par 
ticular  benefit,  and  must  equally  with  other  rights  and  claims  in 
quality  of  their  sovereign  be  considered  as  having  devolved  on 
them  in  consequence  of  their  resumption  of  the  Sovereignty  to 
themselves. 

In  support  of  this  position  it  may  be  further  observed  that 
all  the  territorial  rights  of  the  King  of  G.  Britain  within  the  limits 
of  the  United  States  accrued  to  him  from  the  enterprises,  the 
risks,  the  sacrifices,  the  expence  in  blood  and  treasure  of  the 
present  inhabitants  and  their  progenitors.  If  in  latter  times  ex- 
pences  and  exertions  have  been  borne  by  any  other  part  of  the 


84  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1780 

Empire  in  their  immediate  defence  it  need  only  be  recollected 
that  the  ultimate  object  of  them  was  the  general  security  and  ad 
vantage  of  the  empire,  that  a  proportionate  share  was  borne  by 
the  States  themselves,  and  that  if  this  had  not  been  the  case,  the 
benefits  resulting  from  an  exclusive  enjoyment  of  their  trade 
have  been  an  abundant  compensation.  Equity  and  justice  there 
fore  perfectly  coincide  in  the  present  instance  with  political  and 
constitutional  principles. 

No  objection  can  be  pretended  against  what  is  here  said,  except 
that  the  King  of  G.  Britain  was  at  the  time  of  the  rupture  with 
his  Catholic  Majesty  possessed  of  certain  parts  of  the  territory  in 
question,   and  consequently  that  his  C.  M.  had  and  still  has  a 
right  to  regard  them  as  lawful  objects  of  conquest.     In  answer  to 
this  objection  it  is  to  be  considered.     is.1  that  these  possessions 
are  few  in  number  and  confined  to  small  spots.     2.  that  a  right 
founded  on  conquest  being  only  coextensive   with  the  objects 
of  conquest,  cannot  comprehend  the  circumjacent  territory.     3. 
that  if  a  right  to  the  said  territory  depended  on  the  conquest  of 
the  British  posts  within  it  the  United  States  have  already  a  more 
extensive  claim  to  it,  than  Spain  can  acquire,  having  by  the  suc 
cess  of  their  arms  obtained  possession  of  all  the  important  posts 
and  settlements  on  the  Illinois  and  VVabash,  rescued  the  inhab 
itants  from  British  domination,  and  established  civil  government 
in  its  proper  form  over  them.     They  have  moreover  established  a 
post  on  a  strong  and  commanding  situation  near  the  mouth  of  the 
Ohio,  whereas  Spain  has  a  claim  by  conquest  to  no  post  above 
the  Northern  bounds  of  W.  Florida  except  that  of  Natches,  nor 
are  there  any  other  British  posts  below  the  mouth  of  the  Ohio 
for  their  arms  to  be  employed  against.     4.  that  whatever  extent 
ought  to  be  ascribed  to  the  right  of  conquest,  it  must  be  admitted 
to  have  limitations  which  in  the  present  case  exclude  the  pre- 
tentions  of  his  Catholic  Majesty  by  the  King  of  G.  Britain.     If 
the  occupation  of  posts  within  the  limits  of  the  United  States  as 
defined  by  charters  derived  from  the  said  King  when  constitution 
ally  authorised  to  grant  them,  makes  them  lawful  objects  of  con 
quest  to  any  other  power  than  the  United  States,  it  follows  that 
every  other  part  of  the  United  States  that  is  now  or  may  here 
after  fall  into  the  hands  of  the  Enemy  is  equally  an  object  of 


1 7 80]  JAMES  MADISON.  85 

conquest.  Not  only  N.  York  Long  Island  &  the  other  islands  in 
its  vicinity,  but  almost  the  entire  States  of  S.  Carolina  and 
Georgia,  might  by  the  interposition  of  a  foreign  power  at  war 
with  their  Enemy  be  forever  severed  from  the  American  Con 
federacy  and  subjected  to  a  foreign  Yoke.  But  is  such  a  doctrine 
consonant  to  the  rights  of  nations  or  the  sentiments  of  humanity  ? 
does  it  breathe  that  spirit  of  concord  and  amity  which  is  the  aim 
of  the  proposed  alliance  with  Spain  ?  would  it  be  admitted  by 
Spain  herself  if  it  affected  her  own  dominions  ?  Were  for  ex 
ample  a  British  armament  by  a  sudden  enterprise  to  get  possession 
of  a  sea  port  a  trading  town  or  maritime  province  in  Spain  and 
another  power  at  war  with  Britain  should  before  it  could  be 
reconquered  by  Spain  wrest  it  from  the  hands  of  Britain,  would 
Spain  herself  consider  it  as  an  extinguishment  of  her  just 
pretentions  ?  or  would  any  impartial  nation  consider  it  in  that 
light  ? 

The  right  of  the  United  States  to  Western  territory  as  far  as 
the  Mississippi  having  been  shewn,  there  are  sufficient  reasons 
for  them  to  insist  on  that  right  as  well  as  for  Spain  not  to  wish  a 
relinquishment  of  it. 

In  the  first  place  the  river  Mississippi  be  a  more  natural  more 
distinguishable  and  more  precise  boundary  than  any  other  that 
can  be  drawn  eastwardly  of  it,  and  consequently  will  be  less  liable 
to  become  a  source  of  those  disputes  which  too  often  proceed 
from  uncertain  boundaries  between  nations. 

Secondly.  It  ought  to  be  conceeded  that  although  the  vacant 
territory  adjacent  to  the  Mississippi  should  be  relinquished  by 
the  United  States  to  Spain,  yet  the  fertility  of  its  soil  and  its 
convenient  situation  for  trade  might  be  productive  of  intrusions 
by  the  Citizens  of  the  former  which  their  great  distance  would 
render  it  difficult  to  restrain  and  which  might  lead  to  an  inter 
ruption  of  that  harmony  which  it  is  so  much  to  the  interest  and 
wish  of  both  should  be  perpetual. 

Thirdly.  As  this  territory  be  within  the  charter  limits  of  par 
ticular  States  and  is  considered  by  them  as  no  less  their  property 
than  other  territory  within  their  limits,  Congress  could  not  re 
linquish  it  with  out  exciting  discussions  between  themselves  & 
these  States  concerning  their  respective  rights  and  powers  which 


86  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1780 

might  greatly  embarrass  the  public  councils  of  the  United  States 
and  give  advantage  to  the  common  enemy. 

Fourthly.  The  territory  in  question  contains  a  number  of  in 
habitants  who  are  at  present  under  the  protection  of  the  United 
States  and  have  sworn  allegiance  to  them.  These  could  not  by 
voluntary  transfer  be  subjected  to  a  foreign  jurisdiction  without 
manifest  violation  of  the  common  rights  of  mankind  and  of  the 
genius  and  principles  of  the  American  Governments. 

Fifthly.  In  case  the  obstinacy  and  pride  of  G.  Britain  should 
for  any  length  of  time  continue  an  obstacle  to  peace  a  cession 
of  this  territory  rendered  of  so  much  value  to  the  United  States 
by  its  particular  situation  would  deprive  them  of  one  of  the  ma 
terial  funds  on  which  they  rely  for  pursuing  the  war  against  her, 
on  the  part  of  Spain,  this  territorial  fund  is  not  needed  for  and 
perhaps  could  not  be  applied  to  the  purposes  of  the  war  and 
from  its  situation  is  otherwise  of  much  less  value  to  her  than  to 
the  United  States. 

Congress  have  the  greater  hopes  that  the  pretentious  of  his 
Catholic  Majesty  on  this  subject  will  not  be  so  far  urged  as  to 
prove  an  insuperable  obstacle  to  an  alliance  with  the  United 
States,  because  they  conceive  such  pretentions  to  be  incompatible 
with  the  treaties  subsisting  between  France  and  them  which  are  to 
be  the  basis  and  substance  of  it.  By  Art;  n  of  the  Treaty  of 
Alliance  eventual  and  defensive  the  Possessions  of  the  United 
States  are  guarantied  to  them  by  his  most  IIs  Majesty.  By  Art; 
12  of  the  same  treaty  intended  to  fix  more  precisely  the  sense  and 
application  of  the  preceeding  article,  it  is  declared  that  this  guar 
antee  shall  have  its  full  force  and  effect  the  moment  a  rupture 
shall  take  place  between  France  and  England.  All  fas  possessions 
therefore  belonging  to  the  United  States  at  the  time  of  that  rup 
ture,  which  being  prior  to  the  rupture  between  Spain  and  England 
must  be  prior  to  all  claims  of  conquest  by  the  former,  are  guaran 
tied  to  them  by  his  most  IIs  Majesty.  Now  that  in  fas  possessions 
thus  guarantied  was  meant  by  the  Contracting  parties  to  be  included 
all  the  territory  within  the  limits  assigned  to  the  United  States  by 
the  Treaty  of  Paris,  may  be  inferred  from  Art:  5  of  the  Treaty 
above  mentioned,  which  declares  that  if  the  United  States  should 
think  fit  to  attempt  the  reduction  of  the  British  power  remaining 


1780]  JAMES  MADISON.  87 

in  the  Northern  parts  of  America,  on  the  Islands  of  Bermudas 
&c.,  those  countries  shall  in  case  of  success  be  considered  with  or 
dependent  upon  the  United  States  ;  for  if  it  had  not  been  under 
stood  by  the  parties  that  the  Western  territory  in  question  known 
to  be  of  so  great  importance  to  the  United  States  and  a  reduction 
of  it  so  likely  to  be  attempted  by  them,  was  included  in  the  gen 
eral  guarantee,  can  it  be  supposed  that  no  notice  would  have  been 
taken  of  it  when  the  parties  extended  their  views  not  only  to 
Canada  but  to  the  remote  &  unimportant  Islands  of  Bermudas. 
It  is  true  these  acts  between  France  and  the  United  States  are  in 
no  respect  obligatory  on  his  Catholic  Majesty  until  he  shall  think 
fit  to  accede  to  them.  Yet  as  they  shew  the  sense  of  his  most 
IIs  Majesty  on  this  subject  with  whom  his  C.  M  is  intimately 
allied,  as  it  is  in  pursuance  of  an  express  reservation  to  his  C.  M 
in  a  secret  act  subjoined  to  the  treaties  aforesaid  of  a  power  to 
accede  to  those  treaties  that  the  present  overtures  are  made  on 
the  part  of  the  United  States,  and  as  it  is  particularly  stated  in 
that  Act,  that  any  conditions  which  his  C.  M  shall  think  fit  to  add 
are  to  be  analogous  to  the  principal  aim  of  the  Alliance  and  con 
formable  to  the  rules  of  equality  reciprocity  &  friendship,  Con 
gress  entertains  too  high  an  oppinion  of  the  equity  moderation  & 
wisdom  of  his  C.  M  not  to  suppose,  that  when  joined  to  these 
considerations  they  will  prevail  against  any  mistaken  views  of 
interest  that  may  be  suggested  to  him. 

The  next  object  of  the  instruction  is  the  free  navigation  of  the 
Mississippi  for  the  citizens  of  the  United  States  in  common  with 
the  subjects  of  his  C.  M. 

On  this  subject  the  same  inference  may  be  made  from  Art:  7  of 
the  Treaty  of  Paris  which  stipulates  this  right  in  the  amplest  man 
ner  to  the  King  of  G.  Britain  and  the  devolution  of  it  to  the 
United  States  as  was  applied  to  their  territorial  claims,  of  the  lat 
ter.  Nor  can  Congress  hesitate  to  believe  that  even  if  no  such 
right  could  be  inferred  from  that  treaty,  that  the  generosity  of  his 
C.  M  would  suffer  the  inhabitants  of  these  States  to  be  put  into  a 
worse  condition  in  this  respect  by  their  alliance  with  him  in  the 
character  of  a  sovereign  people,  than  they  were  when  subjects  of 
a  power  who  was  always  ready  to  turn  their  force  against  his 
Majesty  ;  especially  as  one  of  the  great  objects  of  the  proposed 


88  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1780 

alliance  is  to  give  greater  effect  to  the  common  exertions  for 
disarming  that  power  of  the  faculty  of  disturbing  others. 

Besides  as  the  United  States  have  an  indisputable  right  to  the 
possession  of  the  East  bank  of  the  Mississippi  for  a  very  great 
distance,  and  the  navigation  of  that  river  will  essentially  tend  to 
the  prosperity  and  advantage  of  the  Citizens  of  the  United  States 
that  may  reside  on  the  Mississippi  or  the  waters  running  into  it, 
it  is  conceived  that  the  circumstance  of  Spain's  being  in  posses 
sion  of  the  banks  on  both  sides  near  the  mouth,  cannot  be  deemed 
a  natural  or  equitable  bar  to  the  free  use  of  the  river.  Such  a 
principle  would  authorize  a  nation  disposed  to  take  advantage  of 
circumstances  to  contravene  the  clear  indications  of  nature  and 
providence,  and  the  general  good  of  mankind. 

The  usage  of  nations  accordingly  seems  in  such  cases  to  have 
given  to  those  holding  the  mouth  or  lower  parts  of  a  river  no 
right  against  those  above  them  except  the  right  of  imposing  a 
moderate  toll  and  that  on  the  equitable  supposition  that  such  toll 
is  due  for  the  expence  and  trouble  the  former  may  have  been 
put  to. 

"  An  innocent  passage  (says  Vattel)  is  due  to  all  nations  with 
whom  a  State  is  at  peace,  and  this  duty  comprehends  troops 
equally  with  individuals."  If  a  right  to  a  passage  by  land 
through  other  countries  may  be  claimed  for  troops  which  are 
employed  in  the  destruction  of  mankind  ;  how  much  more  may  a 
passage  by  water  be  claimed  for  commerce  which  is  beneficial  to 
all  nations. 

Here  again  it  ought  not  to  be  concealed  that  the  inconvenience 
that  must  be  felt  by  the  inhabitants  on  the  waters  running  west- 
wardly  under  an  exclusion  from  the  use  of  the  Mississippi  would 
be  a  constant  and  increasing  source  of  disquietude  on  their  part, 
of  more  rigerous  precautions  on  the  part  of  Spain  and,  of  an  ir 
ritation  on  both  parts,  which  it  is  equally  to  the  interest  and  duty 
of  both  to  guard  against. 

But  notwithstanding  the  equitable  claim  of  the  United  States 
to  the  free  navigation  of  the  Mississippi  and  its  great  importance 
to  them,  Congress  have  so  strong  a  disposition  to  conform  to  the 
desires  of  his  C.  M  that  they  have  agreed  that  such  equitable 
regulations  may  be  entered  into  as  may  be  a  requisite  security 


I78o]  JAMES  MADISON,  89 

against  contraband  ;  provided  the  point  of  right  be  not  relin 
quished  and  a  free  port  or  ports  below  the  jist  degree  of  N.  L. 
and  accessible  to  merchant  ships  be  stipulated  to  them. 

The  reason  why  a  port  or  ports  as  thus  described  was  required 
must  be  obvious,  without  such  a  stipulation  the  free  use  of  the 
Mississippi  would  in  fact  amount  to  no  more  than  a  free  inter 
course  with  New  Orleans  and  the  other  ports  of  Louisiana.  From 
the  rapid  current  of  this  river  it  is  well  known  that  it  must  be 
navigated  by  vessels  of  a  peculiar  construction  and  which  will  be 
unfit  to  go  to  sea.  Unless  therefore  some  place  be  assigned  to 
the  U.  S.  where  the  produce  carried  down  the  river  and  the  mer 
chandise  returning  from  abroad  may  be  reposited  till  they  can  be 
respectively  taken  away  by  the  proper  vessels  there  can  be  no 
such  thing  as  a  foreign  trade. 

There  is  a  remaining  consideration  respecting  the  navigation  of 
the  Mississippi  which  deeply  concerns  the  maritime  powers  in 
general  but  more  particularly  their  Most  IIs  and  Catholic  Ma 
jesties.  The  Country  watered  by  the  Ohio  with  its  large  branches 
having  their  sources  near  the  lakes  on  one  side,  and  those  running 
N.  Westward  and  falling  into  it  on  the  other  side,  will  appear 
from  a  single  glance  on  a  map  to  be  of  vast  extent.  The  circum 
stance  of  it  being  so  finely  watered  added  to  the  singular  fertility 
of  its  soil  and  the  other  advantages  presented  by  a  new  country, 
will  occasion  a  rapidity  of  population  not  easily  conceived.  The 
spirit  of  emigration  has  already  shewn  itself  in  a  very  strong 
degree,  notwithstanding  the  many  impediments  which  discourage 
it.  The  principal  of  these  impediments  is  the  war  with  Britain 
which  can  not  spare  a  force  sufficient  to  protect  the  emigrants 
against  the  incursions  of  the  Savages.  In  a  very  few  years  after 
peace  shall  take  place  this  Country  will  certainly  be  overspread, 
with  inhabitants.  In  like  manner  as  in  all  other  new  settlements 
agriculture,  not  manufactures  will  be  their  employment.  They 
will  raise  wheat  corn  Beef  Pork  tobacco  hemp  flax  and  in  the 
Southern  parts  perhaps  rice  and  indigo  in  great  quantities.  On 
the  other  hand  their  consumption  of  foreign  manufactures  will 
be  in  proportion,  if  they  can  be  exchanged  for  the  produce  of 
their  soil.  There  are  but  two  channels  through  which  such  com 
merce  can  be  carried  on,  the  first  is  on  the  river  Mississippi — 


9o  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1780 

the  other  is  up  the  rivers  having  their  sources  near  the  lakes, 
thence  by  short  portages  to  the  lakes  or  the  rivers  falling  into 
them,  and  thence  through  the  lakes  and  down  the  St.  Lawrence. 
The  first  of  these  channels  is  manifestly  the  most  natural  and  by 
far  the  most  advantageous.  Should  it  however  be  obstructed, 
the  second  will  be  found  far  from  an  impracticable.  If  no  ob 
structions  should  be  thrown  in  its  course  down  the  Mississippi,  the 
exports  from  this  immense  tract  of  Country  will  not  only  supply 
an  abundance  of  all  necessaries  for  the  W.  Indies  Islands,  but 
serve  for  a  valuable  basis  of  general  trade,  of  which  the  rising 
spirit  of  commerce  in  France  &  Spain  will  no  doubt  partic 
ularly  avail  itself.  The  imports  will  be  proportionally  extensive 
and  from  the  climate  as  well  as  other  causes  will  consist  in  a 
great  degree  of  the  manufactures  of  the  same  countries.  On  the 
other  hand  should  obstruction  on  the  Mississippi  force  this  trade 
into  a  contrary  direction  through  Canada,  France  and  Spain  and 
the  other  maritime  powers  will  not  only  lose  the  immediate  bene 
fit  of  it  to  themselves,  but  they  will  also  suffer  by  the  advantage 
it  will  give  to  G.  Britain.  So  fair  a  prospect  should  not  escape 
the  commercial  sagacity  of  this  nation.  She  would  embrace  it 
with  avidity  ;  she  would  cherish  it  with  most  studious  care  ;  and 
should  she  succeed  in  fixing  it  in  that  channel,  the  loss  of  her 
exclusive  possession  of  the  trade  of  the  United  States  might 
prove  a  much  less  decisive  blow  to  her  maritime  preeminence  and 
tyranny  than  has  been  calculated. 

The  last  clause  of  the  instructions  respecting  the  navigation  of 
the  waters  running  out  of  Georgia  through  West  Florida,  not 
being  included  in  the  ultimatum,  nor  claimed  on  a  footing  of 
right  requires  nothing  to  be  added  to  what  it  speaks  itself.  The 
utility  of  the  privilege  asked  to  the  State  of  Georgia  and  conse 
quently  to  the  Union  is  apparent  from  the  geographic  represen 
tation  of  the  Country.  The  motives  for  Spain  to  grant  it  must  be 
found  in  her  equity  generosity  and  disposition  to  cultivate  our 
friendship  and  intercourse. 

These  observations  you  will  readily  discern  are  not  communi 
cated,  in  order  to  be  urged  in  all  events  and  as  they  here  stand  in 
support  of  the  claims  to  which  they  relate.  They  are  intended 
for  your  private  information  and  use  and  are  to  be  urged  so  far 


1780]  JAMES  MADISON.  91 

and  in  such  form  only  as  will  best  suit  the  temper  and  Sentiments 
of  the  Court  at  which  you  reside,  and  best  fulfil  the  object  of 
them. 


TO  EDMUND  PENDLETON.1 

PHILADELPHIA,  October  31,  1780. 

DEAR  SIR, — Congress  have  felt  a  becoming  resent 
ment  of  the  barbarous  treatment  of  the  gentlemen  in 
captivity  at  Charleston,  and  have  directed  General 
Washington  to  require  of  Clinton  an  explanation  of 
the  matter.  Nothing  has  yet  been  done  in  conse 
quence  of  it,  except  an  application  to  Clinton,  which, 
as  he  had  at  that  time  not  been  officially  informed  of 
the  fact,  he  evaded  by  general  assurances  of  the  hu 
manity,  &c.,  of  Cornwallis.  General  Washington 
had  very  luckily,  between  the  application  and  the 
answer,  received  two  of  the  Earl's  bloody  proclama 
tions,  which  he  very  handsomely  communicated  to 
Sir  Henry. 


TO  JOSEPH  JONES.1 

PHILADELPHIA,  November,  1780. 

DEAR  SIR, — Many  attempts  have  been  made  to 
bring  the  Vermont  dispute  to  an  issue,  but  the  divers 
ity  of  opinions  that  prevail  on  one  side,  and  the  dila 
tory  artifices  employed  on  the  other,  have  frustrated 
them.  All  the  evidence  has  been  heard,  and  the 
proposition  for  including  it  within  the  jurisdiction  of 
some  one  of  the  States,  debated  for  some  time,  but 
the  decision  was  suspended.  An  arrangement  of  the 

1  From  the  Madison  Papers  (1840). 


92  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1780 

army  founded  on  General  Washington's  letter  has 
passed  Congress,  and  is  now  with  the  General  for 
his  observations  on  it.  It  includes  a  recommenda 
tion  to  the  States  to  fill  up  their  quotas.  No  ar 
rangement  of  the  civil  departments  has  taken  place. 
A  new  medical  system  has  been  passed.  Shippen  is 
again  at  the  head  of  it.  Craig  and  Cochran  have 
not  been  forgotten.  The  instructions  relating  to  the 
Mississippi  have  passed  entirely  to  my  satisfaction. 
A  committee  is  now  preparing  a  statement  of  the 
reasons  and  principles  on  which  they  stand. 


TO  EDMUND   PENDLETON.1 

PHILADELPHIA,  November  7,  1780. 

DEAR  SIR, — Doctor  Lee  and  Mr.  Izard,  particu 
larly  the  latter,  have  been  here  sometime,  and  I  be 
lieve  are  not  very  reserved  in  their  reflections  on  the 
venerable  philosopher  at  the  Court  of  Versailles.  Mr. 
Izard,  I  understand,  is  particularly  open  in  his  charges 
against  him.  Doctor  Lee  on  his  arrival  applied  to 
Congress  for  a  hearing  on  the  subject  of  Mr.  Dean's 
allegations,  if  any  doubt  remained  of  the  falsehood 
and  malice  of  them,  but  nothing  final  has  been  done 
as  yet  in  consequence  of  it.  I  have  had  great  anxiety 
lest  the  flame  of  faction,  which  on  a  former  occasion 
proved  so  injurious,  should  be  kindled  anew  ;  but,  as 
far  as  I  can  judge,  the  temper  of  Congress  is  in  gen 
eral  by  no  means  prone  to  it,  although  there  may  be 
individuals  on  both  sides  who  would  both  wish  and 
endeavour  it. 

1  From  the  Madison  Papers  (1840). 


1780]  JAMES  MADISON.  93 

Congress  have  just  finished  an  estimate  of  supplies 
for  the  ensuing  year,  requiring  of  the  States  the  value 
of  six  millions  of  dollars  in  specie.  The  principal 
part  of  the  requisition  consists  of  specific  articles,  the 
residue  of  specie  or  the  new  emissions,  receivable  as 
specie.  If  the  States  fulfil  this  plan  punctually,  there 
is  no  doubt  that  we  shall  go  smoothly  through  an 
other  campaign  ;  and  if  they  would  forbear  recurring 
to  State  emissions  and  certificates,  in  procuring  the 
supplies,  it  may  become  a  permanent  and  effectual 
mode  of  carrying  on  the  war.  But  past  experience 
will  not  permit  our  expectations  to  be  very  sanguine. 
The  collection  and  transportation  of  specific  supplies 
must  necessarily  be  tedious  and  subject  to  casualties  ; 
and  the  proceedings  of  separate  popular  bodies  must 
add  greatly  to  the  uncertainty  and  delay.  The  ex 
pense  attending  the  mode  is  of  itself  a  sufficient  ob 
jection  to  it,  if  money  could  by  any  possible  device 
be  provided  in  due  quantity.  The  want  of  this  arti 
cle  is  the  source  of  all  our  public  difficulties  and 
misfortunes.  One  or  two  millions  of  guineas  prop 
erly  applied,  would  diffuse  vigor  and  satisfaction 
throughout  the  whole  military  departments,  and  would 
expel  the  enemy  from  every  part  of  the  United  States. 
It  would  also  have  another  good  effect.  It  would 
reconcile  the  army  and  everybody  else  to  our  republi 
can  forms  of  government ;  the  principal  inconveniences 
which  are  imputed  to  them  being  really  the  fruit  of 
defective  revenues.  What  other  States  effect  by 
money,  we  are  obliged  to  pursue  by  dilatory  and  in 
digested  expedients,  which  benumb  all  our  operations, 


94  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1780 

and  expose  our  troops  to  numberless  distresses.  If 
these  were  well  paid,  well  fed,  and  well  clothed,  they 
would  be  well  satisfied,  and  would  fight  with  more 
success.  And  this  might  and  would  be  as  well 
effected  by  our  governments  as  by  any  other,  if 
they  possessed  money  enough,  as  in  our  moneyless 
situation  the  same  embarrassments  would  have  been 
experienced  by  any  government. 


TO  EDMUND  PENDLETON.  MAD.  MSS. 

PHILADA.,  Nov.  14,  1780. 

DEAR  SIR, — Your  favor  of  the  6th  inst.  came  to 
hand  yesterday.  Mr.  Griffin  by  whom  you  appear 
also  to  have  written  has  not  yet  arrived. 

It  gives  me  great  pleasure  to  find  that  the  enemy's 
numbers  are  so  much  less  formidable  than  was  at  first 
computed  but  the  information  from  N.  York  makes 
it  not  improbable  that  the  blank  in  the  computation 
may  shortly  be  filled  up.  Gen!  Washington  wrote  to 
Congress  on  the  4^  inst.  that  another  embarkation 
was  going  on  at  that  place,  and  in  another  letter  of 
the  7th  he  says  that  although  he  had  received  no  fur 
ther  intelligence  on  the  subject,  he  had  reason  still  to 
believe  that  such  a  measure  was  in  contemplation. 
Neither  the  amount  nor  the  object  of  it  however  had 
been  ascertained. 

The  inroads  of  the  Enemy  on  the  Frontier  of  N. 
York  have  been  distressing  &  wasteful  almost  beyond 
their  own  example.  They  have  totally  laid  in  ashes 
a  fine  settlement  called  Schoarie  which  was  capable 


1780]  JAMES  MADISON.  95 

Gen!  Washington  says  of  yielding  no  less  than  80,000 
bushels  of  grain  for  public  consumption.  Such  a  loss 
is  inestimable,  and  is  the  more  to  be  regretted  be 
cause,  both  local  circumstances,  and  the  energy  of 
that  Gov^  left  little  doubt  that  it  would  have  been  ap 
plied  to  public  use. 

I  fancy  the  taking  of  Quebec  was  a  mere  invention. 
Your  letter  gave  me  the  first  account  of  such  a  re 
port.  A  different  report  concerning  the  2*!  division  of 
the  French  fleet  has  sprung  up  as  you  will  see  by  the 
enclosed  paper.  It  is  believed  here  by  many,  and 
some  attention  given  to  it  by  all.  It  is  also  said  that 
Rodney  has  sailed  from  N.  York  with  20  Ships  for 
Europe.  If  he  has  sailed  at  all,  &  the  first  report  be 
true  also,  it  is  more  likely  that  he  has  gone  out  to 
meet  the  french. 

The  late  exchange  has  liberated  afr  140  officers  & 
all  our  privates  at  N.  Y.  amounting  to  476.  G.  Wash 
ington  has  acceded  to  a  proposal  of  a  further  ex 
change  of  the  Convention  officers  without  attaching 
any  privates  to  them,  which  will  liberate  almost  the 
whole  residue  of  our  officers  at  that  place. 

I  am  sir,  etc. 


TO    JOSEPH    JONES.1 

PHILADELPHIA,  November  14,  1780. 

DEAR  SIR, — I  do  not  learn  that  any  of  the  States 
are  particularly  attentive  to  prevent  the  evils  aris 
ing  from  certificates  and  emissions  from  their  own 

1  From  the  Madison  Papers  (1840). 


96  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1780 

treasury,  although  they  are  unquestionably  the  bane 
of  every  salutary  arrangement  of  the  public  finances. 
When  the  estimate  for  the  ensuing  year  was  on  the 
anvil  in  Congress,  I  proposed  a  recommendation  to 
the  States  to  discontinue  the  use  of  them,  and  par 
ticularly  in  providing  the  specific  articles  required.  It 
met,  however,  with  so  cool  a  reception,  that  I  did  not 
much  urge  it.  The  objection  against  it  was,  that  the 
practice  was  manifestly  repugnant  to  the  spirit  of  the 
acts  of  Congress  respecting  finance ;  and  if  these 
were  disregarded,  no  effect  could  be  expected  from 
any  additional  recommendations.  The  letters  from 
General  Washington  and  the  Commissary  General, 
for  some  time  past,  give  a  most  alarming  picture  of 
the  state  and  prospects  of  the  magazines.  Applica 
tions  to  the  contiguous  States  on  the  subject,  have 
been  repeated  from  every  quarter,  till  they  seem  to 
have  lost  all  their  force.  Whether  any  degree  of 
danger  and  necessity  will  rouse  them  to  provide  for 
the  winter  season  now  hastening  upon  us,  I  am  un 
willing  to  decide,  because  my  fears  dictate  the  worst. 
The  inroads  of  the  enemy  on  the  frontier  of  New 
York  have  been  most  fatal  to  us  in  this  respect. 
They  have  almost  totally  ruined  that  fine  wheat  coun 
try,  which  was  able,  and  from  the  energy  of  their 
Government,  was  most  likely,  to  supply  magazines  of 
flour,  both  to  the  main  army  and  to  the  northwestern 
posts.  The  settlement  of  Schoharie,  which  alone  was 
able  to  furnish,  according  to  a  letter  from  General 
Washington,  eighty  thousand  bushels  of  grain  for  the 
public  use,  has  been  totally  laid  in  ashes. 


1780]  JAMES  MADISON.  97 

I  make  no  apology  for  inaccuracies  and  bad  writ 
ing,  because  you  know  the  manner  in  which  we  are 
obliged  to  write  for  the  post,  and  having  been  pre 
vented  by  company  from  doing  anything  last  night,  I 
am  particularly  hurried  this  morning. 


TO    JOSEPH    JONES.1 

PHILADELPHIA,  November  21,  1780. 

DEAR  SIR, — I  am  glad  to  find  you  have  at  last  got 
a  House  of  Delegates,  and  have  made  so  auspicious 
a  beginning,  as  an  unanimous  vote  to  fill  up  our  line 
for  the  war.  This  is  a  measure  which  all  the  States 
ought  to  have  begun  with.  I  wish  there  may  not  be 
some  that  will  not  be  prevailed  on  even  to  end  with 
it.  It  is  much  to  be  regretted  that  you  are  not  in  a 
condition  to  discontinue  another  practice  equally  de 
structive  with  temporary  enlistments.  Unless  an 
end  can  by  some  means  or  other  be  put  to  State 
emission  and  certificates,  they  must  prove  the  bane 
of  every  salutary  regulation.  The  depreciation  in 
this  place  has  lately  run  up  as  high  as  one  hundred 
for  one,  and  it  cannot  be  satisfactorily  accounted  for, 
on  any  other  principle  than  the  substitution  of  cer 
tificates  in  the  payment  of  those  taxes  which  were 
intended  to  reduce  its  quantity  and  keep  up  a  de 
mand  for  it.  The  immediate  cause  of  this  event  is 
said  to  have  been  the  sudden  conversion  of  a  large 
quantity  of  paper  into  specie,  by  some  tories  lately 

1  From  the  Madison  Papers  (1840). 

VOL.  I. — 7 


98  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1780 

ordered  into  exile  by  this  State.  It  is  at  present  on 
the  fall,  and  I  am  told  the  merchants  have  associated 
to  bring  it  down  and  fix  it  at  75.  The  fate  of  the 
new  money  is  as  yet  suspended.  There  is  but  too 
much  reason,  however,  to  fear  that  it  will  follow  the 
fate  of  the  old.  According  to  the  arrangement  now 
in  force,  it  would  seem  impossible  for  it  to  rise 
above  one  for  forty.  The  resolutions  of  Congress 
which  establish  that  relation  between  the  two  kinds 
of  paper,  must  destroy  the  equality  of  the  new  with 
specie,  unless  the  old  can  be  kept  down  at  forty  for 
one.  In  New  Jersey,  I  am  told,  the  Legislature  has 
lately  empowered  the  Executive  to  regulate  the  ex 
change  between  the  two  papers,  according  to  the 
exchange  between  the  old  and  the  new,  in  order  to 
preserve  the  equality  of  the  latter  with  specie.  The 
issue  of  this  experiment  is  of  consequence,  and  may 
throw  light  perhaps  on  our  paper  finance.  The  only 
infallible  remedy,  whilst  we  cannot  command  specie, 
for  the  pecuniary  embarrassments  we  labor  under, 
will,  after  all,  be  found  to  be  a  punctual  collection  of 
the  taxes  required  by  Congress. 

I  hope  you  will  not  forget  to  call  the  attention  of 
the  Assembly,  as  early  as  the  preparations  for  de 
fence  will  admit,  to  the  means  of  ratifying  the  Con 
federation,  nor  to  remind  it  of  the  conditions  which 
prudence  requires  should  be  annexed  to  any  territo 
rial  cession  that  may  be  agreed  on.  I  do  not  believe 
there  is  any  serious  design  in  Congress  to  gratify  the 
avidity  of  land  mongers,  but  the  best  security  for 
their  virtue,  in  this  respect,  will  be  to  keep  it  out  of 


1780]  JAMES  MADISON.  99 

their  power.  They  have  been  much  infested,  since 
you  left  us,  with  memorials  from  these  people  ;  who 
appear  to  be  equally  alarmed  and  perplexed.  Mr. 
G.  Morgan,  as  agent  for  the  Indiana  claimants,  after 
memorializing  Congress  on  the  subject,  has  honored 
the  Virginia  delegates  with  a  separate  attention.  He 
very  modestly  proposes  to  them  a  reference  of  the 
controversy  between  the  company  and  Virginia  to 
arbitration,  in  the  mode  pointed  out  in  the  Confed 
eration  for  adjusting  disputes  between  State  and 
State.  We  have  given  him  for  answer,  that  as  the 
State  we  represent  had  finally  determined  the  ques 
tion,  we  could  not,  with  any  propriety,  attend  to  his 
proposition  ;  observing  at  the  same  time,  that  if  we 
were  less  precluded,  we  could  not  reconcile  with  the 
sovereignty  and  honor  of  the  State  an  appeal  from 
its  own  jurisdiction  to  a  foreign  tribunal,  in  a  contro 
versy  with  private  individuals. 


TO  EDMUND  PENDLETON.  MAD.  MSS. 

PHILAD^,  Nov*   21,  1789. 

DEAR  SIR — Your  favor  of  the  13*  came  safe  yes 
terday.  The  past  week  has  brought  forth  very  little 
of  consequence,  except  the  disagreeable  and  I  fear 
certain  information  of  the  arrival  of  the  Cape  fleet. 
Our  last  account  of  the  embarkation  at  N.  York  was 
that  the  Ships  had  fallen  down  to  the  Hook,  that 
the  number  of  troops  was  quite  unknown,  as  well  as 
their  destination,  except  in  general  that  it  was  South 
wardly.  It  is  still  said  that  Philips  is  to  command 


ioo  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1780 

this  detachment.  If  the  projected  junction  between 
Leslie  &  Cornwallis  had  not  been  so  opportunely 
frustrated  by  the  gallant  volunteers  at  King's  Moun 
tain  it  is  probable  that  Philips  would  have  reinforced 
the  former,  as  the  great  force  in  his  rear  would 
otherwise  have  rendered  every  advance  hazardous. 
At  present  it  seems  more  likely  that  the  declining 
state  of  their  Southern  affairs  will  call  their  attention 
to  that  quarter.  They  can  it  is  well  known  regain 
at  any  time  their  present  footing  in  Virginia  if  it 
should  be  thought  expedient  to  abandon  it,  or  to 
collect  in  their  forces  to  a  defensible  point.  But 
every  retrograde  step  they  take  towards  Charleston 
proves  fatal  to  their  general  plan.  M.  J.  Adams  in 
a  letter  of  the  23*!  of  Aug5.1  from  Amsterdam  received 
yesterday,  says  that  Gen.  Prevost  had  sailed  from 
England  with  a  few  frigates  for  Cape  fear  in  order 
to  facilitate  the  operations  of  their  arms  in  N.  Caro 
lina,  and  that  the  Ministry  were  determined  to  make 
the  Southern  States  the  scene  of  a  very  active  winter 
campaign.  No  intimation  is  given  by  Mr.  Adams 
of  the  number  of  troops  under  Gen!  Prevost.  The 
2d.  division  of  the  French  fleet  mentioned  in  my  last 
to  have  been  off  the  Bermudas  has  not  yet  made  its 
appearance.  It  is  now  rather  supposed  to  have  been 
a  British  one.  The  death  of  Gen!  Woodford  is  an 
nounced  in  a  N.  York  paper  of  the  I7th.  I  have 
not  seen  the  paper,  but  am  told  that  no  particulars 
are  mentioned.  I  suppose  it  will  reach  his  friends 
before  this  will  be  rec?,  through  some  other  channel. 

Adieu. 


1780]  JAMES  MADISON.  101 

TO  JOSEPH  JONES.1 

PHILADELPHIA,  November  25,  1780. 

DEAR  SIR, — I  informed  you  some  time  ago  that 
the  instructions  to  Mr.  Jay  had  passed  Congress  in  a 
form  which  was  entirely  to  my  mind.  I  since  in 
formed  you  that  a  committee  was  preparing  a  letter 
to  him  explanatory  of  the  principles  and  objects  of 
the  instructions.  This  letter  also  passed  in  a  form 
equally  satisfactory.  I  did  not  suppose  that  any 
thing  further  would  be  done  on  the  subject,  at  least 
till  further  intelligence  should  arrive  from  Mr.  Jay. 
It  now  appears  that  I  was  mistaken.  The  Dele 
gates  from  Georgia  and  South  Carolina,  apprehen 
sive  that  a  uti  possidetis  may  be  obtruded  on  the 
belligerent  powers  by  the  armed  neutrality  in  Eu 
rope,  and  hoping  that  the  accession  of  Spain  to  the 
alliance  will  give  greater  concert  and  success  to  the 
military  operations  that  may  be  pursued  for  the  re 
covery  of  their  States,  and  likewise  add  weight  to 
the  means  that  may  be  used  for  obviating  a  uti  pos 
sidetis,  have  moved  for  a  reconsideration  of  the 
instructions  in  order  to  empower  Mr.  Jay,  in  case  of 
necessity,  to  yield  to  the  claims  of  Spain  in  consider 
ation  of  her  guaranteeing  our  independence,  and 
affording  us  a  handsome  subsidy.  The  expediency 
of  such  a  motion  is  further  urged,  from  the  danger 
ous  negotiations  now  on  foot,  by  British  emissaries, 
for  detaching  Spain  from  the  war.  Wednesday  last 
was  assigned  for  the  consideration  of  this  motion, 

1  From  the  Madison  Papers  (1840). 


102  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1780 

and  it  has  continued  the  order  of  the  day  ever  since, 
without  being  taken  up.  What  the  fate  of  it  will  be 
I  do  not  predict ;  but,  whatever  its  own  fate  may  be, 
it  must  do  mischief  in  its  operation.  It  will  not 
probably  be  concealed  that  such  a  motion  has  been 
made  and  supported,  and  the  weight  which  our  de 
mands  would  derive  from  unanimity  and  decision 
must  be  lost.  I  flatter  myself,  however,  that  Con 
gress  will  see  the  impropriety  of  sacrificing  the  ac 
knowledged  limits  and  claims  of  any  State,  without 
the  express  concurrence  of  such  State.  Obstacles 
enough  will  be  thrown  in  the  way  of  peace,  if  it  is  to 
be  bid  for  at  the  expense  of  particular  members  of 
the  Union.  The  Eastern  States  must,  on  the  first 
suggestion,  take  the  alarm  for  their  fisheries.  If 
they  will  not  support  other  States  in  their  rights, 
they  cannot  expect  to  be  supported  themselves  when 
theirs  come  into  question. 

In  this  important  business,  which  so  deeply  affects 
the  claims  and  interests  of  Virginia,  and  which  I 
know  she  has  so  much  at  heart,  I  have  not  the  satis 
faction  to  harmonize  in  sentiment  with  my  colleague.1 

1  Colonel  Theoderick  Bland.  He  and  Madison  were  the  only  two  delegates 
from  Virginia  then  in  attendance  on  Congress.  Their  differences  on  this  sub 
ject  culminated  in  the  following  request  for  instructions  : 

His  EXCELLENCY  THOMAS  JEFFERSON  ESQ? 
Governor  of  Virginia 

PHILADELPHIA,  December  13*  1780. 

SIR, — The  complexion  of  the  intelligence  received  of  late  from  Spain,  with  the 
manner  of  thinking  which  begins  to  prevail  in  Congress  with  regard  to  the  claims 
to  the  navigation  of  the  Mississippi,  makes  it  our  duty  to  apply  to  our  constitu 
ents  for  their  precise,  full  and  ultimate  sense  on  this  point.  If  Spain  should 
make  a  relinquishment  of  the  navigation  of  that  river  on  the  part  of  the  United 


1780]  JAMES  MADISON.  103 

He  has  embraced  an  opinion  that  we  have  no  just 
claim  to  the  subject  in  controversy  between  us  and 
Spain,  and  that  it  is  the  interest  of  Virginia  not  to 
adhere  to  it.  Under  this  impression,  he  drew  up  a 
letter  to  the  Executive,  to  be  communicated  to  the 
Legislature,  stating  in  general  the  difficulty  Congress 
might  be  under,  and  calling  their  attention  to  a  revi 
sion  of  their  instructions  to  their  delegates  on  the 
subject.  I  was  obliged  to  object  to  such  a  step,  and, 
in  order  to  prevent  it,  observed  that  the  instructions 

States  an  indispensable  condition  of  an  alliance  with  them,  and  the  State  of  Vir 
ginia  should  adhere  to  their  former  determination  to  insist  on  the  right  of  naviga 
tion,  their  delegates  ought  to  be  so  instructed,  not  only  for  their  own  satisfaction, 
but  that  they  may  the  more  effectually  obviate  arguments  drawn  from  a  suppo 
sition  that  the  change  of  circumstances,  which  has  taken  place  since  the  former 
instructions  were  given,  may  have  changed  the  opinion  of  Virginia  with  regard 
to  the  object  of  them.  If,  on  the  other  side,  any  such  change  of  opinion 
should  have  happened,  and  it  is  now  the  sense  of  the  State  that  an  alliance  with 
Spain  ought  to  be  purchased  even  at  the  price  of  such  a  cession  if  it  can  not  be 
obtained  on  better  terms,  it  is  evidently  necessary  that  we  should  be  authorized 
to  concur  in  it. — It  will  also  be  expedient  for  the  Legislature  to  instruct  us  in 
the  most  explicit  terms  whether  any  and  what  extent  of  territory  on  the  East 
side  of  the  Mississippi  and  within  the  limits  of  Virginia,  is  in  any  event  to 
be  yielded  to  Spain  as  the  price  of  an  alliance  with  her.— Lastly,  it  is  our  earn 
est  wish  to  know  what  steps  it  is  the  pleasure  of  our  Constituents  we  should 
take,  in  case  we  should  be  instructed  in  no  event  to  concede  the  claims  of  Vir 
ginia  either  to  territory  or  to  the  navigation  of  the  above-mentioned  river,  and 
Congress  should  without  their  concurrence  agree  to  such  concession. 

We  have  made  use  of  the  return  of  the  Honb!e  W.  Jones  to  N.  Carolina  to 
transmit  this  to  your  Excellency,  and  request  that  you  will  immediately  commu 
nicate  it  to  the  General  Assembly. 

We  have  the  honor  to  be,  with  the  most  perfect  respect  and  esteem, 
Y*    Excelly.5  most  obl.    &  humble  servants, 

JAMKS  MADISON,  Jun? 
THEO?  BLAND 

The  foregoing  is  a  true  copy  of  a  document  communicated  by  Governor 
Jefferson  to  the  General  Assembly,  and  filed  in  my  office. 

WM  MUMFORD,  Keeper  of  the  Rolls.—  Mad.  MSS. 
RICHMOND,  Augf.  31?'  1819 


io4  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1780 

were  given  by  the  Legislature  of  Virginia  on  mature 
consideration  of  the  case,  and  on  a  supposition  that 
Spain  would  make  the  demands  she  has  done  ;  that 
no  other  event  has  occurred  to  change  the  mind  of 
our  constituents,  but  the  armed  neutrality  in  Europe, 
and  the  successes  of  the  enemy  to  the  southward, 
which  are  as  well  known  to  them  as  to  ourselves  ; 
that  we  might  every  moment  expect  a  third  delegate 
here,  who  would  either  adjust  or  decide  the  differ 
ence  in  opinion  between  us,  and  that  whatever  went 
from  the  Delegation  would  then  go  in  its  proper  form 
and  have  its  proper  effect  ;  that  if  the  instructions 
from  Virginia  were  to  be  revised,  and  their  ultima 
tum  reduced,  it  could  not  be  concealed  in  so  populous 
an  Assembly,  and  that  every  thing  which  our  minis 
ter  should  be  authorized  to  yield,  would  be  insisted 
on  ;  that  Mr.  Jay's  last  despatches  encouraged  us  to 
expect  that  Spain  would  not  be  inflexible  if  we  were 
so,  that  we  might  every  day  expect  to  have  more 
satisfactory  information  from  him  ;  that  finally  if  it 
should  be  thought  expedient  to  listen  to  the  preten 
sions  of  Spain,  it  would  be  best,  before  we  took  any 
decisive  step  in  the  matter,  to  take  the  counsel  of 
those  who  best  know  the  interests,  and  have  the 
greatest  influence  on  the  opinions,  of  our  constituents  ; 
that  as  you  were  both  a  member  of  Congress  and 
of  the  Legislature,  and  were  now  with  the  latter, 
you  would  be  an  unexceptionable  medium  for  effect 
ing  this,  and  that  I  would  write  to  you  for  the 
purpose  by  the  first  safe  conveyance. 

These   objections    had    not    the    weight    with    my 


1780]  JAMES  MADISON.  105 

colleague  which  they  had  with  me.  He  adhered  to 
his  first  determination,  and  has,  I  believe,  sent  the 
letter  above-mentioned  by  Mr.  Walker,  who  will,  I 
suppose,  soon  forward  it  to  the  Governor.  You  will 
readily  conceive  the  embarrassments  this  affair  must 
have  cost  me.  All  that  I  have  to  ask  of  you  is,  that 
if  my  refusing  to  concur  with  my  colleague  in  re 
commending  to  the  Legislature  a  revision  of  their 
instructions  should  be  misconstrued  by  any,  you 
will  be  so  good  as  to  place  it  in  its  true  light  ; 
and  if  you  agree  with  me  as  to  the  danger  of  giv 
ing  express  power  to  concede,  or  the  inexpediency 
of  conceding,  that  you  will  consult  with  gentlemen 
of  the  above  description,  and  acquaint  me  with  the 
result. 

I  need  not  observe  to  you  that  the  alarms  with  re 
spect  to  the  inflexibility  of  Spain  in  her  demands,  the 
progress  of  British  intrigues  at  Madrid,  and  the  dan 
ger  of  the  uti  possidetis,  may  with  no  small  probabil 
ity  be  regarded  as  artifices  for  securing  her  object  on 
the  Mississippi.  Mr.  Adams,  in  a  late  letter  from 
Amsterdam,  a  copy  of  which  has  been  enclosed  to  the 
Governor,  supposes  that  the  pretended  success  of  the 
British  emissaries  at  Madrid  is  nothing  but  a  minis 
terial  finesse  to  facilitate  the  loans  and  keep  up  the 
spirits  of  the  people. 

This  will  be  conveyed  by  Col.  Grayson,  who  has 
promised  to  deliver  it  himself  ;  or,  if  any  thing  unfore 
seen  should  prevent  his  going  to  Richmond,  to  put  it 
into  such  hands  as  will  equally  ensure  its  safe  deliv 
ery. 


THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1780 


TO  JOSEPH  JONES.1 

Philadelphia,  November  28,  1780. 

DEAR  SIR,  —  Yours  of  the  eighteenth  came  yester 
day.  I  am  glad  to  find  the  Legislature  persist  in  their 
resolution  to  recruit  their  line  of  the  army  for  the  war  ; 
though  without  deciding  on  the  expediency  of  the 
mode  under  their  consideration,  would  it  not  be  as 
well  to  liberate  and  make  soldiers  at  once  of  the  blacks 
themselves,  as  to  make  them  instruments  for  enlisting 
white  soldiers?2  It  would  certainly  be  more  conso- 

1  From  the  Madison  Papers  (1840). 

QL/The  scheme  of  a  negro  bounty  was  discussed  on  several  occasions  in  the  Vir 
ginia  legislature,  as  Jones's  letters  show.  "  But  my  notion  is,"  he  says  in  the 
letter  to  which  Madison  alludes,  "and  I  think  the  mode  would  be  more  just 
and  equally  certain  in  procuring  the  men,  to  throw  the  militia  into  divisions  as 
by  the  last  law,  and  require  the  divisions  to  find  a  negro  of  a  certain  value  or 
age,  or  money  equivalent  to  that  value  *  *  *  But  the  negro  bounty  cannot 
fail  to  procure  men  for  the  war  under  either  scheme,  with  the  draught  as  the 
dernier  resort."  /'In  reply  to  this  letter  of  Madison's,  Jones  wrote  Dec.  8  :  "  The 
negro  scheme  is  laid  aside  upon  a  doubt  of  its  practicability  in  any  reasonable 
time,  and  because  it  was  generally  considered  as  unjust,  sacrificing  the  property 
of  a  part  of  the  community  to  the  exoneration  of  the  rest.  It  was  reprobated 
also  as  inhuman  and  cruel.  How  far  your  idea  of  raising  black  regiments,  giv 
ing  them  freedom  would  be  politic,  in  this  and  the  negro  States,  deserves  well  to 
be  considered,  so  long  as  the  States  mean  to  continue  any  part  of  that  people  in 
their  present  subjection  ;  as  it  must  be  doubtful  whether  the  measure  would  not 
ultimately  tend  to  increase  the  army  of  the  enemy  as  much  or  more  than  our 
own.  /  For  if  they  once  see  us  disposed  to  arm  the  blacks  for  the  field  they  will 
follow  the  example  and  not  disdain  to  fight  us  in  our  own  way,  and  this  would 
bring  on  the  southern  States  inevitable  ruin.  At  least  it  would  draw  off  imme 
diately  such  a  number  of  the  best  labourers  for  the  culture  of  the  earth  as  to  ruin 
individuals,  distress  the  State,  and  perhaps  the  Continent,  when  all  that  can  be 
raised  by  their  assistance  is  but  barely  sufficient  to  keep  us  jogging  along  with 
the  great  expence  of  the  war.  The  freedom  of  these  people  is  a  great  and  de 
sirable  object.  To  have  a  clear  view  of  it  would  be  happy  for  Virginia  ;  but 
whenever  it  is  attempted,  it  must  be,  I  conceive,  by  some  gradual  course,  allow 
ing  time  as  they  go  off  for  labourers  to  take  their  places,  or  we  shall  suffer 
exceedingly  under  the  sudden  revolution  which  perhaps  arming  them  would 
produce.  "f-Letters  of  Joseph  Jones,  48,  63,  64. 


1 780]  JAMES  MADISON.  \io7  1 

nant  to  the  principles  of  liberty,  which  ought  never  to 
be  lost  sight  of  in  a  contest  for  liberty  ;  and  with 
white  officers  and  a  majority  of  white  soldiers,  no  im 
aginable  danger  could  be  feared  from  themselves,  as 
there  certainly  could  be  none  from  the  effect  of  the 
example  on  those  who  should  remain  in  bondage  ;  ex 
perience  having  shewn  that  a  freedman  immediately 
loses  all  attachment  and  sympathy  with  his  former 
fellow-slaves. 

We  have  enclosed  to  the  Governor  a  copy  of  an  act 
of  the  Legislature  of  Connecticut,  ceding  some  of 
their  territorial  claims  to  the  United  States,  which  he 
will  doubtless  communicate  to  the  Assembly.  They 
reserve  the  jurisdiction  to  themselves,  and  clog  the 
cession  with  some  other  conditions  which  greatly  de 
preciate  it,  and  are  the  more  extraordinary  as  their 
title  to  the  land  is  so  controvertible  a  one. 

The  association  of  the  merchants  for  fixing  the  de 
preciation  seems  likely  to  prove  a  salutary  measure  ; 
it  reduced  it  from  90  and  100  to  75  at  once,  which  is 
its  present  current  rate  ;  although  it  is  observed  that 
many  of  the  retailers  elude  the  force  of  it  by  raising 
the  price  in  hard  money. 


TO   EDMUND   PENDLETON.  MAD.  MSS. 

PHILAD^,  Dec*   5^,  1780. 

Df  S', — I  have  your  favor  of  the  27th  ult.,  and  con 
gratulate  you  on  the  deliverance  of  our  Country  from 
the  distresses  of  actual  invasion.  The  spirit  it  has 
shewn  on  this  occasion  will  I  hope  in  some  degree 
protect  it  from  a  second  visit. 


io8  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1780 

Congress  yesterday  received  letters  from  Mr.  Jay 
&  Mr.  Carmichael  as  late  as  the  4  &  gth  of  Sepr.  The 
general  tenor  of  them  is  that  we  are  not  to  rely  on 
much  aid  in  the  article  of  cash  from  Spain,  her  finances 
&  credit  being  scarcely  adequate  to  her  own  necessi 
ties,  and  that  the  B.  emissaries  are  indefatigable  in 
misrepresenting  our  affairs  in  that  kingdom  and  in 
endeavoring  to  detach  it  from  the  war.  The  charac 
ter  however  of  the  Catholic  King  for  steadiness  and 
probity,  and  the  entire  confidence  of  our  allies  in  him, 
forbid  any  distrust  on  our  part.  Portugal  on  the 
pressing  remonstrances  of  France  &  Spain  has  at 
length  agreed  to  shut  her  ports  ag5.1  English  prizes 
but  still  refuses  to  accede  to  the  armed  neutrality. 
Mr.  Adams  writes  that  the  [news  of  the]  fate  of  the 
Quebec  and  Jamaica  fleets  arrived  in  London  nearly 
about  the  same  time  and  had  a  very  serious  effect  on 
all  ranks  as  well  as  on  stocks  and  insurance. 

Our  information  from  the  W.  Indies  gives  a  mel 
ancholy  picture  of  the  effects  of  the  late  tempest. 
Martinique  has  suffered  very  considerably  both  in 
shipping  &  people.  Not  less  than  600  houses  have 
been  destroyed  in  S'  Vincents.  The  Spaniards  in 
Cuba  also  have  not  escaped,  and  it  is  reported  that 
their  fleet  on  its  way  from  the  Havannah  to  Pensacola 
has  been  so  disabled  &  dispersed  as  to  defeat  the  ex 
pedition  for  the  present.  On  the  other  side  our  Ene 
mies  have  suffered  severely.  The  Ajax  a  ship  of  the 
line  and  two  frigates  stationed  off  S*  Lucie  to  inter 
cept  the  Martinique  trade  are  certainly  lost  with  the 
greatest  part,  if  not  the  whole,  of  their  crews  ;  and 


1 7  80]  JAMES  MADISON.  1 09 

there  is  great  reason  to  believe  that  several  other  cap 
ital  ships  that  have  not  been  since  heard  of  have 
shared  the  like  fate.  The  Island  of  S'  Lucie  is  totally 
defaced.  In  Barbadoes  also  scarce  a  house  remains 
entire  and  1500  persons  at  least  have  perished.  One 
of  the  largest  towns  in  Jamaica  has  been  totally  swept 
away  and  the  island  otherwise  much  damaged.  The 
consequences  of  this  calamity  must  afford  a  striking 
proof  to  G.  Britain  of  her  folly  in  shutting  our  ports 
against  her  W.  India  commerce  and  transferring  the 
advantage  of  our  friendship  to  her  Enemies. 

I  am,  etc. 


TO  EDMUND  PENDLETON.  MAD.  MSS. 

PHILAD^  ,  Decemr. ,  1780. 

DEAR  SIR, — I  had  the  pleasure  of  yours  of  the 
2?  instant  yesterday.  We  have  not  heard  a  word  of 
the  fleet  which  lately  left  the  Chesapeake.  There  is 
little  doubt  that  the  whole  of  it  has  gone  to  the 
Southward. 

Our  intelligence  from  Europe  confirms  the  accession 
of  Portugal  to  the  Neutral  league  ;  so  far  at  least  as 
to  exclude  the  English  from  the  privileges  which  their 
vessels  of  war  have  hitherto  enjoyed  in  her  ports. 
The  Ariel  commanded  by  P.  Jones  which  had  on 
board  the  cloathing  &c.,  which  has  been  long  ex 
pected  from  France  was  dismasted  a  few  days  after 
she  sailed  and  obliged  to  return  into  port ;  an  event 
which  must  prolong  the  suffering  which  our  army  has 
been  exposed  to  from  the  delay  of  this  supply.  Mr. 


no  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1780 

Sartine,  the  Minister  of  the  French  Marine  has  been 
lately  removed  from  the  administration  of  that  de- 
partmf  His  successor  is  the  Marquis  de  Castries,  who 
is  held  out  to  us  as  a  man  of  greater  activity,  &  from 
whom  we  may  hope  for  more  effectual  co-operation. 

An  Irish  paper  informs  us  that  Mr  Laurens  was 
committed  to  the  Tower  on  the  6l.h  of  Oct^  by  the 
three  Secretaries  of  State  on  suspicion  of  high  treason. 
As  the  warrant  with  the  names  of  the  Secretaries 
subscribed  with  some  other  particulars  is  inserted,  no 
hope  remains  of  the  fact  being  a  forgery. 

With  very  sincere  regard,  I  am,  etc. 


TO  JOSEPH  JONES.1 

PHILADELPHIA,  December  5,  1780. 

DEAR  SIR, — I  had  yours  of  the  twenty-fifth  ultimo, 
by  yesterday's  post.  I  congratulate  you  on  the  de 
liverance  of  our  country  from  the  distresses  of  actual 
invasion.  If  any  unusual  forbearance  has  been  shown 
by  the  British  commanders,  it  has  proceeded  rather  I 
presume,  from  a  possibility  that  they  may  some  time 
or  other  in  the  course  of  the  war  repossess  what  they 
have  now  abandoned,  than  from  a  real  disposition  to 
spare.  The  procedings  of  the  enemy  to  the  south 
ward  prove  that  no  general  change  of  system  has 
taken  place  in  their  military  policy. 

We  had  letters  yesterday  from  Mr.  Jay  and  Mr. 
Carmichael  as  late  as  the  fourth  and  ninth  of  Sep 
tember.  Mr.  Jay  informs  us  that  it  is  absolutely 

1  From  the  Madison  Papers  (1840). 


1 780]  JAMES  MADISON.  1 1 1 

necessary  to  cease  drawing  bills  on  him  ;  that  150,000 
dollars,  to  be  repaid  in  three  years,  with  some  aid  in 
clothing,  &c.,  is  all  that  the  Court  will  advance  for 
us.  The  general  tenor  of  the  letters  is,  that  our 
affairs  there  make  little  progress,  that  the  court  is 
rather  backward,  that  the  navigation  of  the  Missis 
sippi  is  likely  to  prove  a  very  serious  difficulty  ;  that 
Spain  has  herself  been  endeavouring  to  borrow  a  large 
sum  in  France  on  which  she  meant  to  issue  a  paper 
currency,  that  the  terms  and  means  used  by  her  dis 
pleased  Mr.  Neckar,  who  in  consequence  threw  such 
discouragements  on  it,  as  in  turn  were  not  very 
pleasing  to  the  Spanish  Minister;  that  Mr.  Cumber 
land  is  still  at  Madrid  laboring  in  concert  with  other 
secret  emissaries  of  Britain  to  give  unfavorable  im 
pressions  of  our  affairs,  that  he  is  permitted  to  keep 
up  a  correspondence  by  his  couriers  with  London, 
that  if  negotiations  for  peace  should  be  instituted  this 
winter,  as  Spain  has  not  yet  taken  a  decided  part 
with  regard  to  America,  England  will  probably 
choose  to  make  Madrid  rather  than  Versailles  the 
seat  of  it.  However  unfavorable  many  of  these  par 
ticulars  may  appear,  it  is  the  concurrent  representa 
tion  of  the  above  ministers  that  our  disappointment 
of  pecuniary  succor  at  Madrid  is  to  be  imputed  to 
the  want  of  ability  and  not  of  inclination  to  supply 
us,  that  the  steadiness  of  His  Catholic  Majesty  is 
entirely  confided  in  by  the  French  Ambassador,  and 
that  the  mysterious  conduct  of  Mr.  Cumberland  and 
of  the  Court  of  Spain  towards  him,  seems  to  excite 
no  uneasiness  in  the  Ambassador.  The  letters  add, 


II2  THE   WRITINGS  OF  [1780 


that,  on  the  pressing  remonstrances  of  France  and 
Spain,  Portugal  had  agreed  to  shut  her  ports  against 
English  prizes,  but  that  she  persisted  in  her  refusal 
to  accede  to  the  armed  neutrality. 

The  receipt  of  the  foregoing  intelligence  has 
awakened  the  attention  of  the  Georgia  delegates  to 
their  motion,  of  which  I  informed  you  particularly 
by  Col.  Grayson.  It  has  lain,  ever  since  it  was  made, 
undisturbed  on  the  table.  This  morning  is  assigned 
for  the  consideration  of  it,  and  I  expect  it  will  with 
out  fail  be  taken  up.  I  do  not  believe  Congress  will 
adopt  it  without  the  express  concurrence  of  all  the 
States  immediately  interested.  Both  my  principles 
and  my  instructions  will  determine  me  to  oppose  it. 
Virginia,  and  the  United  States  in  general,  are  too 
deeply  interested  in  the  subject  of  controversy  to 
give  it  up,  as  long  as  there  is  a  possibility  of  retain 
ing  it.  And  I  have  ever  considered  the  mysterious 
and  reserved  behaviour  of  Spain,  particularly  her 
backwardness  in  the  article  of  money,  as  intended 
to  alarm  us  into  concessions,  rather  than  as  the  effect 
of  a  real  indifference  to  our  fate  or  to  any  alliance 
with  us.  I  am  very  anxious,  notwithstanding,  to  have 
an  answer  to  my  letter  by  Grayson. 


TO    JOSEPH    JONES.1 

PHILADELPHIA,  December  12,  1780. 

DEAR  SIR, — Agreeably  to  your  favor  of  the  second 
instant,  which  came  to  hand  yesterday,  I  shall  send 

1  From  the  Madison  Papers  (1840). 


1 7  80]  JAMES  MADISON.  1 1 3 

this  to  Fredericksburg.  I  am  sorry  that  either  your 
own  health  or  that  of  your  lady  should  oblige  you  to 
leave  the  Legislature  before  the  principal  business  of 
the  session  is  finished.  I  shall  be  more  sorry,  if 
either  of  these  causes  should  disappoint  my  hopes  of 
your  return  to  Philadelphia  at  the  promised  time.  I 
am  the  more  anxious  for  your  return,  because  I 
suppose  it  will  supersede  the  proposed  measure  of 
sending  an  Envoy  to  Congress  on  the  business  you 
mention.  If  the  facts  are  transmitted  by  the  Speaker 
of  the  Assembly  or  the  Executive,  may  they  not  be 
laid  before  Congress  with  as  much  efficacy  by  the  es 
tablished  Representatives  of  the  State  as  by  a  special 
messenger  ?  And  will  not  the  latter  mode  in  some 
measure  imply  a  distrust  in  the  former  one,  and  lower 
us  in  the  eyes  of  Congress  and  the  public  ?  The  ap 
plication  to  the  Court  of  France  has  been  anticipated. 
Congress  have  even  gone  so  far  as  to  appoint  an 
Envoy  Extraordinary  to  solicit  the  necessary  aids. 
Colonel  Laurens  was  invested  yesterday  with  that 
office.  I  leave  the  measure  to  your  own  reflection. 
How  far  it  may  be  expedient  to  urge  Spain  to  assist 
us,  before  she  is  convinced  of  the  reasonableness  of 
our  pretensions,  ought  to  be  well  weighed  before  it 
be  tried.  The  liberty  we  took  in  drawing  on  her  for 
money,  excited  no  small  astonishment,  and  probably 
gave  an  idea  of  our  distress,  which  confirmed  her 
hopes  of  concession  on  our  part.  Accounts  received 
since  my  last,  repeat  her  inflexibility  with  regard  to 
the  object 1  in  question  between  us.  It  is  indispens- 

1  The  free  navigation  of  the  Mississippi. 


ii4  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1780 

able  that  we  should  in  some  way  or  other  know  the 
ultimate  sense  of  our  constituents  on  this  important 
matter. 

Mr.  Laurens  is  certainly  in  captivity.  An  Irish 
paper  tells  us  he  was  committed  to  the  Tower  on  the 
sixth  of  October,  under  a  warrant  from  the  three  Sec 
retaries  of  State.  Portugal  has  acceded  to  the  neutral 
league  so  far  as  to  exclude  the  English  from  the  privi 
leges  her  armed  vessels  have  hitherto  enjoyed  in  her 
ports.  The  Ariel,  with  Paul  Jones,  and  the  clothing 
&c.,  on  board,  was  dismasted  a  day  or  two  after  she 
sailed,  and  obliged  to  put  back  into  port.  If  General 
Washington  detaches  no  further  aid  to  the  south 
ward,  it  will  be  owing  to  the  reduction  of  his  force  by 
the  expiration  of  enlistments.  The  Pennsylvania 
line  is  mostly  engaged  for  the  war,  and  will  soon 
form  almost  the  whole  of  the  army  under  his  imme 
diate  command. 

Mr.  Sartine,  it  seems,  has  been  lately  removed  from 
the  administration  of  the  Naval  Department,  in  con 
sequence  of  his  disappointing  the  general  hopes 
formed  from  the  great  means  put  into  his  hands. 
When  it  was  mentioned  to  me  by  Mr.  Marbois,  I 
took  occasion  to  ask  whether  the  deception  with  re 
gard  to  the  second  division  ought  to  be  ultimately 
charged  upon  him,  observing  to  him  the  use  the  ene 
mies  of  the  alliance  had  made  of  that  circumstance. 
From  the  explanation  that  was  given,  I  believe,  the 
blame  rests  upon  his  head,  and  that  his  removal  was 
the  effect  of  it  in  a  great  measure  ;  though  it  is  pos 
sible,  he  may,  like  many  others,  have  been  sacrificed 


1780]  JAMES  MADISON.  115 

to  ideas  of  policy,  and  particularly  in  order  to  cancel 
the  unfavorable  impression  which  the  disappointment 
left  on  America.  A  high  character  is  given,  as  might 
be  expected,  of  his  successor,  the  Marquis  de  Cas 
tries,  particularly  with  respect  to  those  qualities  in 
which  Mr.  Sartine  is  charged  with  having  been  most 
deficient. 


TO    JOSEPH    JONES.1 

PHILADELPHIA,  December  19,  1780. 

DEAR  SIR, — Yours  of  the  eighth  instant  came  to 
hand  yesterday.  I  was  sorry  to  find  the  Assembly 
had  not  then  taken  up  the  recommendation  of  Con 
gress  on  the  subject  of  the  western  lands.  Its  being 
postponed  so  late  will,  I  fear,  prevent  the  result  of 
their  deliberations  from  being  communicated  to  Mary 
land  before  the  rising  of  their  Legislature  ;  in  which 
case  much  time  must  be  lost,  unless  their  Delegates 
be  authorized  to  accede  to  the  Confederation,  on  a 
cession  satisfactory  to  themselves, — a  liberality  of 
proceeding  hardly  to  be  expected  from  that  State, 
after  the  jealousy  and  reserve  it  has  shown.  I  am  no 
less  sorry  to  find  so  little  progress  made  in  the  plan 
for  levying  soldiers.  The  regular  force  for  the  south 
ern  department  must  be  principally,  it  seems,  con 
tributed  by  Virginia,  the  North  Carolina  Assembly 
having  broken  up  without  making  any  effectual  pro 
vision  of  that  sort.  One  would  have  supposed  that 
the  fatiguing  service  exacted  of  the  militia  in  that 

1  From  the  Madison  Papers  (1840). 


n6  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1780 

State,  would  have  greatly  facilitated  such  a  meas 
ure,  and  yet  that  is  assigned  as  the  obstacle  to  its 
practicability. 

I  wish  anxiously  to  hear  from  you  on  the  subject 
stated  in  my  letter  by  Grayson,  and  in  my  subsequent 
one  by  the  post.  Circumstances  which  I  do  not 
choose  unnecessarily  to  hazard  by  the  post,  have 
made  it  expedient  to  lay  the  matter  before  the  As 
sembly,  that  their  former  instructions  may  not  be 
invalidated  by  a  supposed  effect  of  a  change  of  situa 
tion,  or  may  be  rescinded  if  real.  This  went  by  W. 
Jones,  Esquire,  on  his  return  to  North  Carolina,  who, 
I  suppose,  will  not  be  at  Richmond  till  nearly  Christ 
mas.  I  wish  it  could  have  reached  the  Assembly 
before  your  leaving  it. 


TO  EDMUND  PENDLETON.  MAD.  MSS. 


Dec?  19,  1780. 

DEAR  SIR,  —  You  preserve  your  character  for  punc 
tuality  so  well  that  I  always  have  the  pleasure  to  be 
gin  with  acknowledging  the  receipt  of  a  favor  from 
you.  That  of  the  1  1  instant  came  to  hand  yesterday. 
As  the  sufferings  of  your  Militia  are  ascribed  to  the 
conduct  of  their  commanding  officer,  I  hope  the  dis 
gust  will  be  only  local.  A  general  disgust  would  be 
a  very  serious  misfortune. 

We  are  informed  from  good  authority  that  an  em 
barkation  is  taking  place  at  N.  York.  From  the 
number  of  Regiments  &  corps  mentioned,  it  probably 
consists  of  about  4000  troops.  Knyphausen  &  Philips 


1780]  JAMES  MADISON.  ny 

it  is  said  are  to  have  the  command  of  them.  Their 
course  will  without  doubt  be  directed  to  the  Southern 
States. 

We  have  a  probable  story  from  the  Southward, 
corroborated  by  a  paper  from  N.  York,  that  Tarlton 
has  had  an  encounter  with  Sumpter,  in  which  he  lost 
upwards  of  100  men  including  the  wounded  &  received 
a  mortal  wound  himself.  Sumpter  is  said  also  to  have 
been  wounded  but  slightly  and  to  have  lost  one  man 
only.  The  personal  wound  of  Tarlton  is  omitted  in 
the  N.  Y.  Paper,  but  his  loss  otherwise  is  represented 
as  greater  than  our  own  account  makes  it. 
I  am  Dr  Sr  Yrs  sincerely. 


TO   EDMUND    PENDLETON.  MAD.  MSS. 

PHILAD^,  Dec1;   26.  1780. 

DEAR  SIR, — I  have  your  favor  of  the  i8l.h  inst : 
inclosing  another  relating  to  Capt:  C.  Taylor  with 
a  certificate  of  his  situation,  to  which  I  shall  pay  the 
necessary  attention  but  cannot  undertake  to  predict 
certain  success. 

The  Danish  Declaration  with  the  step  taken  in 
consequence  by  the  O  of  London  mentioned  in  the 
inclosed  are  the  chief  news  of  this  week.  There  is  a 
report  that  Arnold  is  gone  up  the  sound  with  4000 
troops  towards  N.  London.  Wishing  you  the  com 
pliments  of  the  season 

i 

I  am  Dr  Sr  yours  sincerely 


u8  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1781 

TO  EDMUND  PENDLETON.  MAD.  MSS. 

PHILADA,  Jany  2d  1781. 

DEAR  SIR, — Yesterday's  post  was  the  first  that  has 
failed  to  bring  me  a  line  from  you  since  our  corres 
pondence  commenced.  I  hope  it  has  not  been  owing 
to  any  cause  which  concerns  your  health. 

We  had  it  yesterday  from  under  Gen1  Washing- 
tons  hand  that  another  embarkation  is  actually 
departed  from  N.  York,  among  [torn]  to  abf  2500 
troops.  There  is  little  &  [torn]  that  they  will  steer 
the  same  course  with  the  preceding  detachment. 
Congress  are  under  great  anxiety  for  the  States  ags.1 
which  this  accommodating  force  is  to  be  directed, 
and  the  more  so  as  the  principal  means  of  their 
defence  is  so  little  in  their  power.  It  is  not  so  much 
the  want  of  men  as  the  want  of  subsistence  arms  & 
clothing,  which  results  from  the  want  of  money  that 
gives  the  greatest  alarm.  A  disposition  appears  to 
do  every  thing  practicable  for  their  relief  and  defence. 

Mf  Harrison  writes  from  Cadiz  that  the  combined 
fleets  in  that  port,  including  18  ships  from  the  W. 
Indies  under  Guichen  amounted  to  68  Ships  of  the 
line.  He  offers  no  conjecture  as  to  the  manner  in 
which  they  will  be  employed. 

I  am  Dr  Sir  Yre  sincerely 


TO   AMBROSE  MADISON.  MAD.  MSS. 

PHILADA  Jany  2,  1781. 

DEAR  BROTHER, — I  reel  yesterday  yours  of  the  19 
&  my  father's  of  the  20  Deer      I  am  glad  to  hear  of 


1781]  JAMES  MADISON.  1/19 

your  recovery,  and  particularly  so  of  my  mother's 
whose  attack  was  unknown  to  me  till  the  receipt  of 
my  father's  letter. 

The  inclosed  papers  will  give  you  the  late  proceed 
ings  of  Cong?  more  fully  tho'  often  very  incorrectly, 
than  could  be  done  in  a  letter.  The  excise  on  spirits 
distilled  in  the  Country  will  probably  take  place.  In 
fact,  considering  the  aversion  to  direct  taxes  &  that 
the  imports  are  already  loaded,  I  see  nothing  else 
that  can  be  done.  Besides  the  duty  on  imported 
rum,  requires  a  proportional  one  on  Country  rum,  & 
this  a  duty  on  other  spirits.  The  tax  will  I  presume 
be  so  guarded  as  to  operate  on  stills  according  to  the 
quantity  really  distilled. 

I  have  rec?  a  letter  from  Mr  Maury  which  says 
that  the  market  of  Europe  is  very  full  of  Tob° 
&  recommends  it  to  me  to  [save  ?]  as  much  as 
possible. 

On  leaving  home  I  desired  my  father  to  pay  Maj' 
Lee  the  sum  due  from  me.  I  sh1!  have  left  the  com- 
ission  in  your  hands  if  you  had  been  in  the  way, 
being  apprehensive  that  some  delicacy  might  arise 
from  unsettled  transactions  between  him  &  my 
father.  I  find  accordingly  that  this  has  happened  & 
that  Majf  Lee  refuses  the  paym1  on  y!  account.  I 
wish  you  to  pay  him  if  possible  as  I  intended  & 
promised. 

Tell  Capt :  Bade  that  Gen.  Knox  has  not  yet 
reported  on  his  case  &  that  I  will  let  him  know  the 
event  of  his  claim  as  soon  as  it  happens.  Adieu. 

Y"  affV 


120  THE  WRITINGS   OF  [1781 

TO    EDMUND    PENDLETON.1 

PHILADELPHIA,  January  gth,  1781. 

DEAR  SIR, — I  have  again  the  pleasure  to  begin 
with  acknowledging  the  receipt  of  a  favor  from  you, 
that  of  the  first  having  come  to  hand  yesterday. 

On  Thursday  last,  Congress  was  informed  by  Gen 
eral  Potts  and  Colonel  Johnston,  who  came  expresses 
for  the  purpose,  that  a  general  mutiny  had  broken 
out  on  the  morning  of  the  New  Year's  day,  in  the 
Pennsylvania  line,  which  was  cantoned  near  Morris- 
town,  apart  from  the  rest  of  the  army.  Every  effort 
was  made  by  the  officers  to  stifle  it  in  its  infancy,  but 
without  effect.  Several  of  them  fell  victims  to  the 
fury  of  the  mutineers.  The  next  information  came 
from  General  Wayne,  who  wrote  from  Princeton, 
whither  the  troops  had  marched  in  regular  order  on 
their  way  to  Philadelphia,  as  they  gave  out,  with  a 
determination  not  to  lay  down  their  arms,  nor  to  re 
turn  to  their  obedience  till  a  redress  of  grievances 
should  be  obtained.  They  suffered  none  of  their 
officers  to  be  among  them  except  General  Wayne  and 
Colonels  Steuart  and  Butler,  and  these  they  kept 
under  close  guard,  but  in  every  other  respect  treated 
with  the  utmost  decorum.  The  grievances  com 
plained  of  were  principally,  the  detention  of  many  in 
service  beyond  the  term  of  enlistment,  and  the  suffer 
ings  of  all  from  a  deficient  supply  of  clothing  and 
subsistence,  and  the  long  arrearage  of  pay.  Several 
propositions  and  replies,  on  the  subject  of  redress, 

1  From  the  Madison  Papers  (1840). 


1781]  JAMES  MADISON.  121 

passed  between  a  deputation  of  sergeants,  in  behalf 
of  the  troops,  and  General  Wayne,  but  without  any 
certain  tendency  to  a  favorable  issue.  The  affair  at 
length  began  to  take  a  very  serious  countenance,  and 
as  a  great  proportion  of  that  line  are  foreigners,  and 
not  a  few  deserters  from  the  British  army,  and  as 
they  showed  a  disposition  to  continue  at  Princeton, 
from  whence  a  refuge  with  the  enemy,  who,  it  was 
said,  were  coming  out  in  force  for  the  purpose,  was  at 
any  moment  practicable,  it  was  thought  necessary, 
notwithstanding  the  humiliation  of  the  step,  to  depute 
a  committee  of  Congress  with  powers  to  employ 
every  expedient  for  putting  a  speedy  end  to  the  dis 
contents.  The  President  of  the  State,  with  a  number 
of  gentlemen  from  this  place,  went  up  to  interpose 
their  influence.  By  a  letter  from  the  committee,  who 
had  proceeded  as  far  as  Trenton,  received  the  even 
ing  before  last,  it  appears  that  the  President,  who 
was  ahead,  and  had  written  to  General  Wayne,  was 
likely  to  have  a  confidential  reception.  The  com 
mittee  write,  that  an  emissary  of  Clinton,  who  had 
appeared  among  the  soldiers  with  a  paper  setting 
forth  the  folly  and  danger  of  adhering  to  a  cause 
which  had  already  brought  so  much  misery  upon 
them,  promising  a  protection  under  the  British  Gov 
ernment,  a  body  of  troops  to  cover  their  escape,  and 
the  payment  of  all  arrears  due  from  Congress,  was 
seized  and  given  up  to  General  Wayne,  who  handed 
him  with  his  guide  over  to  the  President  of  this  State  ; 
who  placed  them  under  the  custody  of  his  light-horse. 
This  circumstance  not  only  presages  a  fortunate  issue 


122  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1781 

to  the  mutiny,  but  is  such  a  proof  of  attachment  to 
the  country  in  the  most  trying  situation,  as  must 
effectually  repress  the  joy  and  encouragement  which 
the  enemy  had  taken  from  this  threatening  event. 
The  late  detachment  from  New  York,  which  a  letter 
from  Fredericksburg  says  is  in  the  Chesapeake,  is 
about  one  thousand  six  hundred  strong,  and  com 
manded  by  Arnold. 


TO  EDMUND  PENDLETON.1 

PHILADELPHIA,  January  16,  1781. 

DEAR  SIR, — I  was  very  glad  at  not  being  disap 
pointed  in  my  expectation  of  a  favor  from  you  by 
yesterday's  post.  Several  reports,  in  quick  succes 
sion,  of  the  arrival  and  progress  of  the  predatory 
band  under  Arnold,  had  rendered  us  exceedingly 
anxious  to  hear  the  truth  and  particulars  of  the  mat 
ter.  Some  letters,  by  the  post,  tell  us  that  the  Gov 
ernor  and  Baron  Steuben  were  wholly  engaged  in 
removing  and  securing  the  arms  and  ammunition. 
If  so,  he  was  better  employed  than  in  writing  to  Con 
gress  on  the  subject,  which,  from  his  usual  punctual 
ity,  was  expected.  The  enterprise  against  Richmond, 
at  this  season,  was  certainly  an  audacious  one,  and 
strongly  marks  the  character  which  directed  it.  Hav 
ing  been  long  sensible  that  the  security  of  the  coun 
try,  as  high  up  as  the  tide-water  reaches,  has  been 
owing  more  to  the  ignorance  and  caution  of  the 
enemy  than  to  its  own  strength  or  inaccessibleness,  I 
was  much  less  astonished  at  the  news  than  many 

1  From  the  Madison  Papers  (1840). 


1781]  JAMES  MADISON.  123 

others.  To  those  who  are  strangers  to  the  sparse 
manner  in  which  that  country  is  settled,  and  the  easy 
penetration  afforded  by  its  long,  navigable  rivers,  the 
rapid  and  unopposed  advances  of  the  enemy  appear 
unaccountable,  and  our  national  character  suffers  im 
putations  which  are  by  no  means  due  to  it. 

Congress  have  yet  received  no  official  report  of 
the  result  of  the  conciliatory  measures  taken  with 
the  revolted  soldiers  at  Trenton.  From  oral  and 
circumstantial  evidence,  there  is  no  doubt  that  they 
have  been  successful.  A  discharge  of  a  part  from 
the  service,  and  a  supply  of  clothing  and  money  to 
the  rest,  is  the  price  of  their  submission.  This  much, 
considered  in  itself,  was  required  by  justice,  and  is, 
consequently,  consistent  with  dignity.  But,  consid 
ered  with  respect  to  the  circumstances  attending  the 
negotiation,  there  is  but  too  much  ground  to  suspect 
that  it  will  be  attributed  to  our  fears,  and  is,  therefore, 
not  a  little  mortifying.  Happily,  the  example,  as  we 
understand  by  a  letter  from  General  Washington 
received  yesterday,  had  not  infected  the  other  parts 
of  the  army.  As  the  same  causes,  however,  which 
engendered  this  malignant  humour  in  the  Pennsyl 
vania  line,  are  known  to  exist  in  the  other  lines,  we 
cannot  be  sure  that  the  same  effects  will  not  yet 
take  place  in  the  latter,  unless  they  be  speedily  re 
moved.  As  one  step  towards  it,  Congress  are  en 
deavouring  to  profit  by  the  alarm  which  this  event 
must  have  excited  in  the  States,  by  calling  upon 
them  for  the  means  of  immediately  furnishing  some 
pay  to  the  troops  of  their  respective  lines. 


i24  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1781 

You  ask  me  what  I  think  of  the  Delegate  Extra 
ordinary  to  Congress.1  I  wish  you  had  told  me  what 
you  think  of  such  an  appointment.  It  is  pretty 
certain,  I  believe,  that  people  in  general  will  not 
consider  it  as  a  proof  of  confidence  in  the  ordinary 
delegation.  As  Mr.  Jones,  who,  I  believe,  possesses 
the  confidence  of  his  country,  and,  I  am  sure,  will 
have  as  much  weight  in  Congress  as  any  man  that 
will  be  sent  on  such  an  occasion,  will  come  about  the 
same  time,  and,  having  attended  the  Legislature,  will 
be  as  well  informed  in  every  point  of  view,  I  cannot 
deny  that  the  appointment  appears  to  me  to  be,  at 
least,  a  supernumerary  one.  I  wish  the  good  effects 
of  it  may  show  that  I  am  mistaken. 

The  trade  of  this  city  has  just  suffered  a  very 
severe  blow.  No  less  than  seven  fine  vessels  have 
been  taken  out  of  an  outward  bound  fleet,  and  carried 
into  New  York. 

The  emissary  from  Clinton,  and  his  guide,  were 
executed  on  Saturday  morning  last. 

1  The  father  of  the  proposition  to  send  such  a  delegate  was  Patrick  Henry. 
There  was  a  ballot  for  the  delegate  and  the  House  evenly  divided  between  the 
Speaker,  Benjamin  Harrison,  and  R.  H.  Lee.  The  casting  vote  being  with  the 
Speaker,  who  could  not  vote  for  himself,  an  embarrassing  situation  was  pre 
sented,  which  Lee  relieved  by  withdrawing  from  the  contest,  "  so  that  Harrison 
stood  elected.  Braxton  says  the  old  fellow  was  so  disgusted  with  the  vote  that 
he  believed  he  would  resign  the  appointment."  Jones  to  Madison,  January  2, 
1781,  Letters  of  Joseph  Jones,  65,  66.  The  object  of  the  appointment  was  "  to 
lay  before  Congress  a  clear  state  of  the  war  in  this  quarter,  the  resources  of  this 
State  in  men,  money,  provisions,"  etc.,  and  to  concert  measures  "necessary  in 
the  present  conjuncture  of  affairs  in  the  South." — Journal  of  House  of  Dele 
gates,  35  ;  Rives,  i.,  269,  270. 


1781]  JAMES  MADISON.  125 

TO    EDMUND   PENDLETON.  MAD.  MSS. 

PHILAD*,  Jany  23,  1781. 

DEAR  SIR, — I  have  nothing  new  this  week  for  you 
but  two  reports :  the  first  is  that  very  great  discon 
tents  prevail  in  N.  York  among  the  German  Troops 
for  causes  pretty  similar  to  those  which  produced  the 
eruption  in  the  Pennsylvania  line.  It  is  further  said 
on  this  head  that  a  party  of  200  have  deserted  from 
Long  Island  &  gone  to  Rhode  Island.  The  other 
report  is  that  the  British  minister  either  has  or  pro 
poses  to  carry  a  bill  into  Parliam'  authorizing  the 
Commanding  officer  in  America  to  permit  &  promote 
a  trade  with  us  in  British  Goods  of  every  kind  except 
Linens  &  Woollens.  This  change  of  system  is  said 
to  be  the  advice  of  some  notable  refugees,  with  a  view 
to  revive  an  intercourse  as  far  as  possible  between 
the  two  countries,  &  particularly  to  check  the  habit 
that  is  taking  place  in  the  consumption  of  French 
Manufactures.  Whatever  their  public  views  may  be 
it  is  certain  that  such  a  plan  would  open  fine  pros 
pects  to  them  in  a  private  view. 

We  have  rec?  no  fresh  or  certain  information  of  the 
designs  of  F.  and  Spain  in  assembling  so  great  a  force 
at  Cadiz.  There  does  not  appear  to  be  any  object  in 
that  Quarter  except  Gibraltar.  Should  the  attempts  be 
renewed  ags.1  that  place,  it  will  prove  that  the  former 
has  not  that  absolute  sway  in  the  Cabinet  of  the  latter 
which  has  been  generally  imagined.  Nothing  would 
have  prevailed  on  the  French  to  recall  their  fleets  from 
the  Islands  at  the  time  they  did  but  the  necessity  of 
humouring  Spain  on  the  subject  of  her  hobby  horse. 


i26  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1781 

I  am  glad  to  hear  that  Arnold  has  been  at  last  fired 
at.  It  sounded  a  little  unfavorably  for  us  in  the  ears 
of  the  people  here  that  he  was  likely  to  get  off  with 
out  that  proof  of  a  hostile  reception.  If  he  ventures 
an  irruption  in  any  other  quarter  I  hope  he  will  be 
made  sensible  that  his  impunity  on  James  River  was 
owing  to  the  suddenness  of  his  appearance  &  not  to 
the  want  of  spirit  in  the  people.  I  am,  etc. 


TO   EDMUND    PENDLETON.  MAD.  MSS. 

PHILADR,  Feby,  1781. 

DR  SIR, — I  have  your  favor  of  the  5l.h  instant  by 
the  post.  Col.  Harrison  arrived  here  yesterday,  and 
as  he  mentions  no  circumstance  which  indicated  an 
intended  departure  of  the  Enemy  I  am  afraid  your 
intelligence  on  that  subject  was  not  well  founded. 
Immediately  on  the  receipt  of  your  former  letter 
relating  to  an  exchange  of  C.  Taylor  I  applied  to  the 
Admiralty  department,  and  if  such  a  step  can  be 
brought  about  with  propriety,  I  hope  he  will  be  grat 
ified,  but  considering  the  tenor  of  their  treatment  of 
naval  prisoners,  and  the  resolutions  with  which  it  has 
inspired  Congress,  I  do  not  think  it  probable  that 
exchanges  will  go  on  easily,  and  if  this  were  less  the 
case,  a  mere  passenger,  under  the  indulgence  too  of  a 
parole,  can  scarcely  hope  to  be  preferred  to  such  as 
are  suffering  the  utmost  hardships  and  even  made 
prisoners  in  public  service. 

A  vessel  arrived  here  a  few  days  ago  from  Cadiz 
which  brings  letters  of  as  late  date  as  the  last  of  Dec' 
Those  that  are  official  tell  us  that  England  is  making 


1781]  JAMES  MADISON.  127 

the  most  strenuous  exertions  for  the  current  year,  & 
that  she  is  likely  to  be  but  too  successful  in  the  great 
article  of  money.  The  Parliament  have  voted  32,000 
seamen,  and  a  considerable  land  reinforcement  for 
their  Southern  army  in  America  is  s?  to  be  in  pre 
paration.  Private  letters  by  the  same  conveyance 
mention  that  the  blockage  of  Gibraltar  is  going  on 
with  alacrity,  and  that  the  garrison  is  in  such  distress 
as  flatters  the  hope  of  a  speedy  capitulation. 

If  Mr.  Pendleton  your  nephew  is  still  with  you  be 
pleased  to  return  him  my  compliments. 

With  great  respect  I  am,  etc. 


TO    THOMAS    JEFFERSON.1 

PHILADELPHIA,  April  3rd,  1781. 

DEAR  SIR, — The  letter  from  the  Delegation,  by 
the  last  post,  informed  you  of  the  arrival  of  the  stores 
here,  which  were  to  have  been  delivered  in  Virginia 
by  one  of  the  French  ships.  The  infinite  importance 
of  them  to  the  State,  especially  since  the  arrival  of  a 
reinforcement  to  Arnold,2  of  which  we  are  just 
apprized  by  the  Marquis,  has  determined  the  Dele 
gates  to  forward  them  by  land,  without  loss  of  time. 
This  will  be  attempted  in  the  first  instance,  in  the 

1  From  the  Madison  Papers  (1840). 

2  The  sufferings  in  Virginia  from  the  invasion  of  the  enemy  called  forth  the 
following  peculiar  proposition  from  George  Mason.     It  was  addressed  to  the 
Virginia  delegates  in  Congress  : 

VIRGINIA,  GUNSTON-HALL,  Aprils?,  1781. 
GENTLEMEN, — 

Whoever  considers  the  Importance  of  the  Trade  of  these  States  to  Great 
Britain,  and  her  Expectations  of  great  part  of  it  returning  into  British  Chan- 


128  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1781 

channel  of  the  Quartermaster's  department,  and,  if  it 
cannot  be  effected  in  that  mode,  without  delay,  we 
propose  to  engage  private  wagons  for  the  purpose, 
on  the  credit  of  the  State.  Should  the  latter  alter 
native  be  embraced,  I  find  it  will  be  necessary  to 
stipulate  instantaneous  payment,  from  the  Treasury, 
on  the  arrival  of  the  wagons  at  Richmond,  in  specie 
or  old  continental  currency  to  the  real  amount  thereof. 
I  mention  this  circumstance  that  you  may  be  pre 
pared  for  it.  The  expense  of  the  transportation  will 
be  between  five  and  six  hundred  pounds,  Virginia 
money.  The  exchange  between  specie  and  the  old 
paper,  at  present,  is  about  one  hundred  and  thirty- 
five  for  one. 

The  Delegates  having  understood  that  the  refu 
gees  taken  by  Captain  Tilley,  on  his  return  to  New 
port  from  the  Chesapeake,  consisted  chiefly  of  persons 
who  formerly  lived  in  Virginia,  some  of  whom  were 
traitors  who  deserved  exemplary  punishment,  and 
others  vindictive  enemies  to  the  State,  thought  pro- 

nels,  upon  a  peace,  may  readily  conceive  that  She  will  be  alarmed  at  any 
Measures  which  may  affect  it  hereafter,  by  imposing  such  Burdens  upon  it,  as 
will  give  a  lasting  Preference  to  other  Nations.  If  therefore  Congress  were  to 
recommend  to  the  Legislatures  of  the  different  States  immediately  to  enact 
Laws,  declaring  that  all  private  property,  which  hath  been,  or  shall  be  plun 
dered  or  destroyed,  by  the  British  Troops,  or  others  acting  under  the  authority 
of  the  King  of  Great  Britain,  beyond  high  water  mark,  from  a  certain  Day, 
shall  be  hereafter  reimbursed  &  made  good  to  the  individual  Sufferers,  & 
their  Heirs,  by  Dutys  to  be  imposed  upon  all  Imports  from  Great  Britain  into 
the"  respective  States,  after  a  peace,  and  to  be  continued  until  full  Reparation 
shall  be  accordingly  made  ;  and  for  this  purpose,  directing  Valuations,  upon 
oath,  to  be  made  of  all  private  property  so  plundered  or  destroyed,  to  be 
returned,  with  the  names  &  places  of  abode  of  the  owners,  to  some  certain 
public  office  within  each  State,  &  there  duly  registered,  it  is  more  than  proba 
ble  it  wou'd  produce  good  effects. — Mad.  MSS. 


1781]  JAMES  MADISON.  129 

per  to  make  the  inclosed  application  to  the  French 
Minister.  By  conversation  I  have  since  had  with 
him  on  the  subject,  I  doubt  whether  it  will  be 
deemed  consistent  with  their  general  rules  of  con 
duct,  to  give  up,  to  be  punished  as  malefactors,  any 
of  the  captives  made  by  their  fleet,  which  does  not 
serve,  like  their  land  army,  as  an  auxiliary  to  the 
forces  of  the  United  States.  If  these  persons  had 
been  taken  by  their  land  forces,  which  serve  as  auxili 
aries  under  the  Commander-in-Chief,  it  seems  there 
would  have  been  no  difficulty  in  the  case.  However, 
the  application  will  certainly  prevent  the  exchange  or 
release  to  which  it  refers,  if  the  Executive  think  it 
expedient  to  do  so.  On  the  least  intimation,  I  am 
persuaded  the  apostates  would  be  even  sent  over  to 
France,  and  secured  in  the  most  effectual  manner 
during  the  war.  Perhaps  this  would  not  be  amiss, 
as  being  not  our  prisoners,  no  use  can  be  made  of 
them  in  redeeming  our  citizens  from  captivity. 


TO    THOMAS    JEFFERSON.1 

PHILADELPHIA,  April  16,  1781. 

DEAR  SIR, — The  inclosed  paper  is  a  copy  of  a  re 
port,2  from  a  committee,  now  lying  on  the  table  of  Con- 

1  From  the  Madison  Papers  (1840). 

2  "  Whereas  it  is  stipulated  and  declared  in  the  I3th  Article  of  the  Confedera 
tion,  '  that  every  State  shall  abide  by  the  determinations  of  the  United  States 
in  Congress   assembled,    on   all   questions   which  by   this   Confederation   are 
submitted  to  them  :     And  that  the  Articles  of  this  Confederation  shall  be  in 
violably  observed  by  every  State  ;  '  by  which  Article  a  general  and  implied 
power  is  vested  in  the   United  States  in  Congress  assembled,  to  enforce  and 
carry  into  effect  all  the  Articles  of  the  said  Confederation  against  any  of  the 
States  which  shall  refuse  or  neglect  to  abide  by  such  their  determinations,  or  shall 


i3o  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1781 

gress  for  consideration.  The  delicacy  and  importance 
of  the  subject  makes  me  wish  for  your  judgment  on  it, 
before  it  undergoes  the  final  decision  of  Congress. 

The  necessity  of  arming  Congress  with  coercive 
powers  arises  from  the  shameful  deficiency  of  some 
of  the  States  which  are  most  capable  of  yielding 
their  apportioned  supplies,  and  the  military  exactions 
to  which  others,  already  exhausted  by  the  enemy  and 
our  own  troops,  are  in  consequence  exposed.  With 
out  such  powers,  too,  in  the  General  Government, 
the  whole  confederacy  may  be  insulted,  and  the  most 
salutary  measures  frustrated,  by  the  most  inconsider 
able  State  in  the  Union.  At  a  time  when  all  the 
other  States  were  submitting  to  the  loss  and  incon 
venience  of  an  embargo  on  their  exports,  Delaware 
absolutely  declined  coming  into  the  measure,  and  not 
only  defeated  the  general  object  of  it,  but  enriched 
herself  at  the  expense  of  those  who  did  their  duty. 

The  expediency,  however,  of  making  the  proposed 

otherwise  violate  any  of  the  articles  ;  but  no  determinate  and  particular  provi 
sion  is  made  for  that  purpose  :  And  whereas  the  want  of  such  provision  may 
be  a  pretext  to  call  into  question  the  legality  of  such  measures  as  may  be 
necessary  for  preserving  the  authority  of  the  Confederation,  and  for  doing  justice 
to  the  States  which  shall  duly  fulfil  their  federal  engagements  ;  and  it  is,  more 
over,  most  consonant  to  the  spirit  of  a  free  Constitution,  that,  on  the  one  hand, 
all  exercise  of  power  should  be  explicitly  and  precisely  warranted,  and,  on  the 
other,  that  the  penal  consequences  of  a  violation  of  duty  should  be  clearly  pro- 
mulged  and  understood  :  And  whereas  it  is  further  declared  by  the  said  I3th 
Article  of  the  Confederation,  that  no  addition  shall  be  made  to  the  articles 
thereof,  unless  the  same  shall  be  agreed  to  in  a  Congress  of  the  United  States, 
and  be  afterwards  confirmed  by  the  Legislatures  of  every  State  :  The  United 
States  in  Congress  assembled,  having  seriously  and  maturely  deliberated  on  these 
considerations,  and  being  desirous  as  far  as  possible  to  cement  and  invigorate 
the  Federal  Union,  that  it  may  be  both  established  on  the  most  immutable 
basis,  and  be  the  more  effectual  for  securing  the  immediate  object  of  it,  do  here 
by  agree  and  recommend  to  the  Legislatures  of  every  State,  to  confirm  and  to 


1781]  JAMES  MADISON.  131 

application  to  the  States,  will  depend  on  the  proba 
bility  of  their  complying  with  it.  If  they  should  re 
fuse,  Congress  will  be  in  a  worse  situation  than  at 
present ;  for  as  the  Confederation  now  stands,  and 
according  to  the  nature  even  of  alliances  much  less 
intimate,  there  is  an  implied  right  of  coercion  against 
the  delinquent  party,  and  the  exercise  of  it  by  Con 
gress,  whenever  a  palpable  necessity  occurs,  will 
probably  be  acquiesced  in. 

It  may  be  asked,  perhaps,  by  what  means  Congress 
could  exercise  such  a  power,  if  the  States  were  to 
invest  them  with  it.  As  long  as  there  is  a  regular 
army  on  foot,  a  small  detachment  from  it,  acting 
under  civil  authority,  would  at  any  time  render  a 
voluntary  contribution  of  supplies  due  from  a  State, 
an  eligible  alternative.  But  there  is  a  still  more  easy 
and  efficacious  mode.  The  situation  of  most  of  the 
States  is  such,  that  two  or  three  vessels  of  force 

authorize  their  Delegates  in  Congress  to  subscribe  the  following  clause  as  an 
additional  article  to  the  thirteen  Articles  of  Confederation  and  perpetual  union  : 

It  is  understood  and  hereby  declared,  that  in  case  any  one  or  more  of  the 
confederated  States  shall  refuse  or  neglect  to  abide  by  the  determinations  of  the 
United  States  in  Congress  assembled,  and  to  observe  all  the  Articles  of  Con 
federation  as  required  by  the  I3th  Article,  the  said  United  States  in  Congress 
assembled,  are  fully  authorized  to  employ  the  force  of  the  United  States,  as 
well  by  sea  as  by  land,  to  compel  such  State  or  States  to  fulfil  their  federal 
engagements  ;  and  particularly  to  make  distraint  on  any  of  the  effects,  vessels, 
and  merchandizes  of  such  State  or  States,  or  of  any  of  the  citizens  thereof, 
wherever  found,  and  to  prohibit  and  prevent  their  trade  and  intercourse  as 
well  with  any  other  of  the  United  States  and  the  citizens  thereof,  as  with  any 
foreign  State,  and  as  well  by  land  as  by  sea,  until  full  compensation  or  compli 
ance  be  obtained  with  respect  to  all  requisitions  made  by  the  United  States  in 
Congress  assembled,  in  pursuance  of  the  Articles  of  Confederation. 

And  it  is  understood,  and  is  hereby  agreed,  that  this  article  shall  be  bind 
ing  on  all  States  not  actually  in  possession  of  the  enemy,  as  soon  as  the  same 
shall  be  acceded  to  and  duly  ratified  by  each  of  the  said  States." 


1 32  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1781 

employed  against  their  trade  will  make  it  their  interest 
to  yield  prompt  obedience  to  all  just  requisitions  on 
them.  With  respect  to  those  States  that  have  little 
or  no  foreign  trade  of  their  own,  it  is  provided  that 
all  inland  trade  with  such  States  as  supply  them  with 
foreign  merchandize  may  be  interdicted,  and  the  con 
currence  of  the  latter  may  be  enforced,  in  case  of 
refusal,  by  operations  on  their  foreign  trade. 

There  is  a  collateral  reason  which  interests  the 
States  who  are  feeble  in  maritime  resources,  in  such 
a  plan.  If  a  naval  armament  was  considered  as  the 
proper  instrument  of  general  government,  it  would  be, 
both  preserved  in  a  respectable  state  in  time  of  peace, 
and  it  would  be  an  object  to  man  it  with  citizens, 
taken  in  due  proportions,  from  every  State.  A  navy 
so  formed,  and  under  the  orders  of  the  General 
Council  of  the  State,  would  not  only  be  a  guard 
against  aggressions  and  insults  from  abroad,  but, 
without  it,  what  is  to  protect  the  Southern  States, 
for  many  years  to  come,  against  the  insults  and 
aggressions  of  their  northern  brethren  ? 


TO    EDMUND    RANDOLPH.1 

(Extract.) 

PHILADELPHIA,  May  i,  1781. 

DEAR  SIR, — A  letter  which  I  received  a  few  days 
ago  from  Mr.  Jefferson  gives  me  a  hope  that  he  will 
lend  his  succor  in  defending  the  title  of  Virginia. 
He  professes  ignorance  of  the  ground  on  which  the 

1  From  Madison's  Works. 


1781]  JAMES  MADISON.  133 

report  of  the  committee  places  the  controversy.  I 
have  exhorted  him  not  to  drop  his  purpose,  and  re 
ferred  him  to  you  as  a  source  of  copious  information 
on  the  subject.  I  wish  much  you  and  he  could  unite 
your  ideas  on  it.  Since  you  left  us  I  have  picked  up 
several  pamphlets  which  had  escaped  our  researches. 
Among  them  are  the  examination  of  the  Connecticut 
claim,  and  the  charter  of  Georgia,  bound  up  with  that 
of  Maryland  and  four  others.  Presuming  that  a  bet 
ter  use  will  be  made  of  them,  I  will  send  them  by  Mr. 
Jones,  requesting,  however,  that  they  may  be  re 
turned  by  the  hands  of  him,  Dr.  Lee,  or  yourself,  as 
the  case  may  be. 

TO    EDMUND    RANDOLPH.1 

PHILADELPHIA,  May  i,  1781. 

DEAR  SIR, — The  case  of  the  vessel  captured  within 
North  Carolina  was  some  time  since  remitted  to  Con 
gress  by  Governor  Harrison.  I  am  glad  to  find  your 
ideas  correspond  so  exactly  with  those  I  had  advanced 
on  the  subject.  The  legislative  power  over  captures, 
and  the  judiciary  in  the  last  resort,  are  clearly  vested 
in  Congress  by  the  Confederation.  But  the  judiciary 
power  in  the  first  instance,  not  being  delegated,  is  as 
clearly  reserved  to  the  Admiralty  Courts  of  the  par 
ticular  States  within  which  the  captures  are  made. 
Captures  made  on  the  high  seas  must  fall  within  the 
jurisdiction  of  the  State  into  which  it  shall  please  the 
captor  to  carry  them.  It  will  be  sufficient,  I  believe, 
to  insert  in  the  instructions  to  privateers,  a  clause  for 

1  From  the  Madison  Papers  (1840). 


134 


THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1781 


preventing  the  grievance  complained  of  by  North 
Carolina.  The  anger  of  Mr.  Burke  was  erroneous  in 
its  principle,  as  well  as  intemperate  in  its  degree. 
The  offender  being  an  officer  of  Congress,  and  not  of 
Virginia,  Congress,  and  not  Virginia,  should  have 
been  resorted  to  for  redress. 

On  a  consultation  before  Doctor  Lee  left  us,  it  was 
determined  that  we  ought  to  renew  our  attempts  to 
obtain  from  Congress  a  decision  on  the  cession  of 
Virginia,  before  the  meeting  of  the  Legislature.  The 
attempt  was  accordingly  made,  and  produced  all  the 
perplexing  and  dilatory  objections  which  its  adversa 
ries  could  devise.  An  indisposition  of  the  President, 
which  suspended  the  vote  of  Maryland,  furnished  an 
argument  for  postponing,  which  it  was  prudent  to 
yield  to,  but  which  is  now  removed  by  the  arrival  of 
Mr.  Wright,  a  new  Delegate  from  that  State.  We 
shall  call  again  on  Congress  for  a  simple  answer  in 
the  affirmative  or  the  negative,  without  going  into 
any  unnecessary  discussions  on  the  point  of  right ; 
and  should  the  decision  be  postponed  sine  die,  we 
hope  the  State  will  consider  itself  at  liberty  to  take 
any  course  which  its  interest  shall  suggest.  It  hap 
pens  very  unluckily  that  Virginia  will  only  have  two 
Representatives  present  during  the  interesting  busi 
ness.  Mr.  Jones  cannot  be  prevailed  on  to  wait  the 
event.  Colonel  Bland  thinks  the  validity  of  charters 
unimportant  to  the  title  of  Virginia,  and  that  the  title 
of  the  natives  militates  against  the  claims  of  the 
companies.  Is  not  my  situation  an  enviable  one  ? 

1  Also  a  delegate  from  Maryland. 


1781]  JAMES  MADISON.  135 

A  further  communication  from  the  French  Minis 
ter  informs  us,  that  the  Court  of  France  laments  the 
weakness  of  our  army  ;  insinuates  the  idea  of  co-op 
eration  in  expelling  the  enemy  from  the  United 
States  ;  apprehends  attempts  to  seduce  the  States 
into  separate  negotiations,  and  hopes  measures  will 
be  taken  to  frustrate  such  views.  I  believe,  from  this 
and  other  circumstances,  that  the  Court  of  France 
begins  to  have  serious  suspicions  of  some  latent  dan 
ger.  It  is  extremely  probable,  that  as  the  enemy 
relax  in  their  military  exertions  against  this  country, 
they  will  redouble  the  means  of  seduction  and  divi 
sion.  This  consideration  is  an  additional  argument 
in  favor  of  a  full  representation  of  the  States.  In  a 
multitude  of  counsellors  there  is  the  best  chance  for 
honesty,  if  not  of  wisdom. 

The  subject  of  Vermont  has  not  yet  been  called 
up.  Their  agents  and  those  of  the  land-mongers  are 
playing  with  great  adroitness  into  each  others'  hands. 
Mr.  Jones  will  explain  this  game  to  you.  Colonel 
Bland  is  still  schismatical  on  this  point.  I  flatter  my 
self,  however,  that  he  will  so  far  respect  the  united 
opinion  of  his  brethren  as  to  be  silent.  Mr.  Lee 
entered  fully  into  the  policy  of  keeping  the  vote  of 
Vermont  out  of  Congress. 

The  refugees  from  New  York  have  lately  perpe 
trated  one  of  the  most  daring  and  flagrant  acts  that 
has  occurred  in  the  course  of  the  war.  A  captain  of 
militia  of  New  Jersey,  who  unfortunately  fell  a  cap 
tive  into  their  hands,  was  carried  to  New  York,  con 
fined  successively  in  different  prisons,  and  treated 


136  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1781 

with  every  mark  of  insult  and  cruelty  ;  and  finally 
brought  over  to  the  Jerseys,  and  in  cold  blood  hanged. 
A  label  was  left  on  his  breast,  charging  him  with 
having  murdered  one  of  their  fraternity,  and  denounc 
ing  a  like  fate  to  others.  The  charge  has  been  dis 
proved  by  unexceptionable  testimony.  A  number 
of  respectable  people  of  New  Jersey  have,  by  a  me 
morial,  called  aloud  on  the  Commander-in-Chief  for 
retaliation ;  in  consequence  of  which  he  has,  in  the 
most  decisive  terms,  claimed  of  Sir  Henry  Clinton  a 
delivery  of  the  offenders  up  to  justice,  as  the  only 
means  of  averting  the  stroke  of  vengeance  from  the 
innocent  head  of  a  captive  officer  of  equal  rank  to 
the  Jersey  captain.  The  answer  of  Clinton  was  not 
received  when  General  Washington  despatched  a 
state  of  the  transaction  to  Congress. 


TO  EDMUND  PENDLETON.1 

PHILADELPHIA,  May  29,  1781. 

DEAR  SIR, — The  two  circumstances  relating  to  the 
proposed  duty  on  trade,  mentioned  in  your  favor 
of  the  first  instant,  were  subjects  of  discussion  when 
the  measure  was  on  the  anvil.  It  was  evident  that 
the  disposition  of  the  States  to  invest  Congress  with 
such  a  power  would  be  influenced  by  the  length  of 
the  term  assigned  for  the  exercise  of  it.  It  was 
equally  evident  that  no  provision  would  satisfy  the 
present  creditors  of  the  United  States,  or  obtain 
future  loans,  that  was  not  commensurate  to  all  the 
public  engagements.  In  order  to  reconcile  these 

1  From  the  Madison  Papers  (1840). 


1781]  JAMES  MADISON.  137 

points,  the  duration  of  the  impost  was  limited,  but 
limited  in  so  indefinite  a  manner  as  not  to  defeat 
the  object  of  it.  Should  the  increase  of  trade  ren 
der  the  duty  more  productive  than  was  estimated, 
it  must  the  sooner  extinguish  the  public  debts,  and 
cease.  The  application  of  Congress  for  such  a 
power  supposes,  indeed,  a  confidence  in  them,  on  the 
part  of  the  States,  greater  perhaps  than  many  may 
think  consistent  with  republican  jealousy ;  but  if  the 
States  will  not  enable  their  Representatives  to  ful 
fil  their  engagements,  it  is  not  to  be  expected  that 
individuals  either  in  Europe  or  America  will  confide 
in  them.  The  second  objection  you  mention  was 
also  a  subject  of  much  discussion  in  Congress.  On 
one  side  it  was  contended  that  the  powers  incident 
to  the  collection  of  a  duty  on  trade  were  in  their 
nature  so  municipal,  and  in  their  operation  so  irrita 
tive,  that  it  was  improbable  that  the  States  could  be 
prevailed  on  to  part  with  them ;  and  that,  conse 
quently,  it  would  be  most  prudent  to  ask  from  the 
States  nothing  more  than  the  duty  itself,  to  be  col 
lected  by  State  officers,  and  paid  to  a  Continental 
Receiver;  and  not  the  right  of  collecting  it  by  of 
ficers  of  Congress.  On  the  opposite  side  it  was 
urged,  that  as  Congress  would  be  held  responsible 
for  the  public  debts,  it  was  necessary,  and  would  be 
expected,  that  the  fund  granted  for  discharging  them 
should  be  exclusively  and  independently  in  their 
hands  ;  that  if  the  collectors  were  under  the  control 
of  the  States,  the  urgency  of  their  wants  would  be 
constantly  diverting  the  revenue  from  its  proper 


i38  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1781 

destination ;  that  if  the  States  were  willing  to  give 
up  the  thing  itself,  it  was  not  likely  they  would  cavil 
at  any  form  that  would  be  most  effectual ;  that  the 
term  proposed  might  be  reconciled  with  their  in 
ternal  jurisdictions,  by  annexing  to  the  office  of  col 
lector  all  the  powers  incident  thereto,  and  leaving 
to  Congress  the  right  of  appointing  the  officer.  How 
far  it  may  be  best  to  appoint  the  established  naval 
officer,  I  am  not  prepared  to  say ;  but  should  that 
be  found  to  be  the  case,  they  will  exercise  their  new 
functions,  not  as  naval  officers  of  the  State,  but  as 
invested  with  a  separate  commission  by  Congress,  in 
such  manner  that  in  the  former  respect  they  are 
wholly  exempt  from  the  jurisdiction  of  Congress, 
and  in  the  latter  from  that  of  the  State.  Such  a 
junction  of  powers,  derived  from  different  sources, 
in  the  same  person,  certainly  has  its  inconveniences, 
but  there  will  be  many  instances  of  it  in  our  com 
plex  government.  I  have  met  with  so  many  inter 
ruptions  this  morning,  that  I  fear  I  may  have  not 
done  justice  to  the  subject  in  my  explanation  of  it. 
Another  consequence  is,  that  I  must  be  very  brief 
on  the  head  of  intelligence  to  make  sure  of  the  post. 


TO    PHILIP    MAZZEI.1 

PHILADELPHIA,  July  7,  1781.* 

MY  DEAR  FRIEND, — I  have  received  two  copies 
of  your  favor  of  the  7th  of  December  last,  and  three 

1  From  Madison's  Works. 

*  Mazzei  was  an  Italian  who  had  come  to  Virginia  to  introduce  the  planting 
of  olives  and  grapes.     He  was  an  ardent  revolutionist  at  this  time  and  held  a 


1781]  JAMES  MADISON.  139 

of  that  of  the  3Oth  of  November  preceding.  Having 
neglected  to  bring  with  me  from  Virginia  the  cypher 
concerted  between  you  and  the  Executive,  I  still 
remain  ignorant  of  the  paragraph  in  your  last  which 
I  suppose  the  best  worth  knowing. 

The  state  of  our  affairs  has  undergone  so  many 
vicissitudes  since  you  embarked  for  Europe,  and  I 
can  so  little  judge  how  far  you  may  have  had  intelli 
gence  of  them,  that  I  am  at  a  loss  where  I  ought  to 
begin  my  narrative.  As  the  present  posture  of  them 
is  the  most  interesting,  I  shall  aim  at  nothing  further 
at  present  than  to  give  you  some  idea  of  that,  refer 
ring  to  past  events  so  far  only  as  may  be  necessary 
to  explain  it. 

The  insuperable  difficulties  which  opposed  a  gen 
eral  conquest  of  America  seemed  as  early  as  the  year 
1779  to  have  been  felt  by  the  enemy,  and  to  have 
led  them  into  the  scheme  of  directing  their  opera 
tions  and  views  against  the  Southern  States  only. 
Clinton  accordingly  removed  with  the  principal  part 
of  his  force  from  New  York  to  South  Carolina,  and 


commission  from  Virginia  to  purchase  supplies  for  the  army.  He  had  a  scheme 
for  borrowing  money  in  Italy,  but  insisted  that  the  purchases  should  be  made 
where  it  might  be  borrowed.  Before  leaving  America  he  wrote  to  Madison 
from  Hob's  Hole,  Va.,  June  13,  1779  : 

"  I  have  put  my  papers  with  a  4  pound  ball  in  a  bag  to  be  thrown  overboard, 
if  prudence  should  require  it.  ...  However  well  disposed  the  Gran-Duke, 
or  the  Genose,  might  be  to  lend  us  money,  I  am  confident  that  as  soon  as  they 
know  that  part  of  it  is  to  be  drawn  in  favour  of  another  part  of  Europe  to  pay 
for  things,  which  could  have  been  bought  in  this  country,  they  would  withdraw 
highly,  &  in  my  opinion  justly,  disgusted.  .  .  .  The  late  Governor,  M^  Page, 
&  you  agreed  in  January  last,  that,  in  good  feeling  as  well  as  gratitude,  as 
much  money  as  it  was  necessary  to  employ  in  goods,  was  to  be  layed  out  in  the 
Country  of  the  Lender,  or  Lenders." — MAD.  MSS. 


140 


THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1781 


laid  siege  to  Charleston,  which,  after  an  honorable 
resistance,  was  compelled  to  surrender  to  a  superiority 
of  force.  Our  loss  in  men,  besides  the  inhabitants 
of  the  town,  was  not  less  than  two  thousand.  Clin 
ton  returned  to  New  York.  Cornwallis  was  left  with 
about  five  thousand  troops  to  pursue  his  conquests. 
General  Gates  was  appointed  to  the  command  of  the 
Southern  department,  in  place  of  Lincoln,  who  com 
manded  in  Charleston  at  the  time  of  its  capitulation. 
He  met  Cornwallis  on  the  i6th  of  August,  1780, 
near  Camden,  in  the  upper  part  of  South  Carolina 
and  on  the  border  of  North  Carolina.  A  general 
action  ensued,  in  which  the  American  troops  were 
defeated  with  considerable  loss,  though  not  without 
making  the  enemy  pay  a  good  price  for  their  victory. 
Cornwallis  continued  his  progress  into  North  Caro 
lina,  but  afterwards  retreated  to  Camden.  The 
defeat  of  Gates  was  followed  by  so  general  a  clamor 
against  him,  that  it  was  judged  expedient  to  recall 
him.  Greene  was  sent  to  succeed  in  command. 
About  the  time  of  his  arrival  at  the  army,  Cornwallis, 
having  been  reinforced  from  New  York,  resumed  his 
enterprise  into  North  Carolina.  A  detachment  of 
his  best  troops  was  totally  defeated  by  Morgan  with 
an  inferior  number,  and  consisting  of  a  major  part  of 
militia  detached  from  Greene's  army.  Five  hundred 
were  made  prisoners,  between  two  and  three  hundred 
killed  and  wounded,  and  about  the  like  number 
escaped.  This  disaster,  instead  of  checking  the 
ardor  of  Cornwallis,  afforded  a  new  incentive  to  a 
rapid  advance,  in  the  hope  of  recovering  his  pris- 


1781]  JAMES  MADISON.  141 

oners.  The  vigilance  and  activity,  however,  of 
Morgan,  secured  them.  Cornwallis  continued  his 
pursuit  as  far  as  the  Dan  river,  which  divides  North 
Carolina  from  Virginia.  Greene,  whose  inferior 
force  obliged  him  to  recede  this  far  before  the 
enemy,  received  such  succors  of  militia  on  his  enter 
ing  Virginia  that  the  chase  was  reversed.  Corn 
wallis,  in  his  turn,  retreated  precipitately.  Greene 
overtook  him  on  his  way  to  Wilmington,  and  at 
tacked  him.  Although  the  ground  was  lost  on  our 
side,  the  British  army  was  so  much  weakened  by  the 
loss  of  five  or  six  hundred  of  their  best  troops,  that 
their  retreat  towards  Wilmington  suffered  little  inter 
ruption.  Greene  pursued  as  long  as  any  chance  of 
reaching  his  prey  remained,  and  then,  leaving  Corn 
wallis  on  his  left,  took  an  oblique  direction  towards 
Camden,  which,  with  all  the  other  posts  in  South 
Carolina  except  Charleston  and  Ninety-Six,  have,  in 
consequence,  fallen  again  into  our  possession.  His 
army  lay  before  the  latter  when  we  last  heard  from 
him.  It  contained  seven  or  eight  hundred  men  and 
large  quantities  of  stores.  It  is  nearly  two  hundred 
miles  from  Charleston,  and,  without  some  untoward 
accident,  cannot  fail  of  being  taken.  Greene  has 
detachments  all  over  South  Carolina,  some  of  them 
within  a  little  distance  of  Charleston  ;  and  the  resent 
ments  of  the  people  against  their  late  insolent  masters 
ensure  him  all  the  aids  they  can  give  in  re-establish 
ing  the  American  Government  there.  Great  progress 
is  also  making  in  the  redemption  of  Georgia. 

As  soon  as  Cornwallis  had  refreshed  his  troops  at 


1 42  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1781 

Wilmington,  abandoning  his  Southern  conquests  to 
their  fate,  he  pushed  forward  into  Virginia.  The 
parricide  Arnold  had  a  detachment  at  Portsmouth 
when  he  lay  on  the  Dan  ;  Philips  had  reinforced  him 
so  powerfully  from  New  York,  that  the  juncture  of 
the  two  armies  at  Petersburg  could  not  be  prevented. 
The  whole  force  amounted  to  about  six  thousand 
men.  The  force  under  the  Marquis  De  La  Fayette, 
who  commanded  in  Virginia,  being  greatly  inferior, 
did  not  oppose  them,  but  retreated  into  Orange  and 
Culpeper  in  order  to  meet  General  Wayne,  who  was 
on  his  way  from  Pennsylvania  to  join  him.  Corn- 
wallis  advanced  northward  as  far  as  Chesterfield,  in 
the  county  of  Caroline,  having  parties  at  the  same 
time  at  Page's  warehouse  and  other  places  in  its  vicin 
ity.  A  party  of  horse,  commanded  by  Tarleton,  was 
sent  with  all  the  secrecy  and  celerity  possible  to  sur 
prise  and  take  the  General  Assembly  and  Executive 
who  had  retreated  from  Richmond  to  Charlottes- 
ville.  The  vigilance  of  a  young  gentleman  who  dis 
covered  the  design  and  rode  express  to  Charlottsville 
prevented  a  complete  surprise.  As  it  was,  several 
Delegates  were  caught,  and  the  rest  were  within  an 
hour  of  sharing  the  same  fate.  Among  the  captives 
was  Colonel  Lyon  of  Hanover.  Mr.  Kinlock,  a 
member  of  Congress  from  South  Carolina,  was  also 
caught  at  Mr.  John  Walker's,  whose  daughter  he  had 
married  some  time  before.  Governor  Jefferson  had 
a  very  narrow  escape.  The  members  of  the  Govern 
ment  rendezvoused  at  Stanton,  where  they  soon 
made  a  House.  Mr.  Jefferson's  year  having  expired, 


1781]  JAMES  MADISON.  143 

he  declined  a  re-election,  and  General  Nelson  has 
taken  his  place.  Tarleton's  party  retreated  with  as 
much  celerity  as  it  had  advanced.  On  the  junction 
of  Wayne  with  the  Marquis  and  the  arrival  of  militia, 
the  latter  faced  about  and  advanced  rapidly  on  Corn- 
wallis,  who  retreated  to  Richmond,  and  thence  pre 
cipitately  to  Williamsburg,  where  he  lay  on  the  27th 
ultimo.  The  Marquis  pursued,  and  was  at  the  same 
time  within  twenty  miles  of  that  place.  One  of  his 
advanced  parties  had  had  a  successful  skirmish  within 
six  miles  of  Williamsburg.  Bellini  has,  I  understand, 
abided  patiently  in  the  college  the  dangers  and  in 
conveniences  of  such  a  situation.  I  do  not  hear  that 
the  consequences  have  condemned  the  experiment. 
Such  is  the  present  state  of  the  war  in  the  Southern 
Department.  In  the  Northern,  operations  have 
been  for  a  considerable  time  in  a  manner  suspended. 
At  present,  a  vigorous  siege  of  New  York  by  General 
Washington's  army,  aided  by  five  or  six  thousand 
French  troops  under  Count  De  Rochambeau,  is  in 
contemplation,  and  will  soon  commence.  As  the 
English  have  the  command  of  the  water,  the  result 
of  such  an  enterprise  must  be  very  uncertain.  It  is 
supposed,  however,  that  it  will  certainly  oblige  the 
enemy  to  withdraw  their  force  from  the  Southern 
States,  which  may  be  a  more  convenient  mode  of 
relieving  them  than  by  marching  the  troops  from 
New  York  at  this  season  of  the  year  to  the  south 
ward.  On  the  whole,  the  probable  conclusion  of  this 
campaign  is,  at  this  juncture,  very  flattering,  the 
enemy  being  on  the  defensive  in  every  quarter. 


i44  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1781 

The  vicissitudes  which  our  finances  have  under 
gone  are  as  great  as  those  of  the  war,  the  deprecia 
tion  of  the  old  continental  bills  having  arrived  at 
forty,  fifty,  and  sixty  for  one.  Congress,  on  the  i8th 
of  March,  1780,  resolved  to  displace  them  entirely 
from  circulation,  and  substitute  another  currency,  to 
be  issued  on  better  funds,  and  redeemable  at  a  shorter 
period.  For  this  purpose,  they  fixed  the  relative 
value  of  paper  and  specie  at  forty  for  one  ;  directed 
the  States  to  sink  by  taxes  the  whole  two  hundred 
millions  in  one  year,  and  to  provide  proper  funds  for 
sinking  in  six  years  a  new  currency  which  was  not  to 
exceed  ten  millions  of  dollars,  which  was  redeemable 
within  that  period,  and  to  bear  an  interest  of  five  per 
cent.,  payable  in  bills  of  exchange  on  Europe  or  hard 
money.  The  loan-office  certificates  granted  by  Con 
gress  are  to  be  discharged  at  the  value  of  the  money 
at  the  time  of  the  loan  ;  a  scale  of  depreciation  being 
fixed  by  Congress  for  that  purpose.  This  scheme 
has  not  yet  been  carried  into  full  execution.  The 
old  bills  are  still  unredeemed,  in  part,  in  some  of  the 
States,  where  they  have  depreciated  to  two,  three, 
and  four  hundred  for  one.  The  new  bills,  which 
were  to  be  issued  only  as  the  old  ones  were  taken  in, 
are  consequently  in  a  great  degree  still  unissued  ;  and 
the  depreciation  which  they  have  already  suffered  has 
determined  Congress  and  the  States  to  issue  as  few 
more  of  them  as  possible.  We  seem  to  have  pursued 
our  paper  projects  as  far  as  prudence  will  warrant. 
Our  medium  in  future  will  be  principally  specie.  The 
States  are  already  levying  taxes  in  it.  As  the  paper 


1781]  JAMES  MADISON.  145 

disappears,  the  hard  money  comes  forward  into  circula 
tion.  This  revolution  will  also  be  greatly  facilitated 
by  the  influx  of  Spanish  dollars  from  the  Havannah, 
where  the  Spanish  forces  employed  against  the 
Floridas  *  consume  immense  quantities  of  our  flour, 
and  remit  their  dollars  in  payment.  We  also  receive 
considerable  assistance  from  the  direct  aids  of  our 
ally,  and  from  the  money  expended  among  us  by  his 
auxiliary  troops.  These  advantages,  as  they  have 
been  and  are  likely  to  be  improved  by  the  skill  of 
Mr.  Robert  Morris,  whom  we  have  constituted  minis 
ter  of  our  finances,  afford  a  more  flattering  prospect 
in  this  department  of  our  affairs  than  has  existed  at 
any  period  of  the  war. 

The  great  advantage  the  enemy  have  over  us  lies 
in  the  superiority  of  their  navy,  which  enables  them 
continually  to  shift  the  war  into  defenceless  places, 
and  to  weary  out  our  troops  by  long  marches.  The 
squadron  sent  by  our  ally  to  our  support  did  not 
arrive  till  a  reinforcement  on  the  part  of  the  enemy 
had  counteracted  their  views.  They  have  been  al 
most  constantly  blocked  up  at  Rhode  Island  by  the 
British  fleet.  The  effects  of  a  hurricane  in  the  last 
spring  on  the  latter  gave  a  temporary  advantage  to 
the  former,  but  circumstances  delayed  the  improve 
ment  of  it  till  the  critical  season  was  past.  Mr. 
Destouches,  who  commanded  the  French  fleet,  never 
theless  hazarded  an  expedition  into  Chesapeake  bay. 
The  object  of  it  was  to  co-operate  with  the  Marquis 

*  They  have  lately  taken  West  Florida  with  a  garrison  of   1,500  troops. 
[Note  probably  in  MS.] 


VOL.  I.  — 10 


i46  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1781 

de  la  Fayette  in  an  attack  against  Arnold,  who  lay  at 
Portsmouth  with  about  fifteen  hundred  British  troops. 
Had  he  got  into  the  bay,  and  taken  a  favorable  station, 
the  event  would  certainly  have  been  adequate  to  our 
hopes.  Unfortunately,  the  British  fleet,  which  fol 
lowed  the  French  immediately  from  Rhode  Island, 
reached  the  capes  of  Virginia  first.  On  the  arrival  of 
the  latter,  a  regular  and  fair  combat  took  place.  It 
lasted  for  several  hours,  and  ended  rather  in  favor  of 
of  our  allies.  As  the  enemy,  however,  were  nearest 
the  capes,  and  one  of  the  French  ships  had  lost  her 
rudder,  and  was  otherwise  much  damaged,  the  com 
mander  thought  it  best  to  relinquish  his  object,  and 
return  to  his  former  station.  The  damage  sustained 
by  the  enemy,  according  to  their  own  representation, 
exceeded  that  of  the  French ;  and  as  their  number  of 
ships  and  weight  of  metal  were  both  superior,  it  does 
great  honor  to  the  gallantry  and  good  conduct  of  Mr. 
Destouches.  Congress,  and  indeed  the  public  at 
large,  were  so  sensible  of  this,  that  their  particular 
thanks  were  given  him  on  this  occasion. 

No  description  can  give  you  an  adequate  idea  of 
the  barbarity  with  which  the  enemy  have  conducted 
the  war  in  the  Southern  States.  Every  outrage  which 
humanity  could  suffer  has  been  committed  by  them. 
Desolation  rather  than  conquest  seems  to  have  been 
their  object.  They  have  acted  more  like  desperate 
bands  of  robbers  or  buccaneers  than  like  a  nation 
making  war  for  dominion.  Negroes,  horses,  tobacco, 
&c.,  not  the  standards  and  arms  of  their  antagonists, 
are  the  trophies  which  display  their  success.  Rapes, 


1781]  JAMES  MADISON.  147 

murders,  and  the  whole  catalogue  of  individual  cruel 
ties,  not  protection  and  the  distribution  of  justice, 
are  the  acts  which  characterize  the  sphere  of  their 
usurped  jurisdiction.  The  advantage  we  derive  from 
such  proceedings  would,  if  it  were  purchased  on  other 
terms  than  the  distresses  of  our  citizens,  fully  compen 
sate  for  the  injury  accruing  to  the  public.  They  are 
a  daily  lesson  to  the  people  of  the  United  States  of 
the  necessity  of  perseverance  in  the  contest ;  and 
wherever  the  pressure  of  their  local  tyranny  is  re 
moved,  the  subjects  of  it  rise  up  as  one  man  to 
avenge  their  wrongs  and  prevent  a  repetition  of  them. 
Those  who  have  possessed  a  latent  partiality  for 
them,  as  their  resentment  is  embittered  by  their  dis 
appointment,  generally  feel  most  sensibly  their  inju 
ries  and  insults,  and  are  the  foremost  in  retaliating 
them.  It  is  much  to  be  regretted  that  these  things 
are  so  little  known  in  Europe.  Were  they  published 
to  the  world  in  their  true  colors,  the  British  nation 
would  be  hated  by  all  nations  as  much  as  they  have 
heretofore  been  feared  by  any,  and  all  nations  would 
be  sensible  of  the  policy  of  abridging  a  power  which 
nothing  else  can  prevent  the  abuse  of. 


TO  EDMUND  PENDLETON.  MAD.  MSS. 

PHILADA  July  3is*  1781. 

D?  SIR — I  have  the  pleasure  of  your's  of  the 
23?  I  congratulate  you  on  your  return  to  Caroline 
and  on  the  safety  of  your  estate  from  the  ravages  of 
the  Enemy. 


i48  2Zi£  WAITINGS  OF  [1781 

The  mail  of  last  week  having  been  intercepted  near 
Wilmington  has  kept  back  the  post  a  day  later  than 
his  usual  arrival,  and  I  have  now  but  a  few  moments 
for  the  discharge  of  my  epistolary  duty.  The  only 
certain  information  we  have  lately  had  from  Europe 
is  that  the  mediation  tendered  by  Russia  in  the  dis 
pute  between  England  &  Holland  has  been  referred 
by  the  former  to  the  General  pacification  in  which 
the  mediation  of  the  Emperor  will  be  joined  with  it. 
As  this  step  is  not  very  respectful  to  Russia,  it  can 
only  proceed  from  a  distrust  of  her  friendship,  & 
their  hopes  of  a  favorable  issue  to  the  campaign 
which  an  intercepted  letter  from  L?  G.  Germain  shews 
to  be  extravagantly  sanguine.  There  has  been  noth 
ing  from  the  W  Indies  for  several  weeks.  General 
Washington  is  continuing  his  preparations  &  progress 
ag*  N.  York.  I  shall  hazard  no  prediction  with  re 
gard  to  the  event  of  them.  Col.  Willet  we  understand 
has  lately  given  a  decisive  defeat  to  a  party  from 
Canada  or  the  Frontiers  of  N.  York.  With  very 
sincere  regard  I  am  D^  Sir 

Your  obr  friend  &  servant, 


TO  JAMES  MADISON.  MAD.  MSS. 

PHILADELPHIA,  August  i,  1781. l 

We  have  heard  little  of  late  from  Europe,  except 
that  the  Mediation  proffered  by  Russia  in  the  dispute 
between  England  &  Holland  has  been  referred  by  the 

1  The  first  two  paragraphs  relate  to  the  purchases  of  family  supplies  and  the 
sending  of  newspapers  containing  the  latest  news. 


1781]  JAMES  MADISON.  149 

former  to  the  general  pacification  in  which  the 
mediation  of  the  Emperor  will  be  joined  with  that  of 
Russia.  As  this  step  is  not  very  respectful  to  Russia 
it  can  only  proceed  from  a  distrust  of  her  friendship 
and  the  hopes  entertained  by  Britain  as  to  the  issue 
of  the  Campaign,  which  as  you  will  see  in  an  inter 
cepted  letter  from  Germaine  to  Clinton  were  extrava 
gantly  sanguine.  We  have  no  late  intelligence  from 
the  W.  Indies.  Ge?1  Washington  is  going  on  with 
his  preparations  &  operations  ag*1  N.  York.  What 
the  result  will  be  can  be  decided  by  time  alone. 
We  hope  they  will  at  least  withdraw  some  of  the 
invaders  from  Virginia.  The  French  fleet  is  still  at 
Rhode  Island.  The  British  it  is  reported  has  lately 
left  the  Hook. 

Augs5  2? — Information  has  been  rec?  from  N.  York 
thro'  a  channel  that  is  thought  a  good  one,  that  orders 
are  gone  to  Virginia  for  a  large  part  of  the  troops 
under  Cornwallis  immediately  to  sail  for  that  place. 
Should  this  be  well  founded  the  execution  of  the 
orders  will  announce  it  to  you.  Among  other  ad 
vantages  attending  an  evacuation  of  Virg*  it  will  not 
be  the  least  that  the  communication  with  this  place 
by  the  Bay  will  supply  the  State  with  many  necessary 
articles  wc.h  are  now  transported  by  land  at  so  much 
expense  &  will  enable  you  to  pay  for  them  easier  by 
raising  the  price  of  your  commodities.  It  gives  me 
pain  to  hear  that  so  many  of  the  people  have  incau 
tiously  sold  or  rather  given  away  their  Tob°  to 
speculators  when  it  was  in  no  danger  from  the  Enemy. 
The  destruction  of  that  article,  which  alarmed  them, 


150  THE   WRITINGS  OF  [1781 

was  an  obvious  cause  of  its  future  rise,  and  a  reason 
for  their  retaining  it  till  the  alarm  should  be  over. 
Goods  of  all  kinds,  particularly  dry  goods  are  rising 
here  already.  Salt  in  particular  has  risen  within  a 
few  days  from  two  dollars  to  a  guinea  per  bushel. 

I  send  you  by  this  opportunity  five  English  Gram 
mars1  for  Mr.  W.  Maury  agreeably  to  his  request. 
This  is  the  first  that  has  offered  although  I  have 
had  them  on  hand  for  some  months.  The  price  of 
the  whole  is  a  guinea.  The  price  of  D^  Collins  medical 
book  published  here  is  also  one  guinea.  If  you 
would  choose  a  copy  on  that  condition  I  can  send  you 
one  by  a  future  opportunity.  With  my  most  affection 
ate  regards  to  the  family. 


TO     EDMUND     PENDLETON.2 

PHILADELPHIA,  August  14,  1781. 

DEAR  SIR, — The  controversy  relating  to  the  district 
called  Vermont,  the  inhabitants  of  which  have  for 
several  years  claimed  and  exercised  the  jurisdiction 
of  an  independent  State,  is  at  length  put  into  a  train 
of  speedy  decision.  Notwithstanding  the  objections 
to  such  an  event,  there  is  no  question  but  they  will 
soon  be  established  into  a  separate  and  Federal  State. 
A  relinquishment  made  by  Massachusetts  of  her 
claims  ;  a  despair  of  finally  obtaining  theirs  on  the 
part  of  New  York  and  New  Hampshire,  the  other 

1  In  a  postscript  he  corrects  this  statement,  saying  he  sends  six  grammars  and 
the  price  is  42  /.  Pennsylvania  equal  to  about  33/6  Virginia  currency. 

2  From  the  Madison  Papers  (1840). 


1781]  JAMES  MADISON.  151 

claimants,  on  whom  these  enterprising  adventures 
were  making  fresh  encroachments  ;  the  latent  support 
afforded  them  by  the  leading  people  of  the  New  Eng 
land  States  in  general,  from  which  they  emigrated  ; 
the  just  ground  of  apprehension  that  their  rulers  were 
engaging  in  clandestine  negotations  with  the  enemy  ; 
and  lastly,  perhaps,  the  jealous  policy  of  some  of  the 
little  States,  which  hope  that  such  a  precedent  may 
engender  a  division  of  some  of  the  large  ones,  are  the 
circumstances  which  will  determine  the  concurrence  of 
Congress  in  this  affair. 


TO    EDMUND    PENDLETON.1 

PHILADELPHIA,  September  3,  1781. 

DEAR  SIR, — I  am  favored  with  yours  of  the  27th 
ultimo.  This  letter  will  be  the  most  agreeable  of 
any  I  have  long  had  the  pleasure  of  writing.  I  begin 
with  informing  you  that  the  Commander-in-Chief  and 
the  Count  Rochambeau, — the  former  with  a  part  of 
the  American  army,  and  the  latter  with  the  whole 
of  the  French, — are  thus  far  on  their  way  for  the 
Southern  Department.  The  American  troops  passed 
through  the  town  yesterday.  The  first  division  of 
the  French  army  to-day.  The  second  will  pass  to 
morrow.  Nothing  can  exceed  the  appearance  of  this 
specimen  which  our  Ally  has  sent  us  of  his  army, 
whether  we  regard  the  figure  of  the  men,  or  the 
exactness  of  their  discipline. 

Yesterday  also  arrived,   from   his  special    mission 

1  From  the  Madison  Papers  (1840). 


i5 2  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1781 

to  the  Court  of  France,  Colonel  John  Laurens. 
Although  his  success  has  not  been  fully  commensu 
rate  to  our  wishes,  he  has  brought  with  him  very 
substantial  proofs  of  the  determination  of  that  Court 
to  support  us.  Besides  a  considerable  quantity  of 
clothing  and  other  valuable  articles,  there  are  up 
wards  of  sixteen  thousand  stand  of  arms.  It  is 
rather  unlucky  that  they  found  it  expedient  to  put 
into  Boston,  instead  of  this  place,  from  whence  the 
distribution  of  them  would  have  been  so  much  more 
easy. 

I  wish  I  could  have  concluded  the  intelligence 
without  adding  that  Admiral  Hood,  with  thirteen 
sail  of  the  line  from  the  West  Indies,  lately  arrived 
at  New  York,  and  after  being  joined  by  Graves 
with  eight  ships,  put  again  immediately  to  sea.  The 
French  squadron  under  De  Barras  had  previously 
sailed  from  Newport.  As  the  expected  arrival  of 
De  Grasse  from  the  West  Indies  could  not  be  un 
known  to  Hood,  there  is  little  doubt  that  his  activity 
is  directed  against  the  junction  of  the  two  French 
fleets. 


TO   EDMUND  PENDLETON.  MAD.  MASS. 

PHILAD^,  Sep^   18*  1781. 

DEAR  SIR, — I  was  yesterday  favored  with  yours  of 
the  loth  instant.  The  various  reports  arrived  of  late 
from  the  Chesapeake  prepared  us  for  a  confirmation 
from  our  correspondents  of  a  fortunate  rencontre 
between  the  2  fleets.  A  continuation  of  these  re 
ports  although  unsupported  by  any  authentic  evi- 


1781]  JAMES  MADISON.  153 

dence  still  keeps  up  the  public  anxiety.  We  have 
not  heard  a  word  of  de  Barras.  The  arrival  of  Digby 
is  far  from  being  certain,  and  the  circulating  reports 
have  reduced  his  force  to  six  ships  of  the  line.  The 
preparations  at  New  York  for  some  movement  are 
pretty  well  attested.  The  conjectures  of  many  are 
directing  it  against  this  City,  as  the  most  practicable 
&  important  object  within  the  reach  of  Clinton. 
The  successful  blow  struck  by  the  parricide  Arnold 
against  the  Town  of  New  London  is  described,  as 
far  as  the  particulars  are  known  here  in  the  enclosed 
Gazette.  There  have  been  several  arrivals  of  late 
from  Europe  with  very  little  intelligence  of  any  kind 
&  with  none  from  official  sources.  It  all  relates  to 
the  junction  of  the  French  &  Spanish  fleets,  for  the 
purpose  of  renewing  the  investiture  of  Gibraltar,  and 
enterprising  something  against  Minorca.  Thus  the 
selfish  projects  of  Spain  not  only  withholds  from  us 
the  co-operation  of  their  armaments,  but  divert  in 
part  that  of  our  allies,  &  yet  we  are  to  reward  her 
with  a  cession  of  what  constitutes  the  value  of  the 
finest  part  of  America. 

Gen1.  Washington  &  the  Count  de  Rochambeau, 
with  the  forces  under  them  have  I  presume  by  this 
time  got  within  Virginia.  This  revolution  in  our 
military  plan  cannot  fail  to  produce  great  advantages 
to  the  Southern  department  and  particularly  to  Vir 
ginia,  even  if  the  immediate  object  of  it  should  be 
unexpectedly  frustrated.  The  presence  of  the  Com 
mander  in  chief  with  the  proportion  of  our  forces 
which  will  always  attend  him,  will  better  protect  the 


154  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1781 

country  against  the  depredations  of  the  Enemy 
although  he  should  be  followed  by  troops  from  N.  Y. 
which  w?  otherwise  remain  there,  than  it  has  hitherto 
been,  will  leave  the  militia  more  at  leisure  to  pursue 
their  occupations  at  the  same  time  that  the  demands 
of  the  armies  will  afford  a  sure  market  for  the  surplus 
provisions  of  the  country,  will  diffuse  among  them  a 
share  of  the  gold  &  silver  of  our  ally  &  I  may  now 
say  of  our  own  of  w0!1  their  Northern  Brethren  have 
hitherto  had  a  monopoly  which  will  be  peculiarly 
grateful  to  them  after  having  been  so  long  gorged 
with  depreciating  paper ;  and  as  we  may  suppose 
that  the  ships  of  our  ally  allotted  for  our  service  will 
so  long  as  his  troops  remain  in  the  U.  States  be  kept 
in  the  Chesapeake,  it  will  revive  the  trade  thro'  that 
channel,  reduce  the  price  of  imported  necessaries  & 
raise  the  staple  of  the  Country  once  more  to  its 
proper  value.  I  am,  etc. 


TO  EDMUND  PENDLETON.  MAD.  MSS. 

PHI  LA,  October  2,  1781. 

DEAR  SIR, — Yours  of  the  24th  ult?  came  safe  by 
yesterday's  post.  In  addition  to  the  paper  of  this  day 
I  enclose  you  two  of  the  preceding  week  in  one  of 
which  you  will  find  a  very  entertaining  &  interesting 
speech  of  Mr.  Fox,  and  in  the  other  a  handsome  for 
ensic  discussion  of  a  case  important  in  itself  and 
which  has  some  relation  to  the  State  of  Virginia. 

Our  intelligence  from  N  Y.  through  several  chan 
nels  confirms  the  sufferings  of  the  B.  fleet  from  their 
rash  visit  to  the  Capes  of  Chesapeak.  The  troops 


1781]  JAMES  MADISON.  155 

which  were  kept  in  Transports  to  await  that  event 
have  since  the  return  of  the  fleet  been  put  on  shore 
on  Staten  Island.  This  circumstance  has  been  con 
strued  into  a  preliminary  to  any  expedition  to  this 
City,  which  had  revived,  till  within  a  few  days  the 
preparation  for  a  militia  opposition,  but  is  better  ex 
plained  by  the  raging  of  a  malignant  fever  in  the  City 
of  N  Y.  Digby  we  hear  is  now  certainly  arrived  but 
with  three  ships  of  the  line  only.  It  is  given  out  that 
three  more  with  a  large  number  of  Transports  came 
with  him  and  that  they  only  lay  back  till  it  was  known 
whether  they  could  proceed  to  N.  Y.  with  safety. 
This  is  not  improbably  suspected  to  be  a  trick  to  pal 
liate  the  disappointment  and  to  buoy  up  the  sinking 
hopes  of  their  adherents,  the  most  staunch  of  whom 
give  up  Lord  Cornwallis  as  irretrievably  lost. 

We  have  received  some  communications  from  Eu 
rope  relative  to  the  general  state  of  its  affairs.  They 
all  center  in  three  important  points  ;  the  first  is  the 
obstinacy  of  G.  B,  the  second  the  fidelity  of  our  ally, 
and  the  third  the  absolute  necessity  of  vigorous  & 
systematic  preparations  for  war  on  our  part  in  order 
to  ensure  a  speedy  as  well  as  favorable  peace.  The 
wisdom  of  the  Legislature  of  Virginia  will  I  flatter 
myself,  not  only  prevent  an  illusion  from  the  present 
brilliant  prospects,  but  take  advantage  of  the  military 
ardor  and  sanguine  hopes  of  the  people  to  recruit 
their  line  for  the  war.  The  introduction  of  specie  will 
also  I  hope  be  made  subservient  to  some  salutary  op 
erations  in  their  finances.  Another  great  object  which 
in  my  opinion  claims  an  immediate  attention  from 


156  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1781 

them,  is  some  liberal  provision  for  extending  the  bene 
fits  of  Government  to  the  distant  parts  of  the  State. 
I  am  not  able  to  see  why  this  cannot  be  done,  so  as 
fully  to  satisfy  the  exigencies  of  the  people  and  at  the 
same  time  preserve  the  idea  of  Unity  in  the  State. 
Any  plan  which  divides  in  any  manner  the  Sover 
eignty  may  be  dangerous  &  precipitate  an  evil  which 
ought  &  may  at  least  be  long  procrastinated.  The 
administration  of  justice  which  is  the  capital  branch 
may  certainly  be  diffused  sufficiently  and  kept  in  due 
subordination  in  every  part  to  one  supreme  tribunal. 
Separate  boards  for  auditing  accounts  may  also  be 
admitted  with  safety  &  propriety.  The  same  as  to  a 
separate  depository  for  the  taxes  &c.,  and  as  to  a  land 
office.  The  military  powers  of  the  Executive,  may 
well  be  intrusted  to  militia  officers  of  Rank,  as  far  as 
the  defence  of  the  country  &  the  custody  of  military 
stores  make  it  necessary.  A  complete  organization 
of  the  militia,  in  which  Gen1-  officers  would  be  erected 
would  greatly  facilitate  this  part  of  the  plan.  Such 
an  one  with  a  council  of  Field  officers,  might  exercise 
without  encroaching  on  the  Constitutional  powers  of 
the  Supreme  Executive,  all  the  powers  over  the  mili 
tia  which  any  emergency  could  demand. 
I  am,  etc. 


TO  EDMUND  PENDLETON.  MAD.  MSS. 

PHILAD*  Oct!  9°?,  1781. 

D?  SIR, — Having  sent  you  the  arguments  on  one 
side  of  the  judiciary  question  relating  to  the  property 
of  Virg?  seized  by  Mr.  Nathan,  it  is  but  reasonable 


i78i]  JAMES  MADISON.  157 

that  you  should  see  what  was  contended  on  the  other 
side.  With  this  view,  although  I  in  some  measure 
usurp  the  task  of  Mr.  Jones,  I  enclose  the  paper  of 
Wednesday  last.  As  it  may  escape  Mr.  Jones  I  also 
enclose  a  copy  of  Mr.  Adams  memorial  to  the  States 
General.  I  wish  I  could  have  informed  you  of  its  be 
ing  lodged  in  the  archives  of  their  High  Mightinesses 
instead  of  presenting  it  to  you  in  print. 
I  am,  Dr  Sir,  etc. 


TO  EDMUND  PENDLETON.  MAD.  MSS. 

PHILAD*  Oc*   i6th,  1781. 

DEAR  SIR, — When  you  get  a  sight  of  the  Resolu 
tion  of  the  Gen.  Ass.  referred  to  in  your  favor  of  the 
8th,  you  will  readily  judge  from  the  tenor  of  it  what 
steps  would  be  taken  by  the  Delegates.1  It  necessar 
ily  submitted  the  fate  of  the  object  in  question  to  the 
discretion  and  prospects  of  the  Gentleman 2  whom  re 
ports  it  seems  have  arraigned  to  you,  but  who  I  am 
bound  in  justice  to  testify  has  entirely  supported  the 
character  which  he  formerly  held  with  you.  I  am 
somewhat  surprised  that  you  never  had  before  known 
of  the  Resolution  just  mentioned,  especially  as,  what 
is  indeed  more  surprising,  it  was  both  debated  & 
passed  with  open  doors  and  a  full  gallery.  This  cir- 

1  The  Legislature  of  Virginia  instructed  her  delegates  November  5,  1779,  to 
use  their  utmost  endeavors  to  maintain  the  freedom  of  the  Mississippi.  On 
January  2,  1781,  these  instructions  were  modified,  the  navigation  to  be  claimed 
only  co-extensively  with  our  territory  and  "every  further  or  other  demand  of  the 
said  navigation  be  ceded,  if  insisting  on  the  same  is  deemed  an  impediment 
to  a  treaty  with  Spain." — Rives,  i.,  247,  248. 

"  John  Jay,  Minister  to  Spain. 


158  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1781 

cumstance  alone  must  have  defeated  any  reservations 
attached  to  it. 

The  N.  York  papers  and  the  intelligence  from 
thence  make  it  evident  that  they  have  no  hope  of  re 
lieving  Cornwallis,  unless  it  can  be  effected  by  some 
desperate  naval  experiment  and  that  such  an  one  will 
be  made.  Their  force  will  probably  amount  to  26 
sail  of  the  line,  and  if  we  are  not  misinformed  as  to 
the  late  arrival  of  three  ships  of  the  line  to  29  sail. 
The  superiority  still  remaining  on  the  part  of  our 
Allies  and  the  repeated  proofs  given  of  their  skill  & 
bravery  on  the  water  forbid  any  apprehension  of  dan 
ger.  At  the  same  time  we  cannot  help  calculating  that 
every  addition  to  the  British  force  proportionally  dim 
inishes  the  certainty  of  success.  A  fleet  of  provisions 
amounting  to  about  40  sail  convoyed  by  a  44  &  2  frig 
ates  have  arrived  at  N.  York  within  the  week  past. 

Having  sent  all  the  papers  containing  the  proceed 
ings  on  the  case  of  Mr.  N.  ags.'  V.  as  they  came  out, 
I  shall  to  complete  your  view  of  it  add  the  last  effort 
in  his  favor  published  in  the  enclosed  No.  of  the 
Freemans  Journal.  I  am  told  however  that  the  pub 
lisher  ought  to  have  subjoined  that  the  privy  Coun 
cil  interposed  &  directed  restitution  of  the  King  of 
Spain's  effects.  I  am,  etc. 


TO    EDMUND    PENDLETON.1 

PHILADELPHIA,  October  30,  1781. 

DEAR  SIR, — I  return  you  my  fervent  congratula 
tions  on  the  glorious  success  of  the  combined  arms 

1  From  the  Madison  Papers  (1840.) 


1781]  JAMES  MADISON.  159 

at  York  and  Gloucester.  We  have  had  from  the 
Commander-in-Chief  an  official  report  of  the  fact, 
with  a  copy  of  the  capitulation,  and  a  general  intima 
tion  that  the  number  of  prisoners,  excluding  seamen, 
&c.,  would  exceed  five  thousand  ;  but  no  detail  of 
our  gains.  If  these  severe  doses  of  ill  fortune  do  not 
cool  the  phrenzy  and  relax  the  pride  of  Britain,  it 
would  seem  as  if  Heaven  had  in  reality  abandoned 
her  to  her  folly  and  her  fate.  This  campaign  was 
grounded  on  the  most  intense  exertion  of  her  pecuni 
ary  resources.  Upwards  of  twenty  millions  were 
voted  by  the  Parliament.  The  King  acknowledged 
that  it  was  all  he  asked,  and  all  that  was  necessary. 
A  fair  trial  has  been  made  of  her  strength  ;  and  what 
is  the  result  ?  They  have  lost  another  army,  another 
colony,  another  island,  and  another  fleet  of  her  trade ; 
their  possessions  in  the  East  Indies,  which  were  so 
rich  a  source  of  their  commerce  and  credit,  have  been 
severed  from  them,  perhaps  for  ever  ;  their  naval  arm 
aments,  the  bulwarks  of  their  safety,  and  the  idols  of 
their  vanity,  have  in  every  contest  felt  the  rising  su 
periority  of  their  enemies.  In  no  points  have  they 
succeeded,  except  in  the  predatory  conquest  of  Eus- 
tatia,  of  which  they  have  lost  the  greatest  part  of 
every  thing  except  the  infamy,  and  in  the  relief  of 
Gibraltar,  which  was  merely  a  negative  advantage. 
With  what  hope  or  with  what  view  can  they  try  the 
fortune  of  another  campaign  ?  Unless  they  can  draw 
succour  from  the  compassion  or  jealousy  of  other 
powers,  of  which  it  does  not  yet  appear  that  they 
have  any  well-founded  expectation,  it  seems  scarcely 


160  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1781 

possible  for  them  much  longer  to  shut  their  ears 
against  the  voice  of  peace. 

I  am  sorry  to  find  that  the  practice  of  impressing 
is  still  kept  up  with  you.  It  is  partial  and  oppressive 
with  respect  to  individuals,  and  I  wish  it  may  not 
eventually  prove  so  with  respect  to  the  State.  The 
zeal  and  liberality  of  those  States  which  make  undue 
advances,  may  not  find  an  equal  disposition  to  re-im- 
burse  them,  in  others  which  have  had  more  caution, 
or  less  occasion  for  such  exertions. 

You  are  not  mistaken  in  your  apprehensions  for 
our  Western  interests.  An  agrarian  law  is  as  much 
coveted  by  the  little  members  of  the  Union,  as  ever 
it  was  by  the  indigent  citizens  of  Rome.  The  condi 
tions  annexed  by  Virginia  to  her  territorial  cession 
have  furnished  a  committee  of  Congress  a  handle  for 
taking  up  questions  of  right,  both  with  respect  to  the 
ceding  States,  and  the  great  Land  Companies,  which 
they  have  not  before  ventured  to  touch.  We  have 
made  every  opposition  and  remonstrance  to  the  con 
duct  of  the  committee  which  the  forms  of  proceedings 
will  admit.  When  a  report  is  made,  we  shall  renew 
our  efforts  upon  more  eligible  ground,  but  with  little 
hope  of  arresting  any  aggression  upon  Virginia  which 
depends  solely  on  the  inclination  of  Congress.  Since 
the  close  of  the  Confederation,  however,  it  has  been 
understood,  that  seven  votes  are  necessary  to  carry 
every  question.  This  rule,  in  proportion  to  the  thin 
ness  of  Congress,  opposes  a  difficulty  to  those  who 
attack.  It  will  therefore,  I  believe,  be  impossible  for 
the  enemies  of  Virginia  to  obtain  any  positive  injury 


i78i]  JAMES  MADISON.  161 

to  her  rights.  My  greatest  anxiety  at  present  is,  lest 
the  attempts  for  that  purpose  may  exasperate  the 
Assembly  into  measures  which  will  furnish  new 
hopes  to  the  British  Court  to  persevere  in  the  war, 
and  new  baits  for  the  credulity  of  the  British  nation. 
The  good  sense  of  the  Assembly  will,  however,  I 
flatter  myself,  temper  every  expression  of  their  dis 
pleasure  with  due  respect  to  this  consideration.  It 
would  be  particularly  unhappy,  if  any  symptoms  of 
disunion  among  ourselves  should  blast  the  golden 
prospects  which  the  events  of  the  campaign  have 
opened  to  us. 

TO    EDMUND    PENDLETON.1 

PHILADELPHIA,  November  13,  1781. 

DEAR  SIR, — Nothing  definitive  has  taken  place  on 
the  territorial  cessions.  That  of  Virginia  will  not,  I 
believe,  be  accepted  with  the  conditions  annexed  to  it. 
The  opinion  seems  to  be,  that  an  acceptance  of  the 
cession  of  New  York  will  give  Congress  a  title  which 
will  be  maintainable  against  all  the  other  claimants. 
In  this,  however,  they  will  certainly  be  deceived  ;  and 
even  if  it  were  otherwise,  it  would  be  their  true  inter 
est,  as  well  as  conformable  to  the  plan  on  which  the 
cessions  were  recommended,  to  bury  all  further  con 
tentions  by  covering  the  territory  with  the  titles  of  as 
many  of  the  claimants  as  possible.  We  are  very 
anxious  to  bring  the  matter  to  issue,  that  the  State 
may  know  what  course  their  honor  and  security 
require  them  to  take.  The  present  thinness  of  Con- 

1  From  the  Madison  Papers  (1840). 


1 62  THE   WRITINGS  OF  [1781 

gress  makes  it  but  too  uncertain  when  we  shall  be  able 
to  accomplish  it. 

Will  not  the  Assembly  pay  some  handsome  com 
pliments  to  the  Marquis,  for  his  judicious  and  zealous 
services  whilst  the  protection  of  the  country  was  en 
trusted  to  him?  His  having  baffled,  and  finally 
reduced  to  the  defensive,  so  powerful  an  army  as  we 
now  know  he  had  to  contend  with,  and  with  so  dis 
proportionate  a  force,  would  have  done  honor  to  the 
most  veteran  officer,  added  to  his  other  merits  and 
services,  constitutes  a  claim  on  their  gratitude  which 
I  hope  will  not  be  unattended  to. 


TO    THOMAS    JEFFERSON.1 

PHILADELPHIA,  November  18,  1781. 

DEAR  SIR, — By  the  conveyance  through  which  you 
will  receive  this,  the  Delegates  have  communicated  to 
the  State  the  proceedings  in  Congress  to  which  the 
territorial  cessions  have  given  birth.  The  complexion 
of  them  will,  I  suppose,  be  somewhat  unexpected,  and 
produce  no  small  irritation.  They  clearly  speak  the 
hostile  machinations  of  some  of  the  States  against  our 
territorial  claims,  and  afford  suspicions  that  the  pre 
dominant  temper  of  Congress  may  coincide  with  them. 
It  is  proper  to  recollect,  however,  that  the  report  of 
the  Committee  having  not  yet  been  taken  into  con 
sideration,  no  certain  inference  can  be  drawn  as  to  its 
issue  ;  and  that  the  report  itself  is  not  founded  on  the 
obnoxious  doctrine  of  an  inherent  right  in  the  United 

1  From  the  Madison  papers  (1840). 


1781]  JAMES  MADISON.  163 

States  to  the  territory  in  question,  but  on  the  expedi 
ency  of  clothing  them  with  the  title  of  New  York, 
which  is  supposed  to  be  maintainable  against  all 
others.  It  is  proper  also  to  be  considered,  that  the 
proceedings  of  the  Committee,  which  we  labored  in 
vain  to  arrest,  were  vindicated  not  by  the  pretext  of 
a  jurisdiction  belonging  to  Congress  in  such  cases, 
but  alleged  to  have  been  made  necessary  by  the  con 
ditions  annexed  to  the  cession  of  Virginia.  Although 
the  cession  of  Virginia  will  probably  be  rejected,  on 
the  whole,  I  do  not  think  it  probable  that  all  the 
principles  and  positions  contained  in  the  report  of  the 
Committee  will  be  ratified.  The  Committee  was 
composed  of  a  member  from  Maryland,  Pennsylvania, 
New  Jersey,  Rhode  Island  and  New  Hampshire  ;  all 
of  which  States,  except  the  last,  are  systematically 
and  notoriously  adverse  to  the  claims  of  Western 
Territory,  and  particularly  those  of  Virginia.  The 
opinion  of  the  Committee  is  therefore  no  just  index 
of  the  opinion  of  Congress  ;  and  it  is  a  rule  observed 
since  the  Confederation  was  completed,  that  seven 
States  are  requisite  in  any  question,  and  there  are 
seldom  more  than  seven,  eight,  nine  or  ten  States 
present ;  even  the  opinion  of  a  majority  of  Congress 
is  a  very  different  thing  from  a  constitutional  vote. 
I  mention  these  particulars,  that  you  may  be  the  better 
able  to  counteract  any  intemperate  measures  that  may 
be  urged  in  the  Legislature.  If  the  State  wishes  any 
particular  steps  to  be  pursued  by  the  Delegates,  it 
would  be  well  for  particular  instructions  to  that  effect 
to  be  given.  These  will  not  only  be  a  guide  to  us, 


1 64  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1781 

but  will  give  greater  weight  to  whatever  is  urged 
by  us. 

I  enclose  you  a  paper  containing  two  of  the  many 
letters  lately  published  in  New  York,  with  the  sub 
scription  of  Mr.  Deane's  name.  The  genuineness  of 
some  of  them,  and  particularly  that  to  Mr.  Morris,  is 
generally  doubted.  There  are  some  who  think  the 
whole  of  them  spurious.  However  this  may  be,  there 
is,  through  another  channel,  indubitable  proof  that  no 
injustice  is  done  in  ascribing  to  him  the  sentiments 
advanced  in  these  letters.  Either  from  pique,  in 
terested  projects  of  trade,  or  a  traitorous  correspond 
ence  with  the  enemy,  he  has  certainly  apostatized 
from  his  first  principles. 


TO   EDMUND  PENDLETON.  MAD.  MSS. 

PHILA,  Nov.  27th,  1781. 

DEAR  SIR, — Your  favor  of  the  19*  instant  came 
to  hand  yesterday.  On  the  same  evening  arrived 
our  illustrious  General  returning  to  his  position  on 
the  North  river.  We  shall  probably  however  have 
his  company  here  for  some  days  at  least,  where  he 
will  be  able  to  give  Congress  very  seasonable  aid  in 
settling  the  military  establishment  for  the  next  year, 
about  which  there  is  some  diversity  of  opinion 
Whatever  the  total  requisition  of  men  may  be  on  the 
States,  I  cannot  but  wish  that  Virginia  may  take 
effectual  measures  for  bringing  into  the  field  her 
proportion  of  them.  One  reason  for  this  wish  is 
the  calumnies  which  her  enemies  ground  on  her 
present  deficiency,  but  the  principal  one  is  the  influ- 


1781]  JAMES  MADISON.  165 

ence  that  such  an  exertion  may  have  in  preventing  in 
sults  &  aggressions  from  whatever  quarter  they  may  be 
meditated,  by  shewing  that  we  are  able  to  defy  them. 

The  Delegates  have  lately  transmitted  to  the  Gov1; 
for  the  Assembly  all  the  proceedings  which  have 
taken  place  on  the  Subject  of  the  territorial  cessions. 
The  tenor  of  them  &  the  reception  given  them  by 
the  assembly  will  I  doubt  not  be  communicated  to 
you  by  some  of  your  correspondents  in  it. 

There  is  pretty  good  reason  to  believe  that  a 
descent  on  Minorca  has  actually  taken  place.  It  is 
a  little  problematical  with  me  whether  successes 
against  G.  B.  in  any  other  quarter  except  America 
tend  much  to  hasten  a  peace.  If  they  increase  her 
general  distress  they  at  the  same  time  increase  those 
demands  against  her  which  are  likely  to  impede  ne 
gotiations,  &  her  hopes  from  the  sympathy  of  other 
powers.  They  are  favorable  to  us  however  in  making- 
it  more  the  interest  of  all  the  belligerent  powers  to  re 
ject  the  uti  possidetis  as  the  basis  of  a  pacification. 

The  report  of  Rodney's  capture  never  deserved 
the  attention  it  seems  which  was  given  to  it. 

I  am,  etc. 


TO   EDMUND   PENDLETON.  MAD.  MSS. 

PHIL.,  D'  nth,  1781. 

DEAR  SIR, — I  am  favored  with  yours  of  the  3d  in 
stant.  Other  letters  by  the  same  conveyance  confirm 
your  report  of  the  election  of  Mr.  Harrison  to  the  chief 
magistracy.  Several  other  appointments  are  men 
tioned  which  I  make  no  doubt  are  all  well  known  to  you. 


1 66  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1781 

On  whichever  side  Mr.  Deanes  letters  are  viewed 
they  present  mysteries.  Whether  they  be  supposed 
genuine  or  spurious  or  a  mixture  of  both  difficulties 
which  cannot  well  be  answered  may  be  started.  There 
are  however  passages  in  some  of  them  which  can 
scarcely  be  imputed  to  any  other  hand.  But  it  is  un 
necessary  to  rely  on  these  publications  for  the  real  char 
acter  of  the  man.  There  is  evidence  of  his  obliquity 
which  has  for  a  considerable  time  been  conclusive. 

Congress  have  not  resumed  their  proceedings  on 
the  Western  business.  They  have  agreed  on  a  re 
quisition  on  the  States  for  8,000,000  of  Dollars  &  a 
completion  of  their  lines  according  to  the  last  estab 
lishment  of  the  army.  We  endeavored,  tho'  with  very 
little  effect  to  obtain  deductions  in  the  first  article 
from  the  quota  of  Virginia  but  we  did  not  oppose  the 
aggregate  of  the  demand  in  either.  If  we  do  not 
obtain  a  sufficiency  of  men  &  money  from  the  States 
by  regular  &  duly  appointed  calls  we  know  by  ex 
perience  that  the  burden  of  the  war  will  fall  on  the 
resources  of  the  States  wc.h  happen  to  be  subject  of  it. 

Mr.  Moore  late  Vice  Preside  has  been  elected 
Preside  of  this  State  in  place  of  Mr.  Reed  whose 
period  of  eligibility  was  out.  I  am,  etc. 


TO  EDMUND  PENDLETON.  MAD.  MSS. 

PHILADA  Dec.  25th,  1781. 

DEAR  SIR, — You  only  do  me  justice  in  ascribing 
your  disappointment  in  the  part  of  the  week  preced 
ing  your  favor  of  the  16^  instant,  to  some  other 
cause  than  my  neglect.  If  I  were  less  disposed  to 


1782]  JAMES  MADISON.  167 

punctuality  your  example  w<?  preserve  me  from  trans 
gressing  it.  As  the  last  letter  went  to  the  post  of 
fice  here  &  you  did  not  receive  it  from  the  post  in 
Virg%  the  delinquency  must  have  happened  in  that 
line.  It  is  however  I  believe  of  little  consequence, 
as  I  do  not  recollect  that  any  thing  material  has 
been  contained  in  my  letters  for  several  weeks,  any 
more  than  there  will  be  in  this  in  which  I  have  little 
else  to  say  than  to  tender  you  the  compliments  of 
the  day.  Perhaps  indeed  it  will  be  new  to  you  what 
appeared  here  in  a  paper  several  days  ago,  that 
the  success  of  Comodore  Johnstone  in  taking  5  Duch 
E.  India  men  homeward  bound  &  destroying  a  6*  is 
confirmed.  Whatever  may  be  thought  of  this  stroke 
of  fortune  by  him  &  his  rapacious  crew,  the  Ministry 
will  hardly  think  it  a  compensation  to  the  public  for 
the  danger  to  which  the  remains  of  their  possessions 
in  the  East  will  be  exposed  by  the  failure  of  his 
Expedition. 

It  gives  me  great  pleasure  to  hear  of  the  honor 
able  acquittal  of  Mf  Jefferson.  I  know  his  abilities, 
&  I  think  I  know  his  fidelity  &  zeal  for  his  Country 
so  well,  that  I  am  persuaded  it  was  a  just  one.  We 
are  impatient  to  know  whether  he  will  undertake  the 
new  service  to  which  he  is  called.  I  am,  etc. 


TO    EDMUND    PENDLETON.1 

PHILADELPHIA,  January  8,  1782. 

DEAR  SIR, — Yesterday  was  opened,   for   the    first 
time,  the  Bank  instituted  under  the  auspices  of  Con- 

1  From  the  Madison  Papers  (1840). 


i68  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1782 

gress.  Its  principal  founder  is  Mr.  Robert  Morris, 
who  has  certain  prerogatives  with  respect  to  it  in  his 
quality  of  Superintendent  of  Finance.  It  is  pretty 
analogous  in  its  principles  to  the  Bank  of  England. 
The  stock  subscribed  is  400,000  dollars.  When  the 
scheme  was  originally  proposed  to  Congress  for  their 
approbation  and  patronage,  a  promise  was  given  that 
as  soon  as  it  was  ripe  for  operation  the  company 
should  be  incorporated.  A  few  days  ago  the  fulfil 
ment  of  the  promise  was  claimed.  The  competency 
of  Congress  to  such  an  act  had  been  called  in  question 
in  the  first  instance ;  but  the  subject  not  lying  in  so 
near  and  distinct  a  view,  the  objections  did  not  pre 
vail.  On  the  last  occasion,  the  general  opinion, 
though  with  some  exceptions,  was,  that  the  Confeder 
ation  gave  no  such  power,  and  that  the  exercise  of  it 
would  not  bear  the  test  of  a  forensic  disquisition,  and 
consequently  would  not  avail  the  Institution.  The 
Bank,  however,  supposing  that  such  a  sanction  from 
Congress  would  at  least  give  it  a  dignity  and  pre 
eminence  in  the  public  opinion,  urged  the  engagement 
of  Congress  ;  that  on  this  engagement  the  subscrip 
tions  had  been  made,  and  that  a  disappointment  would 
leave  the  subscribers  free  to  withdraw  their  names. 
These  considerations  were  re-inforced  by  the  Super 
intendent  of  Finance,  who  relied  on  this  Institution 
as  a  great  auxiliary  to  his  department ;  and,  in  par 
ticular,  expected  aid  from  it  in  a  payment  he  is  exert 
ing  himself  to  make  to  the  army.  The  immediate 
interposition  of  Congress  was  rendered  the  more 
essential,  too,  by  the  sudden  adjournment  of  the 


1782]  JAMES  MADISON.  169 

Assembly  of  this  State,  to  whom  the  Bank  might 
have  been  referred  for  the  desired  incorporation, 
which,  it  was  the  opinion  of  many,  would  have  given 
them  a  sufficient  legal  existence  in  every  State.  You 
will  conceive  the  dilemma  in  which  these  circum 
stances  placed  the  members  who  felt  on  one  side  the 
importance  of  the  Institution,  and  on  the  other  a  want 
of  power,  and  an  aversion  to  assume  it.  Something 
like  a  middle  way  finally  produced  an  acquiescing, 
rather  than  an  affirmative,  vote.  A  charter  of  in 
corporation  was  granted,  with  a  recommendation  to 
the  States  to  give  it  all  the  necessary  validity  within 
their  respective  jurisdictions.  As  this  is  a  tacit  ad 
mission  of  a  defect  of  power,  I  hope  it  will  be  an 
antidote  against  the  poisonous  tendency  of  precedents 
of  usurpation. 

In  the  ordinance  lately  passed  for  regulating  cap 
tures,  which  I  presume  you  have  seen,  a  clause  was 
inserted  exposing  to  capture  all  merchandizes  pro 
duced  in  Great  Britain,  if  coming  into  these  States, 
and  within  three  leagues  of  the  coast,  although  the 
property  of  a  neutral  nation.  Congress  have  now 
recommended  to  the  States  to  subject  them  to  seizure, 
during  the  war,  if  found  on  land  within  their  respect 
ive  limits.  These  measures  had  become  necessary  to 
check  an  evil  which  was  every  day  increasing,  and 
which  both  enabled  and  encouraged  Great  Britain  to 
persevere  in  the  war,  at  the  same  time  that  it  mortified 
our  ally  with  daily  seeing  the  fruits  of  his  generosity 
to  us  remitted  in  payment  to  the  rival  of  his  nation 
and  the  enemy  of  both. 


i7o  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1782 

TO    THOMAS    JEFFERSON.1 

PHILADELPHIA,  January  15,  1782. 

DEAR  SIR, — The  result  of  the  attack  on  your  ad 
ministration  was  so  fully  anticipated  that  it  made 
little  impression  on  me.2  If  it  had  been  consistent 
with  your  sentiments  and  views  to  engage  in  the 
service  to  which  you  were  called,  it  would  have 
afforded  me  both  unexpected  and  singular  satisfac 
tion,  not  only  from  the  personal  interest  I  felt  in  it, 
but  from  the  important  aid  which  the  interest  of  the 
State  would  probably  have  derived  from  it.  What  I 
particularly  refer  to  is  her  claim  to  Western  territory. 
The  machinations  which  have  long  been  practised  by 
interested  individuals  against  this  claim,  are  well 
known  to  you.  The  late  proceedings  within  the 
walls  of  Congress,  in  consequence  of  the  territorial 
cessions,  produced  by  their  recommendations  to  the 
States  claiming  the  Western  country,  were,  many 
weeks  ago,  transmitted  for  the  Legislature  by  a  Cap 
tain  Irish.  By  the  same  conveyance  I  wrote  to  you 
on  the  subject.  We  have  the  mortification  to  find, 
by  our  latest  letters  from  Richmond,  that  this  gentle 
man  had  not,  at  the  date  of  them,  appeared  there. 
As  it  is  uncertain  whether  that  information  may  not 
have  totally  miscarried,  it  will  be  proper  to  repeat  to 
you  that  the  States,  besides  Virginia,  from  which  the 
cessions  came,  were  Connecticut  and  New  York, 

1  From  the  Madison  Papers  (1840). 

2  June  5,  1781,  the  Virginia  Assembly  ordered  an  investigation  of  Jefferson's 
administration  as  Governor.     It  resulted  in  a  favorable  report.     He  was  ap 
pointed  a  Peace  Commissioner  by  Congress  June  14  and  declined  June  30. 


1782]  JAMES  MADISON.  171 

The  cession  of  the  former  consisted  of  all  her  claim 
west  of  New  York  as  far  as  the  Mississippi.  That  of 
the  latter,  of  all  her  claims  beyond  a  certain  western 
limit,  drawn  on  the  occasion.  The  cession  of  Con 
necticut  extended  to  the  soil  only,  expressly  reserv 
ing  the  jurisdiction.  That  of  New  York  made  no 
reservation.  These  cessions,  with  that  of  Virginia, 
and  sundry  memorials  from  the  Indiana  and  other 
land  companies,  were  referred  to  a  committee,  com 
posed  of  a  member  from  New  Hampshire,  Rhode 
Island,  New  Jersey,  Pennsylvania  and  Maryland. 
The  ingredients  of  this  composition  prepared  us  for 
the  complexion  of  their  proceedings.  Their  first  step 
was  to  investigate  and  discuss  the  respective  titles  of 
the  States  to  the  territory  ceded.  As  this  was  directly 
in  the  face  of  the  recommendation  of  Congress,  which 
professed  to  bury  all  such  discussions,  and  might 
prejudge  future  controversies  between  individual 
members  of  the  Union,  we  refused  to  exhibit  any 
evidence  in  favor  of  the  title  of  Virginia,  and  endeav 
ored,  though  in  vain,  to  prevail  on  Congress  to  inter 
dict  the  Committee  from  proceeding  in  the  inquiry. 
The  next  step  of  the  Committee  was  still  more 
obnoxious.  They  went  fully  into  a  hearing  of  the 
memorialists  through  their  agent,  and  received  all 
the  evidence  adduced  in  support  of  their  pretensions. 
On  this  occasion  we  renewed  our  remonstrances  to 
the  Committee,  and  our  complaints  to  Congress,  but 
with  as  little  effect  as  on  the  first  occasion.  The 
upshot  of  the  whole  was  a  report  to  Congress,  reject 
ing  the  cessions  of  Connecticut  and  Virginia,  and 


172  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1782 


accepting  that  of  New  York ;  disallowing  also  the 
claims  of  the  companies  northwest  of  the  Ohio,  but 
justifying  that  of  the  Indiana  company.  The  report 
seems  to  distrust  the  doctrine  hitherto  maintained,  of 
territorial  rights  being  incident  to  the  United  States 
collectively,  which  are  not  comprehended  within  any 
individual  State  ;  substituting  the  expedient  of  recog 
nizing  the  title  of  New  York,  stretching  over  the 
whole  country  claimed  by  the  other  ceding  States, 
and  then  accepting  a  transfer  of  it  to  the  United 
States.  In  this  state  the  business  now  rests — the 
report  having  never  been  taken  into  consideration  ; 
nor  do  we  wish  it  should,  till  it  shall  have  undergone 
the  consideration  of  Virginia. 

In  whatever  light  the  policy  of  this  proceeding 
may  be  viewed,  it  affords  an  additional  proof  of  the 
industry  and  perseverance  with  which  the  territorial 
rights  of  Virginia  are  persecuted,  and  of  the  neces 
sity  of  fortifying  them  with  every  precaution  which 
their  importance  demands.  As  a  very  obvious  and 
necessary  one,  we  long  since  recommended  to  the 
State  an  accurate  and  full  collection  of  the  docu 
ments  which  relate  to  the  subject.  If  the  arrival  of 
Captain  Irish  had  taken  place  before  the  adjourn 
ment  of  the  Assembly,  and  during  your  stay  with  it, 
we  flattered  ourselves  that  the  recommendation 
would  have  been  attended  to,  and  that  the  task 
would  have  fallen  on  you.  As  this  was  not  the  case, 
we  have  no  hope  at  present  of  being  enabled,  from 
any  other  sources  than  the  voluntary  aid  of  indi 
viduals,  to  contradict  even  verbally  the  misrepresen 
tations  and  calumnies  which  are  daily  levelled 


1782]  JAMES  MADISON.  173 


against  the  claims  of  Virginia,  and  which  cannot 
fail  to  prepossess  the  public  with  errors,  injurious  at 
present  to  her  reputation,  and  which  may  affect  a 
future  decision  on  her  rights.  Colonel  Mason's  in 
dustry  and  kindness  have  supplied  us  with  some 
valuable  papers  and  remarks.  Mr.  Jones  has  also 
received  from  Mr.  Pendleton  some  judicious  remarks 
on  the  subject.  We  are  still,  notwithstanding,  far 
from  possessing  a  complete  view  of  it.  Will  you 
permit  me  to  ask  of  you  such  information  as  your 
researches  have  yielded,  with  the  observations  which 
you  have  made  in  the  course  of  them.  I  would  not 
obtrude  such  a  request  on  you  if  the  subject  were 
not  of  public  importance,  and  if  it  could  have  been 
addressed  with  equal  prospect  of  advantage  else 
where.  Indeed,  if  you  could  prevail  on  yourself  to 
spare  as  much  time  as  would  survey  the  whole  sub 
ject,  beginning  with  the  original  charter,  pursuing 
it  through  the  subsequent  charters  and  other  public 
acts  of  the  crown,  through  the  government  of  Vir 
ginia,  and  referring  to  all  the  transactions  with  the 
Indians  which  have  been  drawn  into  the  question, 
the  public  utility,  I  am  persuaded,  would  sufficiently 
reward  you  for  the  labor. 


TO    EDMUND     PENDLETON.1 

PHILADELPHIA,  January  22,  1782. 

DEAR  SIR, — Congress  are  much  occupied  and  per 
plexed  at  present  with  the  case  of  Vermont.  The 
pretensions  of  that  settlement  to  the  character  of  an 

1  From  the  Madison  Papers  (1840). 


i74  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1782 

independent  State,  with  the  grounds  on  which  they 
are  made,  and  the  countenance  given  them  by  Con 
gress,  are,  I  presume,  pretty  well  known  to  you.  It 
has  long  been  contended,  that  an  explicit  acknowledg 
ment  of  that  character,  and  an  admission  of  them 
into  the  Federal  Union,  was  an  act  both  of  justice 
and  policy.  The  discovery  made  through  several 
channels,  and  particularly  the  intercepted  letters  of 
Lord  G.  Germaine,  added  such  force  to  the  latter  of 
these  considerations,  that  in  the  course  of  last  sum 
mer  preliminary  overtures  were  made  on  the  part  of 
Congress  for  taking  them  into  the  Confederation, 
containing,  as  one  condition  on  the  part  of  Vermont, 
that  they  should  contract  their  claims  within  the 
bounds  to  which  they  were  originally  confined,  and 
guaranteeing  to  New  York  and  New  Hampshire  all 
the  territory  without  those  bounds  to  which  their 
encroachments  had  been  extended.  Instead  of  com 
plying  with  this  condition,  they  have  gone  on  in 
their  encroachments  both  on  the  New  York  and 
New  Hampshire  sides,  and  there  is  at  this  moment 
every  symptom  of  approaching  hostility  with  each  of 
them.  In  this  delicate  crisis,  the  interposition  of 
Congress  is  again  called  for,  and,  indeed,  seems  to  be 
indispensable  ;  but  whether  in  the  way  of  military 
coercion,  or  a  renewal  of  former  overtures,  or  by 
making  the  first  a  condition  of  a  refusal  of  the  last, 
is  not  so  unanimously  decided.  Indeed,  with  several 
members,  and,  I  may  say,  States  in  Congress,  a  want 
of  power  either  to  decide  on  their  independence,  or 
to  open  the  door  of  the  Confederacy  to  them,  is 


1782]  JAMES  MADISON.  175 

utterly  disclaimed  ;  besides  which  the  danger  of  the 
precedent,  and  the  preponderancy  it  would  give  to 
the  Eastern  scale,  deserve  serious  consideration. 
These  reasons,  nevertheless,  can  only  prevail  when 
the  alternative  contains  fewer  evils.  It  is  very  un 
happy  that  such  plausible  pretexts,  if  not  necessary 
occasions,  of  assuming  power  should  occur.  Nothing 
is  more  distressing  to  those  who  have  a  true  respect 
for  the  constitutional  modifications  of  power,  than  to 
be  obliged  to  decide  on  them. 


TO    EDMUND    RANDOLPH.1 


PHILADELPHIA,  January  22,  1782. 

DEAR  SIR, — The  repeal  of  the  impost  act  by  Vir 
ginia  is  still  considered  as  covered  with  some  degree 
of  mystery.  Colonel  Eland's  representations  do  not 
remove  the  veil.  Indeed,  he  seems  as  much  as 
tonished  at  it,  and  as  unable  to  penetrate  it,  as  any 
of  us.  Many  have  surmised  that  the  enmity  of  Doc 
tor  Lee  against  Morris  is  at  the  bottom  of  it.  But 
had  that  been  the  case,  it  can  scarcely  be  supposed 
that  the  repeal  would  have  passed  so  quietly.  By 
this  time,  I  presume,  you  will  be  able  to  furnish  me 
with  its  true  history,  and  I  ask  the  favor  of  you  to  do 
it.  Virginia  could  never  have  cut  off  this  source  of 
public  relief  at  a  more  unlucky  crisis  than  when  she 
is  protesting  her  inability  to  comply  with  the  conti 
nental  requisitions.  She  will,  I  hope,  be  yet  made 
sensible  of  the  impropriety  of  the  step  she  has  taken, 

1  From  the  Madison  Papers  (1840). 


1 76  THE   WRITINGS  OF  [1782 

and  make  amends  by  a  more  liberal  grant.  Congress 
cannot  abandon  the  plan  as  long  as  there  is  a  spark 
of  hope.  Nay,  other  plans  on  a  like  principle  must 
be  added.  Justice,  gratitude,  our  reputation  abroad, 
and  our  tranquillity  at  home,  require  provisions  for  a 
debt  of  not  less  than  fifty  millions  of  dollars,  and  I 
pronounce  that  this  provision  will  not  be  adequately 
met  by  separate  acts  of  the  States.  If  there  are 
not  revenue  laws  which  operate  at  the  same  time 
through  all  the  States,  and  are  exempt  from  the  con 
trol  of  each — the  mutual  jealousies  which  begin 
already  to  appear  among  them  will  assuredly  defraud 
both  our  foreign  and  domestic  creditors  of  their  just 
claims. 

The  deputies  of  the  army  are  still  here,  urging  the 
objects  of  their  mission.  Congress  are  thoroughly 
impressed  with  the  justice  of  them,  and  are  disposed 
to  do  everything  which  depends  on  them.  But  what 
can  a  Virginia  Delegate  say  to  them,  whose  constit 
uents  declare  that  they  are  unable  to  make  the  neces 
sary  contributions,  and  unwilling  to  establish  funds 
for  obtaining  them  elsewhere  ?  The  valuation  of 
lands  is  still  under  consideration. 


TO    EDMUND     PENDLETON.1 

PHILADELPHIA,  February  7,  1782. 

DEAR  SIR, — Congress  are  still  occupied  with  the 
thorny  subject  of  Vermont.  Some  plan  for  a  general 
liquidation  and  apportionment  of  the  public  debts  is 

1  From  the  Madison  Papers  (1840). 


1782]  JAMES  MADISON.  177 

also  under  their  consideration,  and  I  fear  will  be  little 
less  perplexing.  It  is  proposed  that  until  justice  and 
the  situation  of  the  States  will  admit  of  a  valuation 
of  lands,  the  States  should  be  applied  to  for  power  to 
substitute  such  other  rule  of  apportioning  the  expen 
ditures  as  shall  be  equitable  and  practicable,  and  that 
Commissioners  be  appointed  by  the  concurrent  act  of 
the  United  States  and  each  State,  to  settle  the 
accounts  between  them.  The  scheme  is  not  yet 
matured,  and  will  meet  with  many  difficulties  in  its 
passage  through  Congress.  I  wish  it  may  not  meet 
with  much  greater  when  it  goes  down  to  the  States. 
A  spirit  of  accommodation  alone  can  render  it  unani 
mously  admissible  ;  a  spirit  which  but  too  little  pre 
vails,  but  which  in  few  instances  is  more  powerfully 
recommended  by  the  occasion  than  the  present.  If 
our  voluminous  and  entangled  accounts  be  not  put 
into  some  certain  course  of  settlement  before  a 
foreign  war  is  off  our  hands,  it  is  easy  to  see  they 
must  prove  an  exuberant  and  formidable  source  of 
intestine  dissensions. 


TO  JAMES  MADISON.  MAD.  MSS. 

Feb.  12,  1782. 

HON?  SIR, — A  conveyance  by  a  waggon  returning 
to  your  neighbourhood  this  moment  presenting  itself 
I  make  use  of  it  to  forward  a  collection  of  papers 
which  have  accumulated  since  the  last  supply.  If 
there  are  any  deficiencies  be  so  good  as  to  point 
them  out  to  me.  By  the  same  conveyance  I  send  to 


VOL.    I. — 12 


178  THE   WRITINGS  OF  [1782 

M^  W.  Maury  4  English  grammars  the  price  of 
which  is  3  dollars  which  he  is  to  remit  thro'  you. 

The  disappointment  in  forwarding  the  money  by 
Mr.  Brownlow  has  been  sorely  felt  by  me,  and  the 
more  so  as  the  Legislature  has  made  no  provision 
for  the  subsistence  of  the  Delegates  that  can  be  re- 
lyed  on.1  I  hope  some  opportunity  will  soon  put  it 
in  your  power  to  renew  the  attempt  to  transmit  it,  & 
that  the  delay  will  have  made  considerable  addition 
to  it.  Besides  the  necessity  of  this  supply  for  the 
common  occasions,  I  have  frequent  opportunities 
here  of  purchasing  many  scarce  &  necessary  books 
at  -J-  of  the  price  which  if  to  be  had  at  all  they 
will  hereafter  cost  me.  If  an  immediate  conveyance 
does  not  present  itself  for  the  cash,  I  vjd.  recomend 
that  a  bill  of  exchange  on  some  merchant  here  be 
got  of  Mr.  Hunter,  Mr.  Maury  or  other  respectable 
merchant,  &  forwarded  by  the  post.  This  is  a  safer 
method  than  the  first  and  I  make  no  doubt  is  very 
practicable.  I  wish  at  all  events  the  trial  to  be 
made  &  that  speedily. 

I  recollect  nothing  new  which  is  not  contained  in 

1  J.  Ambler,  Treasurer  of  Virginia,  wrote  to  Madison,  May  n,  1782:  "I 
sincerely  wish  our  Treasury  would  enable  us  to  make  you  a  remittance.  We 
have  not  had  ten  pounds  Specie  in  it  since  my  coming  into  office,  and  it  is 
much  to  be  feared  there  will  not  any  come  in  for  a  long  time.  .  .  .  Want 
of  commerce  prevents  a  due  circulation  of  what  Money  is  in  the  State  so  that 
tho'  the  Army  of  our  Allies  spend  some  with  us,  it  remains  in  few  hands. — The 
officers  of  Civil  Government  have  not  been  paid  for  the  last  ten  months." 
August  24th,  he  writes  that  accounts  should  be  rendered  for  the  number  of  days 
of  service  as  a  delegate  at  $3.oo  a  day.  Madison  was  charged  with  .£2000, 
paid  in  December,  1779,  before  he  left  Virginia.  From  that  date  up  to  No 
vember,  1782,  ^500  was  paid  him.  March  22,  1783,  Ambler  announced  that 
£865,  8j,  3^/was  still  due  him.— Mad.  MSS. 


1782]  JAMES  MADISON.  179 

some  of  the  late  papers.  Present  my  affectionate 
regards  to  all  the  family.  I  have  not  time  to  add 
more  than  that  I  am, 

your  dutiful  son. 


TO    EDMUND    PENDLETON.1 

PHILADELPHIA,  February  25,  1782. 

DEAR  SIR, — You  have  been  misinformed,  I  find, 
with  respect  to  that  article  in  the  scheme  of  the  Bank, 
which  claims  for  it  the  exclusive  privilege  of  issuing 
circulating  notes.  It  is  true,  Congress  have  recom 
mended  to  the  States  to  allow  it  such  privilege,  but 
it  is  to  be  considered  only  during  the  present  war. 
Under  such  a  limitation  it  was  conceived  both  neces 
sary  to  the  success  of  the  scheme,  and  consistent  with 
the  policy  of  the  several  States  ;  it  being  improbable 
that  the  collective  credit  and  specie  of  the  whole 
would  support  more  than  one  such  institution,  or  that 
any  particular  State  would,  during  the  war,  stake  its 
credit  anew  on  any  paper  experiment  whatever. 


TO   THOMAS   JEFFERSON.1 

PHILADELPHIA,  March  18,  1782. 

DEAR  SIR, — I  have  met  with  a  bundle  of  old  pam 
phlets  belonging  to  the  public  library  here,  in  which 
is  a  map  2  published  in  1650,  which,  from  this  and  other 

1  From  the  Madison  Papers  (1840). 

2  Mr.  P.  Lee  Phillips,  Superintendent  of  the  Map  Department  of  the  Library 
of  Congress,  identifies  this  as  the  map  of  Virginia  Farrer,  published  in  London 
in  1650  or  1651.     It  is  described  as  a  curious  combination  of  fact  and  fiction  and 
an  evidence  of  ignorance  in  England  of  the  geographical  position  of  Virginia 


i8o  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1782 

circumstances,  I  am  pretty  confident  is  of  the  same 
impression  with  that  of  Dr.  Smith's.  It  represents 
the  South  Sea  at  about  ten  days'  travel  from  the 
heads  or  falls,  I  forget  which,  of  James  River.  From 
the  tenor,  however,  of  the  pamphlet  to  which  it  is 
immediately  annexed,  and  indeed  of  the  whole  collec 
tion,  there  is  just  ground  to  suspect  that  this  repre 
sentation  was  an  artifice  to  favor  the  object  of  the 
publications,  which  evidently  was  to  entice  emigrants 
from  England  by  a  flattering  picture  of  the  advan 
tages  of  this  country,  one  of  which,  dwelt  on  in  all  the 
pamphlets,  is  the  vicinity  of  the  South  Sea,  and  the 
facility  it  afforded  of  a  trade  with  the  Eastern  world. 
Another  circumstance,  which  lessens  much  the  value 
of  this  map  to  the  antiquary,  is,  that  it  is  more  modern 
by  twenty-five  years  than  those  extant  in  Purchase's 
Pilgrim,  which  are  referred  to  in  the  negotiations  be 
tween  the  British  and  French  Commissaries  touching 
the  bounds  of  Nova  Scotia,  as  the  first  of  authenticity 
relating  to  this  part  of  the  world.  If,  notwithstand 
ing  these  considerations,  you  still  desire  that  a  copy 
be  taken  from  the  map  above  described,  I  shall  with 
pleasure  execute  your  orders  ;  or  if  you  wish  that 
a  copy  of  Virginia,  or  of  the  whole  country,  may  be 
taken  from  those  in  Purchase,  your  orders  shall  be 
equally  attended  to.  I  much  doubt,  however,  whether 
that  book  be  so  extremely  scarce  as  to  require  a  tran 
script  from  it  for  the  purpose  you  seem  to  have  in  view. 

with  reference  to  "the  Sea  of  China  and  the  Indies,"  which  are  placed  west 
of  "  ould  Virginia  and  new."  The  Potomac  River  at  its  mouth  is  called 
"  Maryland  River,"  and  the  Carolinas  appear  as  "  Rawliana."  Virginia  Far- 
rer  also  wrote  a  paper  on  "  The  Reformed  Virginia  Silk  Worm."  See  Phillips's 
Virginia  Cartography,  Smithsonian  Miscellaneous  Collections,  1030. 


1782]  JAMES  MADISON.  181 

Congress  have  taken  no  step  in  the  business  of  the 
Western  territory  since  the  report  of  the  Committee, 
of  which  I  have  already  given  you  an  account,  and 
which,  we  hear,  arrived  at  Richmond  on  the  day  of 
the  adjournment  of  the  Assembly.  We  wish  it  to 
undergo  their  consideration,  and  to  receive  their 
instructions  before  we  again  move  in  it. 


TO    EDMUND     PENDLETON.1 


PHILADELPHIA,  March  19,  1782. 

DEAR  SIR, — The  Ministerial  speeches,  with  other 
circumstances,  place  it  beyond  a  doubt  that  the  plan 
for  recovering  America  will  be  changed.  A  separate 
peace  with  the  Dutch — a  suspension  of  the  offensive 
war  here — an  exertion  of  their  resources  thus  disen 
cumbered  against  the  naval  power  of  France  and 
Spain — and  a  renewal  of  the  arts  of  seduction  and 
division  in  the  United  States,  will  probably  constitute 
the  outlines  of  the  new  plan.  Whether  they  will 
succeed  in  the  first  article  of  it,  cannot  be  ascertained 
by  the  last  intelligence  we  have  from  Holland.  It  is 
only  certain  that  negotiations  are  on  foot,  under  the 
auspices  of  the  Empress  of  Russia. 


TO    THOMAS    JEFFERSON.1 

PHILADELPHIA,  March  26,  1782. 

DEAR  SIR, — A  letter  has  been  lately  received  from 
you  by  the  President  of  Congress,  accompanied  by  a 

1  From  the  Madison  Papers  (1840). 


i82  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1782 

bundle  of  papers  procured  from  the  Cherokees  by 
Colonel  Campbell.  As  it  appears  that  these  papers 
were  transmitted  at  the  request  of  the  late  President, 
it  is  proper  to  apprize  you  that  it  was  made  with 
out  any  written  or  verbal  sanction,  and  even  without 
the  knowledge  of  Congress ;  and  not  improbably 
with  a  view  of  fishing  for  discoveries  which  may  be 
subservient  to  the  aggressions  meditated  on  the  terri 
torial  rights  of  Virginia.  It  would  have  been  un 
necessary  to  trouble  you  with  this,  had  it  not  appeared 
that  Colonel  Campbell  has  given  a  promise  of  other 
papers ;  which  if  he  should  fulfil,  and  the  papers  con 
tain  any  thing  which  the  adversaries  of  Virginia  may 
make  an  ill  use  of,  you  will  not  suffer  any  respect 
for  the  acts  of  Congress  to  induce  you  to  forward 
hither. 


TO  JAMES  MADISON.  MAD.  MSS. 

PHILADA    March  30^  1782. 

HON?  SIR, — Mr.  J.  Walker  has  safely  delivered  to 
me  three  letters  from  you  attended  with  the  money 
therein  specified.  He  has  also  been  so  obliging  as 
to  undertake  the  conveyance  of  the  several  articles 
of  medicine  you  wanted  with  a.  gallon  keg  filled  with 
good  Port  wine  ;  to  all  which  I  add  a  large  packet  of 
Newspapers — and  an  almanack.  The  last  packet  I 
sent  was  by  a  waggon  returning  to  your  neighbor 
hood  which  brought  me  a  letter  from  M-  W.  Maury, 
by  which  I  sent  at  the  same  time  a  small  supply  of 
Bark  for  my  Mother. 


1782]  JAMES  MADISON.  183 

I  mentioned  to  you  in  one  of  my  former  letters 
that  I  had  a  prospect  of  getting  on  very  favorable 
terms  a  few  scarce  books  from  a  library  brought 
hither  for  sale  by  Col.  Lane.  My  purchases  of  him 
have  amounted  in  the  whole  to  nineteen  pounds 
three  shillings  of  this  currency.  As  I  had  not  the 
money  here  for  him,  &  he  could  not  conveniently 
wait  till  it  would  be  convenient  for  me  to  pay  him,  I 
was  obliged  to  give  him  a  draught  on  you.  I  hope 
you  will  be  able  to  find  means  to  satisfy  it.  If  it  can 
not  be  otherwise  done  than  by  a  deduction  from  the 
further  supply  you  have  in  contemplation  for  me  I 
must  submit  to  it.  How  far  I  shall  depend  on  you 
for  the  resources  necessary  for  my  expenses  here  not 
included  in  the  legal  provision,  and  for  the  arrearages 
into  which  I  have  unavoidably  fallen,  will  be  known 
as  soon  as  the  assembly  have  finally  decided  on  our 
accounts  &  the  allowance  which  is  to  be  made  to  us. 
This  I  suppose  will  be  done  at  their  session  in  May 
next.  Unless  liberal  principles  prevail  on  the  occa 
sion,  I  shall  be  under  the  necessity  of  selling  .  . 
a  negro. 

The  newspapers  will  give  you  in  general  the  intel 
ligence  we  have  from  Europe.  As  far  as  we  are 
enabled  to  judge  of  the  views  of  the  British  Cabinet, 
the  misfortunes  of  one  more  campaign  at  least  will 
be  necessary  to  conquer  their  obstinacy.  They  are 
attempting  a  separate  peace  with  the  Dutch  &  talk 
of  suspending  their  offensive  war  ag-'  us,  &  directing 
their  whole  resources  ag-'  the  naval  power  of  France 
&  Spain.  If  this  be  their  real  plan  we  may  be  sure 


184  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1782 

they  do  not  mean  by  it  to  abandon  their  pretensions 
to  the  U.  States  but  try  another  mode  for  recovering 
them.  During  their  offensive  exertions  ag"1  our  ally, 
they  can  be  practicing  insidious  ones  ag.e  us  :  and  if 
in  the  first  they  should  be  successful  &  in  the  latter 
disappointed,  a  renewal  of  a  vigorous  war  upon  us 
will  certainly  take  place.  The  best  security  ag-1 
every  artifice  &  every  event  will  be  such  military 
preparations  on  our  part  as  will  be  sufficient  either 
to  resist  or  expell  them  as  the  case  may  require. 
With  my  affectionate  regards  for  the  family 
I  am  Hon?  Sir  y'  dutiful  son 


TO   EDMUND    PENDLETON.1 

PHILADELPHIA,  April  2,  1782. 

DEAR  SIR, — The  only  event  with  which  the  period 
since  my  last  has  enabled  me  to  repay  your  favor  of 
the  twenty-fifth  ultimo,  is  the  arrival  of  four  Deputies 
from  Vermont,  with  a  plenipotentiary  commission  to 
accede  to  the  Confederacy.  The  business  is  referred 
to  a  committee  who  are  sufficiently  devoted  to  the 
policy  of  gaining  the  vote  of  Vermont  into  Congress. 
The  result  will  be  the  subject  of  a  future  letter. 

The  thinness,  or  rather  vacancy,  of  the  Virginia 
line,  and  the  little  prospect  of  recruiting  it,  are  sub 
jects  of  a  very  distressing  nature.  If  those  on  whom 
the  remedy  depends  were  sensible  of  the  insulting 
comparisons  to  which  they  expose  the  State,  and  of 
the  wound  they  give  to  her  influence  in  the  general 

1  From  the  Madison  Papers  (1840). 


1782]  JAMES  MADISON.  185 

councils,  I  am  persuaded  more  decisive  exertions 
would  be  made.  Considering  the  extensive  interests 
and  claims  which  Virginia  has,  and  the  enemies  and 
calumnies  which  these  very  claims  form  against  her, 
she  is  perhaps  under  the  strongest  obligation  of  any 
State  in  the  Union,  to  preserve  her  military  contin 
gent  on  a  respectable  footing ;  and  unhappily  her 
line  is  perhaps,  of  all,  in  the  most  disgraceful  condi 
tion.  The  only  hope  that  remains  is,  that  her  true 
policy  will  be  better  consulted  at  the  ensuing  As 
sembly,  and  that  as  far  as  a  proper  sense  of  it  may 
be  deficient,  the  expostulations  of  her  friends,  and 
clamors  of  her  enemies,  will  supply  the  place  of  it. 
If  I  speak  my  sentiments  too  freely  on  this  point,  it 
can  only  be  imputed  to  my  sensibility  to  the  honor 
and  interest  of  my  country. 


TO   EDMUND    RANDOLPH.1 

PHILADELPHIA,  April  g,  1782. 

DEAR  SIR, — I  perceive,  by  a  passage  cited  in  the 
examination  of  the  Connecticut  claim  to  lands  in 
Pennsylvania,  that  we  have  been  mistaken  in  suppos 
ing  the  acquiescence  of  Virginia  in  the  defalcations 
of  her  chartered  territory  to  have  been  a  silent 
one.  It  said  that  "  at  a  meeting  of  the  Privy  Council, 
July  3d,  1633,  was  taken  into  consideration  the  peti 
tion  of  the  planters  of  Virginia,  remonstrating  that 
some  grants  had  lately  been  obtained  of  a  great  pro 
portion  of  the  lands  and  territories  within  the  limits 

1  From  the  Madison  Papers  (1840). 


1 86  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1782 

of  the  Colony  there  ;  and  a  day  was  ordered  for 
further  hearing  the  parties,  (to  wit  :  Lord  Baltimore, 
and  said  adventurers  and  planters.)  "  The  decision 
against  Virginia  is  urged  as  proof  that  the  Crown 
did  not  regard  the  charter  as  in  force  with  respect 
to  the  bounds  of  Virginia.  It  is  clearly  a  proof  that 
Virginia  at  that  time  thought  otherwise,  and  made 
all  the  opposition  to  the  encroachment  which  could 
then  have  been  made  to  the  arbitrary  acts  which 
gave  birth  to  the  present  revolution.  If  any  monu 
ments  exist  of  the  transactions  of  Virginia  at  the 
period  above  mentioned,  or  any  of  the  successive 
periods,  at  which  these  encroachments  had  been  re 
peated,  you  will  have  an  opportunity  of  searching 
more  minutely  into  them.  It  is  not  probable,  how 
ever,  that  after  a  failure  in  the  first  opposition  any 
further  opposition  will  be  found  to  subsequent  grants 
out  of  Virginia. 

TO  THOMAS  JEFFERSON.  ' 

PHILADELPHIA,  April  16,  1782. 

DEAR  SIR, — I  entreat  that  you  will  not  suffer  the 
chance  of  a  speedy  and  final  determination  of  the 
Territorial  Question,  by  Congress,  to  affect  your  pur 
pose  of  tracing  the  title  of  Virginia  to  her  claims.  It 
is,  in  the  first  place,  very  uncertain  when  a  determin 
ation  will  take  place,  even  if  it  takes  place  at  all  ;  and 
in  the  next  it  will  assuredly  not  be  a  final  one,  unless 
Virginia  means  to  be  passive  and  silent  under  aggres 
sion  on  her  rights.  In  every  event,  therefore,  it  is 

1  From  the  Madison  Papers  (1840). 


1782]  JAMES  MADISON.  187 

proper  to  be  armed  with  every  argument  and  docu 
ment  that  can  vindicate  her  title.  Her  adversaries 
will  be  either  the  United  States,  or  New  York,  or 
both.  The  former  will  either  claim  on  the  principle 
that  the  vacant  country  is  not  included  in  any  partic 
ular  State,  and  consequently  falls  to  the  whole,  or 
will  clothe  themselves  with  the  title  of  the  latter  by 
accepting  its  cession.  In  both  cases  it  will  be  al 
leged,  that  the  charter  of  1609  was  annulled  by  the 
resumption  of  it  into  the  hands  of  the  Crown,  and 
that  the  subsequent  grants  to  Maryland,  &c.,  denote 
this  to  have  been  the  construction  of  it  ;  that  the 
proclamation  of  1763  has  constituted  the  Alleghany 
ridge  the  Western  limit  of  Virginia,  and  that  the  let 
ter  of  President  Nelson,  on  the  subject  of  a  new 
Colony  on  the  Ohio,  relinquishes  on  the  part  of  Vir 
ginia  all  interference  with  the  authority  of  the  Crown 
beyond  that  limit.  In  case  the  title  of  New  York 
should  alone  be  opposed  to  that  of  Virginia,  it  will  be 
further  alleged  against  the  latter,  that  the  treaties  of 
1684,  1701,  1726,  1744,  and  1754,  between  the  Gov 
ernment  of  the  former  and  the  Six  Nations,  have  an 
nexed  to  it  all  the  country  claimed  by  these  nations 
and  their  tributaries,  and  that  the  expense  of  New 
York  in  defending  and  protecting  them  ought  in 
equity  to  be  reimbursed  by  this  exclusive  advantage. 
The  original  title  of  New  York  is  indeed  drawn  from 
the  charter  to  the  Duke  of  York  in  1663-4,  renewed 
after  the  treaty  of  Westminister  in  1674.  But  this 
charter  will  not,  I  believe,  reach  any  territory  claimed 
by  Virginia. 


i88  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1782 

Much  stress  will  also  be  laid  on  the  treaty  of  Fort 
Stanwix,  particularly  as  a  bar  to  any  corroboration 
of  the  claim  of  Virginia  from  the  treaties  of  Lancaster 
and  Loggstown.  It  is  under  this  treaty  that  the 
companies  of  Indiana  and  Vandalia  shelter  their  pre 
tensions  against  the  claims  of  Virginia,  &c.  &c.  See 
the  pamphlets  entitled  "  Public  Good"  and  "  Plain 
Facts."  As  these  pretentions  can  be  of  no  avail, 
unless  the  jurisdiction  of  Congress,  or  New  York  at 
least,  can  be  established,  they  no  otherwise  deserve 
notice  than  as  sources  of  calumny  and  influence  in 
the  public  councils ;  in  both  which  respects  it  is 
the  interest  of  Virginia  that  an  antidote  should  be 
applied. 

TO  EDMUND  RANDOLPH.  » 

PHILADELPHIA,  April  23,  1782. 

DEAR  SIR, — Congress  have  received  from  the  Min 
ister  of  France  some  informal  communications  relative 
to  the  issue  of  the  proposed  mediation  of  Vienna  and 
Petersburgh.  The  answer  of  the  British  Court  to 
the  preliminary  articles  is  among  them.  It  rejects 
explicitly  that  part  of  the  plan  which  requires  con 
current  negotiations  between  her  and  America,  and 
guaranties  the  result,  as  incompatible  with  the  rela 
tion  of  subjects  to  their  sovereign,  and  the  essential 
interests  of  the  Empire  ;  alleging,  at  the  same  time, 
that  a  great  part  of  the  people  are  disposed  to  re 
turn  to  their  allegiance,  and  that  such  a  treaty  would 
supply  the  rebels  with  new  pretexts  for  misleading 

1  From  the  Madison  Papers  (1840). 


1782]  JAMES  MADISON.  r89 

them.  The  final  answer  of  the  mediating  Courts 
professes  great  impartiality  and  delicacy  toward  the 
belligerent  parties  ;  adheres  to  the  expediency  of  the 
first  plan,  and  hopes  that  it  may  still  become,  under 
more  favorable  circumstances,  the  basis  of  a  general 
pacification. 

Another  letter  has  come  to  hand  from  Mr.  Dana. 
His  proposed  step  was  probably  taken  a  few  days 
after  the  date  of  it,  which  was  about  the  middle  of 
October. 

The  Committee  on  the  last  application  from  Ver 
mont  have  reported  fully  in  their  favor.  The  consid 
eration  of  the  report  will  not  be  called  for,  however, 
till  the  pulse  of  nine  States  beats  favorably  for  it. 
This  is  so  uncertain  that  the  agents  have  returned. 
The  recognition  of  the  Independence  of  Vermont  is 
not  fully  stated  in  the  report,  as  a  resolution,  antece 
dent,  went  to  authorizing  a  committee  to  treat  with 
them  on  the  terms  of  their  admission.  You  will  know 
the  object  of  this  arrangement. 


TO  EDMUND  RANDOLPH.1 

PHILADELPHIA,  May,  1782. 

DEAR  SIR, — The  enclosed  gazette  details  all  the 
information  which  we  have  received  relative  to  the 
parliamentary  advances  towards  a  negotiation  with 
the  United  States.  The  first  reports  which  issued 
from  the  packet  which  brought  them,  were  of  a  very 
different  complexion,  and  raised  high  expectations  of 
peace.  We  now  find  the  ideas  of  the  opposition,  as 

1  From  the  Madison  Papers  (1840). 


IQO  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1782 

well  as  the  Ministry,  to  be  far  short  of  the  only  con 
dition  on  which  it  can  take  place.  Those  who  are 
the  farthest  reconciled  to  concessions  calculate  on  a 
dissolution  of  the  compact  with  France.  The  Min 
istry  will  yield  to  the  experiment,  and  turn  the  result 
upon  their  adversaries.  Our  business  is  plain.  Fi 
delity  to  our  allies,  and  vigor  in  military  preparation, 
—these,  and  these  alone,  will  secure  us  against  all 
political  devices. 

We  have  received  no  intelligence  which  speaks  a 
danger  of  a  separate  peace  between  the  Dutch  and 
Great  Britain.  Mr.  Adams'  request  of  a  categorical 
answer  was  taken,  ad  referendum,  prior,  if  I  mistake 
not,  to  the  knowledge  of  Cornwallis'  fate  ;  and  it  is 
not  likely  that  after  that  event  they  would  be  less 
disposed  to  respect  our  overtures,  or  reject  those  of 
the  enemy. 

We  have  letters  from  Mr.  Jay  and  Mr.  Carmichael 
of  as  late  date  as  the  twenty-seventh  of  February. 
They  differ  in  nothing  from  the  style  of  the  former. 
The  conduct  of  the  Spanish  Court  subsequent  to  the 
date  of  the  letter  received  the  day  preceding  your 
departure,  corresponds  entirely  with  the  tenor  of  it 
as  therein  related.  Mr.  Jones  will  inform  you  of  the 
act  of  Congress  which  that  letter  produced. 

We  have  made  no  progress  in  the  Western  subject. 
We  mean  to  desist,  after  one  or  two  more  attempts, 
and  state  the  matter  to  the  Assembly  by  next  post, 
expecting  that  they  will  pursue  such  measures  as 
their  interest  prescribes,  without  regard  to  the  reso 
lutions  which  proposed  the  cession. 


1782]  JAMES  MADISON.  191 

I  beg  you  to  keep  me  punctually  informed  of  every 
legislative  step  touching  the  Western  territory.  I 
suppose  the  cession  cannot  fail  to  be  revoked,  or,  at 
least,  a  day  of  limitation  set  to  it.  The  condition 
relative  to  the  companies  will  certainly  be  adhered 
to  in  every  event.  I  find  that  those  who  have  been 
against  us  do  not  wish  to  lose  sight  of  the  prospect 
altogether.  If  the  State  is  firm  and  prudent,  I  have 
little  doubt  that  she  will  be  again  courted.  Pre 
vious  to  Mr.  Jones'  departure,  our  opinions  were 
united  on  the  expediency  of  making  the  impost  of 
five  per  cent,  subservient  to  an  honorable  adjust 
ment  of  territory  and  accounts.  I  have  since  dis 
covered  that  Varnum  is  left  out,  the  latter  having 
promoted  it,  and  that  Chase  is  inflexible  against  it. 
Massachusetts  also  holds  out.  The  expedient,  there 
fore,  would  not  be  efficacious,  and  clamors  would  be 
drawn  on  Virginia,  which  it  would  be  best  should 
fall  elsewhere.  Show  this  to  Mr.  Jones.  He  will 
be  with  you  about  the  twentieth  instant. 


TO  EDMUND  RANDOLPH.1 

PHILADELPHIA,  May  14,  1782. 

DEAR  SIR, — The  Ceres  man-of-war,  we  are  in 
formed  by  a  New  York  paper,  arrived  there,  in 
twenty-five  days,  on  the  fifth  instant,  having  on  board 
His  Excellency,  Sir  Guy  Carleton,  Commander-in- 
Chief,  &c.,  and  commissioned for making  peace  or  war 
in  North  America.  The  intelligence  brought  by  this 

1  From  the  Madison  Papers  (1840). 


i92  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1782 

conveyance  is,  that  the  vibrations  of  power  between 
the  Ministry  and  their  rivals  had  terminated  in  the 
complete  dissolution  of  the  former  and  organization 
of  the  latter.  What  change  of  measures  will  follow 
this  change  of  men  is  yet  concealed  from  us.  The 
bill  for  empowering  the  King  to  conclude  a  peace  or 
truce  with  the  revolted  Colonies  in  North  America 
had  been  brought  into  Parliament  on  the  twenty- 
seventh  of  March.  The  language  of  it  is  at  the  same 
time  cautious  and  comprehensive,  and  seems  to  make 
eventual  provision  for  our  independence,  without  be 
traying  any  purpose  of  acknowledging  it.  The  terms 
peace  and  truce  are  scarcely  applicable  to  any  other 
conventions  than  national  ones.  And  the  King  is 
authorized  to  annul  or  suspend  all  acts  of  Parliament 
whatever,  as  far  as  they  speak  of  the  Colonies.  He 
can,  therefore,  clearly  remove  any  parliamentary  bar 
to  his  recognition  of  our  Independence,  and  I  know  of 
no  other  bar  to  his  treating  with  America  on  that 
ground.  All  this  is,  however,  very  different  from  a 
real  peace.  The  King  will  assuredly  prefer  war  as 
long  as  his  Ministry  will  stand  by  him,  and  the  senti 
ments  of  his  present  Ministry,  particularly  of  Shel- 
burne,  are  as  peremptory  against  the  dismemberment 
of  the  Empire  as  those  of  any  of  their  predecessors. 
They  will  at  least  try  a  campaign  of  negotiation 
against  the  United  States,  and  of  war  against  their 
other  enemies,  before  they  submit  to  it.  It  is  prob 
able  that  the  arrival  of  Sir  Guy  Carleton  will  not 
long  precede  an  opening  of  the  first  campaign.  Con 
gress  will,  I  am  persuaded,  give  a  proper  verbal 


1780]  JAMES  MADISON.  193 

answer  to  any  overtures  with  which  he  may  insult 
them  ;  but  the  best  answer  will  come  from  the  States, 
in  such  supplies  of  men  and  money  as  will  expel  him 
and  all  our  other  enemies  from  the  United  States. 

We  have  at  length  brought  our  territorial  business 
to  an  issue.  It  was  postponed  sine  die  on  the  sixth 
instant.  We  have  transmitted  the  whole  proceeding 
to  the  Governor,  to  be  laid  before  the  Assembly. 

There  are  various  accounts  from  the  West  Indies, 
which  render  it  pretty  certain  that  an  engagement 
has  taken  place  between  the  two  fleets.  The  cir 
cumstances  are  not  ascertained.  The  issue  seems,  at 
least,  to  have  been  so  far  in  favor  of  our  allies  as  to  leave 
them  free  to  pursue  their  course  with  their  convoy  to 
Hispaniola,  where  a  junction  is  to  be  made  with  the 
Spaniards.  The  object  of  this  junction  is  universally 
supposed  to  be  Jamaica. 

Since  I  finished  the  above,  a  letter  has  come  to 
Congress  from  General  Washington,  enclosing  one  to 
him  from  Sir  Guy  Carleton,  announcing  his  com 
mission,  in  conjunction  with  Admiral  Digby,  to  treat 
of  peace  with  this  country,  and  requesting  a  passport' 
for  his  secretary,  Mr.  Morgan,  to  bring  a  similar 
letter  of  compliment  to  Congress.  The  request  will 
certainly  be  refused,  and  General  Washington  proba 
bly  directed  to  receive  and  forward  any  despatches 
which  may  be  properly  addressed  to  Congress. 

A  public  audience  was  yesterday  given  to  the 
Minister  of  France,  in  which  he  formally  announced 
the  birth  of  the  Dauphin.  It  was  deemed  politic 
at  this  crisis  to  display  every  proper  evidence  of 


VOL.  I.  — 13 


i94  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1782 

tionate  attachment  to  our  ally.  The  Minister  was 
accordingly  received  with  military  honors,  and  the 
audience  concluded  with  the  discharge  of  cannon,  and 
a  feu  de  jot  of  small  arms.  A  public  entertainment 
followed,  and  fireworks  at  night  closed  the  scene. 

The  answer  reported  by  the  committee  on  Mr. 
Dana's  letter  gave  him  a  cautionary  instruction.  It 
afterwards  went  to  the  Secretary  of  Foreign  Affairs, 
and  thence,  I  suppose,  in  his  dress,  to  Petersburg. 
Mr.  Jones  will  give  you  more  satisfactory  information 
on  this,  as  also  with  respect  to  the  answer  to  Mr.  Jay's 
letter. 

Your  surmises  relative  to  a  revival  of  paper  cur 
rency  alarms  me.  It  is  impossible  that  any  evil  can 
render  such  an  alternative  eligible.  It  will  revive  the 
hopes  of  the  enemy,  increase  the  internal  debility  of 
the  States,  and  awaken  the  clamors  of  all  ranks 
throughout  the  United  States  against  her.  Much 
more  to  Virginia's  honor  would  it  be  to  rescind  the 
taxes,  although  the  consequence  of  that  can  but  be  of 
a  most  serious  nature. 


TO  JAMES  MADISON.  MAD.  MSS. 

PHILA  ,  May  2Oth,  1782. 

HON?  SIR, — Having  written  a  letter  and  enclosed  it 
with  a  large  collection  of  Newspapers,  for  you  which 
was  to  have  been  carried  by  Mr  J.  Smith,  but  which  I 
have  now  put  into  the  hands  of  Capt:  Walker,  whose 
return  will  be  quicker,  little  remains  for  me  to  add 
here.  Our  anxiety  on  account  of  the  West  India 


1782]  JAMES  MADISON,  195 

news,  published  at  New  York  is  still  supported  by  con 
tradictory  reports  and  conjectures.  The  account 
however  to  which  Rodneys  name  is  prefixed  renders 
our  apprehensions  too  strong  for  our  hopes.  Riving- 
ton  has  been  very  bold  in  several  of  his  spurious  pub 
lications,  and*at  this  conjuncture  might  venture  as  far 
to  serve  a  particular  turn  as  at  any.  But  it  is  scarcely 
credible  that  he  would  dare  or  be  permitted  to  sport 
with  so  high  an  official  name. 

If  Mr  Jefferson  will  be  so  obliging  as  to  superintend 
the  legal  studies  of  W™  I  think  he  cannot  do  better 
than  prosecute  the  plan  he  has  adopted.  The  inter 
ruption  occasioned  by  the  Election  of  Mr.  J.1  although 
inconvenient  in  that  respect,  is  by  no  means  a  decisive 
objection  ags.1  it. 

I  did  not  know  before  that  the  letters  which  Mr 
Walker  was  to  have  carried  last  fall  had  met  with  the 
fate  which  it  seems  they  did.  I  shall  be  more  cautious 
hereafter.  The  papers  missing  in  your  list  were  I 
presume  for  I  do  not  recollect,  contained  in  them. 

The  short  notice  does  not  leave  me  time  to  obtain 
the  information  you  ask  as  to  Stiles.  I  have  never 
heard  of  Iron  Stiles  cast  here,  nor  do  I  know  the 
price  of  Copper  ones. 

If  Continental  money  passes  here  at  all  it  is  in  a 
very  small  quantity,  at  very  great  discount,  and  merely 
to  serve  particular  local  &  temporary  ends. 

It  has  at  no  time  been  more  difficult  for  me  to  fix 
my  probable  return  to  Virg?  At  present  all  my  Col 
leagues  have  left  Congress  except  Col:  Bland,  and  it 

1  Jefferson  had  just  been  elected  to  the  Legislature. 


196  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1782 

is  a  crisis  which  calls  for  a  full  representation  from 
every  State.  Anxious  as  I  am  to  visit  my  friends,  as 
long  as  I  sustain  a  public  trust,  I  shall  feel  a  prin 
ciple  which  is  superior  to  it.  The  state  of  my  finances 
also,  unless  the  Assembly  shall  make  a  different 
provision  for  the  Delegates  from  what  has  hitherto 
been  in  force,  will  be  a  serious  bar  to  my  removal 
from  this  place.  I  shall  I  believe  be  under  the  neces 
sity  of  purchasing  a  carriage  of  some  kind  besides  dis 
charging  considerable  arrears,  &  where  the  means  for 
effecting  either  are  to  be  found  is  totally  without  my 
comprehension.  ***** 

I  am,  etc. 


TO    EDMUND    RANDOLPH.1 

PHILADELPHIA,  May  21,  1782. 

DEAR  SIR, — Your  favor  of  the  loth  was  received 
yesterday.  I  suspect  that  I  have  expressed  myself 
ambiguously  with  respect  to  Mr.  Jefferson.  He  does 
not  allege  ignorance  of  the  report  of  the  committee, 
but  of  the  title  of  New  York,  which  is  the  ground  on 
which  the  report  places  the  controversy  with  Virginia. 

The  final  report  of  our  suit  to  Congress  for  an  an 
swer  to  the  Western  cession  was  sent  by  the  last  post. 
Mr.  Jones  can  explain  every  thing  relative  to  it.  I 
feel  myself  much  disburdened  by  the  termination  of 
the  business.  If  it  should  be  revived  here,  in  conse 
quence  of  steps  taken  by  the  Legislature,  I  flatter 
myself  it  will  be  under  circumstances  less  em 
barrassing. 

1  From  the  Madison  Papers  (1840). 


1782]  JAMES  MADISON.  197 

TO  EDMUND  RANDOLPH.1 

PHILADELPHIA,  May  28,  1782. 

DEAR  SIR, — A  letter  from  Dr.  Franklin,  of  the 
fourth  March,  informs  the  Superintendent  of  Finance 
that  the  Court  of  France  had  granted  an  aid  of  six 
millions  of  livres  to  the  United  States  for  the  present 
year.  It  appears,  however,  that  this  aid  has  been 
wholly  anticipated,  as  well  as  the  aids  of  the  last 
year,  by  bills  of  exchange ;  by  supplies  for  the  army, 
particularly  those  in  Holland  ;  by  the  debt  of  Beau- 
marchais,  amounting  to  two  millions  and  a  half  of 
livres  ;  by  the  interest  money  ;  by  the  deduction  on 
account  of  Virginia,  computed  at  seven  hundred  thou 
sand  livres,  &c.  The  States  must,  therefore,  by 
some  means  or  other,  supply  the  demands  of  Con 
gress,  or  a  very  serious  crisis  must  ensue.  After  the 
differences  between  the  modes  of  feeding  the  army 
by  contracts  and  by  the  bayonet  have  been  experi 
enced  both  by  the  army  and  the  people,  a  recurrence 
to  the  latter  cannot  be  too  much  dreaded. 

The  Province  of  Friesland  has  instructed  its  Dele 
gates  in  the  States  General  to  concur  in  a  public 
reception  of  Mr.  Adams.  The  city  of  Dort  has  done 
the  same  to  theirs  in  the  Provincial  Assembly  of 
Holland. 

The  above  letter  came  by  the  Alliance,  which  is 
arrived  at  Rhode  Island.  Captain  Barry,  I  am  told, 
says  that  the  Marquis  will  come  with  a  squadron  for 
the  American  coast,  which  was  equipping.  If  this  be 
true,  Barry  is  wrong  in  disclosing  it.  I  distrust  it. 

1  From  the  Madison  Papers  (1840). 


i98  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1782 

A  French  cutter  is  since  arrived,  after  a  short 
passage,  with  despatches  for  the  Minister  here.  He 
received  them  on  Saturday  by  an  express  from  Sa 
lem,  and  has  not  yet  communicated  their  contents  to 
Congress.  I  understand,  through  the  Secretary  of 
Foreign  Affairs,  that  the  Court  of  London  has  lately 
proposed  to  the  Court  of  France  a  separate  peace,  as 
the  price  of  which  she  would  place  Dunkirk  in  its 
former  state,  make  some  sacrifices  in  the  East  In 
dies,  and  accede  to  a  status  quo  in  the  West  Indies. 
The  answer  of  France  was  dictated  by  her  engage 
ments  with  the  United  States.  This  insidious  step 
taken  at  the  same  moment  with  the  agency  of  Mr. 
Carleton,  will,  I  hope,  not  long  be  withheld  from  the 
public.  We  have  heard  nothing  from  this  gentleman 
since  the  answer  to  his  request  of  a  passport  for  his 
secretary. 

In  order  to  explain  our  public  affairs  to  the  States, 
and  to  urge  the  necessity  of  complying  with  the  re 
quisitions  of  Congress,  we  have  determined  to  depute 
two  members  to  visit  the  Eastern  States,  and  two 
the  Southern.  The  first  are  Root  and  Montgomery  ; 
the  others,  Rutledge  and  Clymer.  I  put  this  in 
cypher,  because  secrecy  has  been  enjoined  by  Con 
gress.  The  deputation  will  probably  set  off  in  a 
few  days. 

I  find  that  the  Minister  of  France  has  been  in 
formed,  by  some  correspondent  in  Virginia,  that  the 
late  intelligence  from  Britain  has  produced  very  un 
favorable  symptoms  in  a  large  party.  He  seems  not 
a  little  discomposed  at  it.  The  honor  of  the  State 


1782]  JAMES  MADISON.  199 

concurred  with  my  own  persuasion  in  dictating  a 
consolatory  answer  to  him.  For  this  reason,  as  well 
as  for  others,  I  think  it  would  be  expedient  /or  the 
Legislature  to  enter  into  an  unanimous  declaration 
on  this  point.  Other  States  are  doing  this,  and  such 
a  mode  of  announcing  the  sense  of  the  people  may 
be  regarded  as  more  authentic  than  a  declaration 
from  Congress.  The  best  form,  I  conceive,  will  be 
that  of  an  instruction  to  the  Delegates.  Do  not  fail 
to  supply  me  with  accurate  and  full  information  on 
the  whole  subject  of  this  paragraph. 

A  letter  from  Dr.  Franklin,  of  thirtieth  of  March, 
enclosing  a  copy  of  one  to  him  from  Mr.  Adams,  at 
the  Hague,  was  laid  before  Congress  subsequently 
to  writing  the  above.  By  these,  it  appears  not  only 
that  an  essay  has  been  made  on  the  fidelity  of  France 
to  the  alliance,  but  that  the  pulse  of  America  has 
been  at  the  same  time  separately  felt  through  each 
of  those  Ministers.  They  both  speak  with  becoming 
indignation  on  the  subject,  attest  the  firmness  of  our 
ally,  and  recommend  decisive  efforts  for  expelling 
the  enemy  from  our  country.  Mr.  Adams  says,  'ten 
or  eleven  cities  of  Holland  have  declared  themselves 
in  favor  of  American  Independence,  and  it  is  ex 
pected  that  to-day  or  to-morrow  this  Province  will 
take  the  decisive  resolution  of  admitting  me  to  my 
audience.  Perhaps  some  of  the  other  Provinces 
may  delay  it  for  three  or  four  weeks,  but  the  Prince 
has  declared  that  he  has  no  hopes  of  resisting  the 
torrent,  and,  therefore,  that  he  shall  not  attempt  it. 
The  Duke  de  la  Vauguyon  has  acted  a  very  friendly  and 


200  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1782 

honorable  part  in  this  business,  without,  however, 
doing  any  ministerial  act  in  it.'  What  was  said  above 
of  Friesland  came  from  Mr.  Barclay,  the  Consul. 
Mr.  Adams  says  nothing  of  that  Province,  although 
his  letter  is  of  later  date. 

The  Secretary  of  War  has  just  given  notice  to 
Congress,  that  the  Department  of  Finance  is  unable 
to  supply  the  essential  means  of  opening  the  cam 
paign.  This  shocks,  rather  than  surprises,  us.  It 
will  be  one  article  in  the  communications  of  the  dep 
uties  above  mentioned,  and  adds  force  to  the  expe 
diency  of  their  mission. 

The  denial  to  Congress  of  the  right  of  granting 
flags  is  singular  indeed.  May  not  the  power  of  Con 
gress  to  agree  to  a  truce  be  contested  on  the  same 
grounds  ?  The  former  is  a  partial  truce,  and  if  the 
silence  of  the  Confederation  reserves  it  to  the  States, 
the  same  silence  reserves  the  latter.  Admitting  that 
Congress  had  the  right  of  granting  flags,  was  it  not 
exercised  to  the  advantage  of  Virginia  in  procuring 
a  vent  to  her  staple,  and  stopping  the  exportation  of 
her  specie  ? 


TO    EDMUND    RANDOLPH.1 

PHILADELPHIA,  May  29,  1782. 

DEAR  SIR, — I  wrote  you  yesterday  morning  by  the 
post,  fully  and  in  cypher.  As  I  am  told,  however, 
the  bearer  will  probably  be  in  Richmond  before  the 
post,  it  may  not  be  amiss  to  repeat  to  you  that  we 

1  From  the  Madison  Papers  (1840). 


1782]  JAMES  MADISON.  201 

have  heard  nothing  from  Carleton  since  our  refusal 
of  the  passport  to  his  secretary,  and  that  we  have 
authentic  information  from  Europe,  that  insidious 
attempts  have  been  made  both  on  Doctor  Franklin 
and  Mr.  Adams,  by  British  emissaries,  as  well  as 
tempting  overtures  employed  to  divide  our  ally  from 
us.  These  machinations  have  served  no  other  end 
than  to  expose  the  meanness  and  impotence  of  our 
enemy,  and  to  supply  fresh  proofs  of  the  indissoluble 
nature  of  the  alliance.  Mr.  Adams  begins  to  advance 
with  considerable  speed  towards  the  object  of  his 
mission  in  Holland. 

The  action  in  the  West  Indies  is  still  wrapt  up  in 
darkness.  The  enclosed  paper  contains  a  specimen 
of  the  obscure  and  contradictory  advices  which  have 
alternately  excited  our  hopes  and  our  apprehensions. 

A  copy  of  sundry  resolutions  of  the  House  of  Del 
egates,  touching  the  exportation  of  tobacco  in  the 
flags,  was  laid  before  Congress  yesterday  by  the 
Superintendent  of  Finance,  and  referred  to  a  com 
mittee.  On  a  review  of  the  doctrine  of  the  ninth 
Article  of  Confederation,  I  believe,  the  right  of  the 
State  to  prohibit  in  the  present  case  the  exportation 
of  her  produce  cannot  be  controverted.  The  States 
seem  to  have  reserved  at  least  a  right  to  subject  for 
eigners  to  the  same  imposts  and  prohibitions  as  their 
own  citizens  ;  and  the  citizens  of  Virginia  are  at  pres 
ent  prohibited  from  such  an  exportation  as  is  granted 
in  favor  of  the  British  merchants.  This  is  a  very 
interesting  point,  and  unless  the  division  line  between 
the  authority  of  Congress  and  the  States  be  properly 


202  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1782 

ascertained,  every  foreign  treaty  may  be  a  source  of 
internal  as  well  as  foreign  controversy.  You  will 
call  to  mind  one  now  in  negotiation,  which  may  be 
affected  by  the  construction  of  this  clause  in  the  Con 
federation.  Congress  have  no  authority  to  enter  into 
any  convention  with  a  friendly  power  which  would 
abridge  such  a  right.  They  cannot  have  a  greater 
authority  with  respect  to  a  hostile  power.  On  the 
other  side,  it  is  equally  clear,  that  the  State  has  no 
authority  to  grant  flags  for  the  exportation  of  its  pro 
duce  to  the  enemy.  Armed  vessels  would  not  re 
spect  them,  nor  would  they  be  more  respected  in  the 
Courts  of  Admiralty.  Unless  Congress  and  the  State, 
therefore,  act  in  concert,  no  tobacco  can  be  remitted 
to  New  York,  and  a  further  drain  of  specie  must 
ensue.  When  the  matter  was  first  opened  in  Con 
gress,  the  impression  was  unfavorable  to  the  right  of 
the  States,  and  pretty  free  strictures  were  likely  to 
be  made  on  its  opposition  to  the  constitutional  power 
of  Congress.  It  became  necessary,  therefore,  to  re 
cur  to  the  law  and  the  testimony,  which  produced  an 
acquiescence  in  the  contrary  doctrine.  Their  senti 
ments,  however,  with  regard  to  the  policy  and  con 
sistency  of  the  resolutions,  are  very  different.  The 
last  resolution  in  particular,  compared  with  the  pre 
liminary  doctrines,  produces  animadversions,  which 
I  need  not  recite  to  you.  There  are  several  reasons 
which  make  me  regret  much  this  variation  between 
Congress  and  Virginia,  of  which  a  material  one  is 
that  a  great  personage  will  be  touched  by  it,  since  it 
originates  in  his  act ;  and,  since  a  conference  between 


1782]  JAMES  MADISON.                              203 

a   committee  and   him  and  the  Superintendent,  he 

concurred    in  the  expediency  of  granting  the  pass 
ports. 


TO    EDMUND    RANDOLPH  1 

PHILADELPHIA,  June  4,  1782. 

DEAR  SIR, — According  to  your  request,  I  send  an 
authenticated  extract  from  the  Journals  of  the  vote 
of  Congress  on  the  clause  which  interdicts  British 
manufactures.  It  has,  however,  been  for  some  time 
in  print,  and  will  probably  be  at  Richmond  before 
you  receive  the  manuscript  copy.  The  arguments 
urged  against  the  measure  appear  to  me  in  the  same 
light  in  which  you  describe  them.  The  policy  of 
Great  Britain  in  the  capture  of  St.  Eustatia  has  been 
constantly  reprobated  by  some  of  the  wisest  states 
men.  But  whatever  her  policy  might  at  that  period 
be,  it  is  manifest  that  a  very  different  one  is  now 
pursued.  British  goods  are  issued  from  the  enemy's 
line  with  greater  industry  than  they  have  ever  been, 
and,  as  is  universally  believed,  with  the  knowledge,  if 
not  at  the  instigation,  of  those  in  power.  Indeed, 
they  would  counteract  their  new  system  in  doing  other 
wise.  The  sense  of  the  Eastern  States  will  appear 
from  the  ayes  and  noes  on  the  question.  Mr.  Adams, 
in  his  last  despatches,  ascribes  much  of  the  late  paci 
fic  symptoms  in  the  British  nation,  and  of  the  facili 
ties  which  begin  to  attend  the  mission  in  Holland,  to 
our  proscription  of  the  British  merchandize. 

1  From  the  Madison  Papers  (1840). 


204 


THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1782 


You  have  not  sufficiently  designated  the  papers 
from  Mr.  R.  Morris,  from  which  you  wish  an  extract. 
I  do  not  recollect,  nor  can  I  find,  any  letter  which 
contains  a  state  of  the  finances,  except  his  circular 
letters,  which  may  be  found  either  among  the  Legisla 
tive  or  Executive  archives.  If  you  should  be  disap 
pointed  in  these  researches,  I  will,  on  a  renewal  of 
your  demands,  renew  my  researches.  My  charity,  I 
own,  cannot  invent  an  excuse  for  the  prepense  malice 
with  which  the  character  and  services  of  this  gentle 
man  are  murdered.  I  am  persuaded  that  he  accepted 
his  office  from  motives  which  were  honorable  and 
patriotic.  I  have  seen  no  proof  of  misfeasance.  I 
have  heard  of  many  charges  which  were  palpably 
erroneous.  I  have  known  others,  somewhat  suspi 
cious,  vanish  on  examination.  Every  member  in 
Congress  must  be  sensible  of  the  benefit  which  has 

o 

accrued  to  the  public  from  his  administration  ;  no  in 
telligent  man  out  of  Congress  can  be  altogether  insen 
sible  of  it.  The  Court  of  France  has  testified  its 
satisfaction  at  his  appointment,  which  I  really  believe 
lessened  its  repugnance  to  lend  us  money.  These 
considerations  will  make  me  cautious  in  lending  an 
ear  to  the  suggestions  even  of  the  impartial ;  to  those 
of  known  and  vindictive  enemies,  very  incredulous. 
The  same  fidelity  to  the  public  interest  which  obliges 
those  who  are  its  appointed  guardians,  to  pursue 
with  every  rigor  a  perfidious  or  dishonest  servant  of 
the  public,  requires  them  to  confront  the  imputations 
of  malice  against  the  good  and  faithful  one.  I  have, 
in  the  conduct  of  my  colleague  here,  a  sure  index  of 


1782]  •  JAMES  MADISON.  205 

the  sentiments  and  objects  of  one  of  my  colleagues 
who  is  absent,  relative  to  the  Department  of  Finance. 
The  Chevalier  de  laxLuzerne  tells  us  he  has  written 
to  the  General  on  the  subject  of  the  transaction  be 
tween  them,  and  has  no  doubt  that  the  difficulties 
which  attended  it  will  be  removed. 


TO    EDMUND    RANDOLPH  * 

PHILADELPHIA,  June,  1782. 

DEAR  SIR, — General  Washington  has  transmitted 
to  Congress  sundry  informations  he  has  received,  of 
preparations  at  New  York  for  expediting  from  thence 
a  considerable  number  of  ships.  Whether  they  are 
to  convoy  troops,  and  whither,  or  to  bring  off  troops 
from  other  places,  is  uncertain.  He  has  also  trans 
mitted  to  Congress  an  answer  to  him  from  General 
Carleton,  on  a  demand,  made  at  the  instance  of  the 
Legislature  of  South  Carolina,  of  a  re-transportation  of 
the  exiles  at  the  expense  of  the  King  of  Great  Britain. 
This  demand  was  instituted,  not  executed,  during  the 
command  of  Clinton,  from  whom  an  imperious  re 
fusal  was  calculated  upon.  In  pursuance  of  the  views 
of  the  new  system,  his  successor  weeps  over  the  mis 
fortunes  of  the  exiles,  and  in  the  most  soothing 
language  that  could  be  framed,  engages  to  comply 
fully  with  the  application.  This  incident  at  once 
mortifies  our  pride  and  summons  our  vigilance.  We 
have  nothing  further  from  Carleton  on  the  main 
point. 

1  From  the  Madison  Papers  (1840). 


206  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1782 

The  communication,  expected  in  my  last  from  the 
Minister  of  France,  has  been  received,  and  afforded 
a  very  seasonable  occasion,  which  was  improved,  of 
renewing  the  assurances  suited  to  the  present  crisis. 


TO    EDMUND    RANDOLPH.1 

PHILADELPHIA,  June  6,  1782. 

DEAR  SIR, — Mr.  Webb  being  detained  till  this 
morning,  I  enclose  the  gazette  of  it.  You  will  find  a 
singular  extract  from  Lord  North's  budget.  The 
speech  was  delivered  on  the  eleventh  of  March.  It 
must  have  been  Mr.  Ross's  contract,  therefore,  and 
not  Mr.  Morris's,  which  supplied  this  article.  I  am 
just  told  that  the  Senate  have  put  their  veto  on  the 
resolutions  of  the  House  of  Delegates  against  the  lat 
ter.  If  an  existing  law,  however,  prohibits  the  expor 
tation,  and  one  branch  of  the  Legislature  protests 
against  the  authority  of  Congress  to  dispense  with  it, 
the  Executive  will  scarcely  suffer  the  tobacco  to 
be  exported.  *  The  proviso  in  the  resolu 

tions  in  favor  of  the  contract  of  the  State  agents, 
furnishes,  I  find,  a  copious  topic  for  anti-Virginian 
critics.  It  is  inconsistent  with  the  laws  of  the 
State — with  the  ordinances  of  Congress — with,  the 
treaty  with  France — with  gratitude  to  our  allies — for 
tobacco  to  be  shipped  to  New  York,  by  Mr.  Morris, 
for  the  advantage  of  the  United  States  ;  but  if  the 

1  From  the  Madison  Papers  (1840). 


1782]  JAMES  MADISON.  207 

identical  tobocco  be  shipped  by  Mr.  Ross,  for  the  ad 
vantage  of  Virginia,  the  inconsistency  is  done  away 
in  the  eyes  of  the  House  of  Delegates  of  Virginia. 


TO    EDMUND    RANDOLPH.1 

PHILADELPHIA,  June  n,  1782. 

DEAR  Si  , — I  have  your  favor  of  the  first  instant. 
I  hope  you  have  received  mine,  although  you  do  not 
acknowledge  them.  My  punctuality  has  not  been 
intermitted  more  than  once  or  twice  since  your  de 
parture,  and  in  no  instance  for  a  considerable  time 
past. 

I  have  written  so  fully  concerning  the  flags  that  I 
have  nothing  to  add  on  that  subject,  but  that  I  wish 
the  Senate  may,  by  their  perseverance  on  this  occa 
sion,  exemplify  the  utility  of  a  check  to  the  precipi 
tate  acts  of  a  single  legislature. 

Having  raised  my  curiosity  by  your  hints  as  to 
certain  manoeuvres,  you  will  not  forget  your  responsi 
bility  to  gratify  it.  The  pleasure  I  feel  at  your  being 
included  in  the  commission  for  vindicating  the  claims 
of  Virginia,  is  considerably  impaired  by  my  fears  that 
it  may  retard  your  return  hither. 

Great  as  my  partiality  is  to  Mr.  Jefferson,  the  mode 
in  which  he  seems  determined  to  revenge  the  wrong 
received  from  his  country  does  not  appear  to  me  to  be 
dictated  either  by  philosophy  or  patriotism.2  It  argues, 

1  From  the  Madison  Papers  (1840). 

2  He  had  temporarily  retired  from  public  life. 


208  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1782 

indeed,  a  keen  sensibility  and  strong  consciousness  of 
rectitude.  But  this  sensibility  ought  to  be  as  great 
towards  the  relentings  as  the  misdoings  of  the  Legis 
lature,  not  to  mention  the  injustice  of  visiting  the 
faults  of  this  body  on  their  innocent  constituents. 

Sir  Guy  Carleton  still  remains  silent.  The  resolu 
tions  which  the  Legislatures  of  the  States  are  passing, 
may,  perhaps,  induce  him  to  spare  British  pride  the 
mortification  of  supplicating  in  vain  the  forgiveness 
of  rebels. 

Mr.  Izard,  warm  and  notorious  as  his  predilection 
for  the  Lees  is,  acknowledges  and  laments  the  oppo 
sition  made  by  them  to  measures  adapted  to  the 
public  weal. 

The  letter  in  the  first  page  of  the  Gazette  of  this 
morning  was  written  by  Mr.  Marbois.1  In  an  even 
ing  of  promiscuous  conversation  I  suggested  to  him 
my  opinion,  that  the  insidiousness  of  the  British  Court, 
and  the  good  faith  of  our  ally,  displayed  in  the  late 
abortive  attempt  of  the  former  to  seduce  the  latter, 
might  with  advantage  be  made  known,  in  some  form 


1  The  letter  appeared  in  the  Pennsylvania  Packet  for  June  n,  1782,  as  an 
"  Extract  of  a  letter,  written  from  Philadelphia  by  a  gentleman  in  office,  to  one 
of  the  principal  officers  of  the  State  of  New  Jersey."  Marbois'  authorship  was 
carefully  concealed,  the  letter  purporting  to  come  from  an  American.  It  con 
firmed  the  reported  victory  of  Sir  G.  Rodney  over  the  French  in  the  West 
Indies,  but  declared  it  to  be  a  barren  one,  and  that  it  had  "afforded  us  an 
occasion  of  displaying  a  national  character,  a  good  faith,  a  constancy  and  firm 
ness  worthy  of  a  people  who  are  free,  and  determined  to  perish  sooner  than 
cease  to  be  so,"  as  the  resolutions  to  reject  offers  of  a  separate  peace  passed  in 
Maryland,  Pennsylvania,  Virginia,  and  New  Jersey  showed.  The  article  is 
printed  in  full  in  the  Madison  Papers,  vol.  iii.,  xxxvi. 


1782]  JAMES  MADISON.  209 

or  other,  to  the  public  at  large.  He  said  he  would 
think  of  the  matter,  and  next  day  sent  me  the  letter 
in  question,  with  a  request  that  I  would  revise  and 
translate  it  for  the  press,  the  latter  of  which  was 
done.  I  mention  this  that  you  may  duly  appreciate 
the  facts  and  sentiments  contained  in  this  publication. 


TO  EDMUND  RANDOLPH.1 

PHILADELPHIA,  June  18,  1782. 

DEAR  SIR, — I  received  no  letter  from  you  yester 
day,  nor  shall  I  receive  any  for  that  week,  unless  it  be 
through  the  channel  of  Rivington's  Gazette,  the  post 
having  been  robbed  of  his  mail  on  Saturday  evening 
last  in  Maryland.  I  hope  your  letter  did  not  contain 
anything  not  in  cypher  which  is  unfit  for  the  public 
eye.  The  policy,  however,  which  seems  to  direct 
Carleton's  measures,  renders  it  probable  that  he  will 
decline  the  mean  expedient  pursued  on  such  occa 
sions  by  his  predecessors  for  giving  pain  to  individu 
als.  It  will  be  proper  for  us  to  take  from  this  accident 
an  admonition  to  extend  the  use  of  our  cypher. 

The  trade  with  New  York  begins  to  excite  general 
indignation,  and  threatens  a  loss  of  all  our  hard 
money.  The  continued  drains  which  it  makes  from 
the  bank  must  at  least  contract  its  utility,  if  it  pro 
duces  no  greater  mischief  to  it.  The  Legislature  of 
New  Jersey  are  devising  a  remedy  for  this  disgrace 
ful  and  destructive  traffic,  and  a  Committee  of  Con 
gress  are  also  employed  in  the  same  work.  I  have 

1  From  the  Madison  Papers  (1840) 

VOL.    I.— 14 


210  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1782 

little  expectation  that  any  adequate  cure  can  be  ap 
plied,  whilst  our  foreign  trade  is  annihilated,  and  the 
enemy  in  New  York  make  it  an  object  to  keep  open 
this  illicit  channel. 


TO  EDMUND  RANDOLPH.1 

PHILADELPHIA,  June  25,  1782. 

DEAR  SIR, — Your  favor  of  the  fifteenth,  being  more 
fortunate  than  the  preceding  one,  came  safe  to  hand 
yesterday.  The  loss  of  the  mail  is  the  more  provok 
ing,  as  it  is  said  to  have  contained  a  packet  from  New 
York,  which  had  been  intercepted  on  its  passage  to 
England  and  carried  to  North  Carolina. 

The  illicit  trade  with  the  British  lines  has  been 
pushed  so  far,  under  the  encouragement  of  the  enemy, 
as  to  threaten  a  deep  wound  to  our  finances.  Con 
gress  have  renewed  the  exhortation  to  the  States  on 
this  subject,  and  recommended  to  the  people,  through 
them,  a  patriotic  co-operation  with  the  public  meas 
ures.  This  trade,  we  have  also  discovered,  is  carried 
on  with  considerable  effect,  under  collusive  captures. 
This  branch  of  the  iniquity  falls  properly  within  the 
purview  of  Congress,  and  an  ordinance  for  its  excision 
is  in  the  hands  of  a  committee. 

A  letter  from  Mr.  Adams,  of  the  eleventh  of  April, 
informs  his  correspondent  that  five  of  the  seven  prov 
inces  had  decided  in  favor  of  a  treaty  with  the  United 
States,  and  that  the  concurrence  of  the  remaining  two 
might  be  expected  in  a  few  days.  A  Leyden  paper, 

1  From  the  Madison  Papers  (1840). 


1782]  JAMES  MADISON.  211 

of  a  subsequent  date,  reduces  the  exception  to  a  sin 
gle  province.  It  would  seem,  from  a  memorial  from 
the  merchants  to  the  States  General,  that  this  resolu 
tion  had  been  greatly  stimulated  by  an  apprehension 
that  a  sudden  pacification  might  exclude  their  com 
merce  from  some  of  the  advantages  which  England 
may  obtain.  The  memorial  appeals  to  the  effect  of 
the  American  trade  on  the  resources  of  France, 
and  to  the  short  and  indirect  experience  of  it,  which 
Holland  enjoyed  before  the  loss  of  St.  Eustatia,  as 
proof  of  its  immense  consequence.  It  observes,  also, 
that  the  ordinance  of  Congress  against  British  manu 
factures  presented  a  precious  crisis  for  introducing 
those  of  other  nations  ;  which  ought  to  be  the  rather 
embraced,  as  nothing  would  be  so  likely  to  dispose 
Britain  to  the  independence  of  America  and  a  general 
peace,  as  the  prospect  of  her  being  supplanted  in  the 
commercial  preference  expected  from  the  habits  of 
her  lost  provinces. 

The  present  conjecture  with  regard  to  the  fleet 
mentioned  in  my  late  letters,  is,  that  it  conveyed  a 
parcel  of  miserable  refugees,  who  are  destined  to  ex 
change  the  fancied  confiscations  of  their  rebellious 
countrymen,  for  a  cold  and  barren  settlement  in  Nova 
Scotia  or  Penobscot. 


TO  EDMUND  RANDOLPH.1 

PHILADELPHIA,  July  2,  1782. 

DEAR  SIR,  —  The  confidential  and  circumstantial 
communications,   in  your  favor  of  the  twentieth  of 

1  From  the  Madison  Papers  (1840). 


212  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1782 

June,  have  afforded  me  much  pleasure.  Those  which 
relate  to  the  scheme  of  garbling  the  delegation  were 
far  from  surprising  me.  In  a  conversation  with  Mr. 
Jones,  before  he  left  Philadelphia,  it  was  our  joint 
inference,  from  a  review  of  certain  characters  and  cir 
cumstances,  that  such  a  scheme  would  be  tried. 

No  addition  has  been  made  to  our  foreign  intelli 
gence  in  the  course  of  the  past  week.  Some  of  the 
republications  from  the  European  papers  herewith 
sent  throw  light,  however,  on  the  general  state  of 
foreign  affairs.  Those  which  relate  to  Ireland,  in  par 
ticular,  are  very  interesting.  The  Empress  of  Russia 
appears,  by  the  memorial  of  her  Ministers,  to  be  more 
earnest  in  forwarding  a  reconciliation  between  England 
and  Holland,  than  is  consistent  with  the  delicate  im 
partiality  she  has  professed  as  mediatrix,  or  with  that 
regard  which  we  flattered  ourselves  she  felt  for  the 
interests  of  the  United  States. 

One  article  of  our  late  communications  from  France 
was,  that  the  interest  on  the  certificates  is  no  longer 
to  be  continued,  and  that  provision  must  be  made 
within  ourselves.  This  has  caused  great  commotion 
and  clamor,  among  that  class  of  public  creditors, 
against  Congress,  who,  they  believe,  or  affect  to  be 
lieve,  have  transferred  the  funds  to  other  uses.  The 
best  salve  to  this  irritation,  if  it  could  with  truth  be 
applied,  would  be  a  notification  that  all  the  States 
had  granted  the  impost  of  five  per  cent.,  and  that  the 
collection  and  appropriation  of  it  would  immediately 
commence.  It  is  easy  to  see  that  the  States  whose 
jealousy  and  delays  withhold  this  resource  from  the 


1782]  JAMES  MADISON.  213 

United  States,  will  soon  be  the  object  of  the  most 
bitter  reproaches  from  the  public  creditors.  Rhode 
Island  and  Georgia  are  the  only  States  in  this  pre 
dicament,  unless  the  acts  of  Virginia  and  Maryland 
should  be  vitiated  by  the  limitations  with  which  they 
are  clogged. 

No  step  has  yet  been  taken  in  the  instructions  pre 
pared  before  your  departure.  I  expostulated  a  few 
days  ago  with  Dr.  Witherspoon  on  the  subject,  and 
prevailed  on  him  to  move  in  the  business  ;  but  his 
motion  only  proved  the  watchfulness  and  inflexibility 
of  those  who  think  they  advance  towards  their  own 
objects,  in  the  same  proportion  as  they  recede  from 
those  of  Virginia.  I  have  since  shown  him  the  re 
port,  and  he  is  a  confirmed  advocate  both  for  the  in 
nocence  and  expediency  of  it. 

We  are,  even  at  this  day,  without  official  advice  of 
the  naval  event  of  the  twelfth  of  April,  in  the  West 
Indies  ;  nor  have  we  any  advices  of  late  date  from 
that  quarter.  There  is  little  room  to  hope  that  the 
misfortune  of  our  ally  will  be  repaired  by  any  subse 
quent  enterprises. 

Congress  are  much  perplexed  by  the  non-appear 
ance  of  Connecticut  at  the  time  appointed  for  the 
meeting  of  her  agents  and  those  of  Pennsylvania. 
We  wish  to  avoid  leaving  her  any  pretext  to  revive 
the  controversy,  and  yet  the  reasons  for  her  neglect 
cannot  be  pronounced  sufficient.  Her  adversary  pro 
fesses  a  strong  jealousy  that  she  means,  by  every  ar 
tifice,  to  parry  a  decision  during  the  war  ;  and  it  cannot 
be  denied  that  appearances  but  too  well  authorize  it. 


214  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1782 

REPORT  OF  THE  COMMITTEE  CONSISTING  OF  MR.  MADI 
SON,  MR.  DUANE,  &  MR.  CLYMER,  RELATIVE  TO  THE 
INSTRUCTIONS  OF  MR.  ADAMS — JULY  5th,  1782. 

MAD.  MSS. 

The  comittee  appointed  to  revise  the  instructions  of  Mf  Adams  &c, 
recommend. 

That  the  Minister  Plenipo  :  at  the  Hague  be  instructed,  in  case  no  definitive 
steps  shall  have  been  taken  by  him  in  the  proposed  Treaty  of  amity  and  com 
merce  with  the  U.  Provinces,  to  engage  them  if  possible,  in  an  express  stipula 
tion  to  furnish  annually  to  the  U.  States,  a  loan  of  ,  with  an  interest 
not  exceeding  ,  the  principal  not  to  be  demanded  within  years 
after  the  conclusion  of  the  war,  and  the  payment  of  the  interest  to  be  suspended 
during  the  war  ;  or  in  case  the  U.  Provinces  shall  refuse  to  stipulate  such  a  loan, 
that  the  said  Minister  endeavor  to  obtain  their  engagements,  to  authorize  and 
countenance  a  loan  from  their  subjects  &  to  guaranty  if  requisite  the  due  pay 
ment  of  the  interest  &  repayment  of  the  principal  by  the  U.  States. 

That  in  case  definitive  steps  shall  have  been  taken  in  the  proposed  Treaty, 
the  said  Minister  Plenipo:  be  instructed  still  to  represent  to  the  U.  Provinces 
the  great  advantages  which  would  result  as  well  to  them  as  to  the  U.  States 
from  such  pecuniary  succours  to  the  latter  as  would  give  stability  to  their 
finances  and  energy  to  their  measures  against  the  common  Enemy:  and  to  use 
his  utmost  address  to  prevail  on  them  either  to  grant  directly  the  loan  above- 
mentioned,  or  to  support  by  such  responsibility  as  may  be  necessary  the  appli 
cations  made  to  individuals  for  that  purpose,  on  the  part  of  the  U.  States. 

The  Committee  beg  leave  to  observe  that  in  the  Treaty  between  the  U.  S.  & 
M.[ost]  C.[hristian]  Majesty,  it  is  among  other  things  stipulated  that  the  sub 
jects  of  the  parties  "  may  by  testament,  donation,  or  otherwise  dispose  of  their 
"  goods  immoveable  as  well  as  moveable,  in  favor  of  such  persons,  as  to  them 
"  shall  seem  good,  and  the  heirs  of  the  respective  subjects,  wheresoever  resid- 
"  ing,  may  succeed  them  ab  intestate  without  being  obliged  to  obtain  letters  of 
"  naturalization  : 

That  the  plan  of  the  proposed  treaty  between  the  U.  S.  &  the  U.  P.  with 
which  the  Minister  Plenipo:  of  the  former  is  furnished,  extends  this  privilege  to 
the  subjects  of  the  latter,  under  a  general  stipulation  of  the  same  privileges  as 
are  allowed  to  the  most  favor'd  nation  : 

That  as  it  is  not  probable  that  the  U.  P.  have  granted,  or  will  grant  this 
privilege  even  to  the  most  favored  nation,  the  said  treaty  if  executed  in  its 
present  form,  will  engage  the  U.  S.  in  a  concession  which  will  not  be  recipro 
cal,  and  which  if  reciprocal,  would  not  be  equally  beneficial  to  the  parties. 

That  in  the  opinion  of  the  committee  it  is  at  least  questionable  whether  the 
extension  of  this  privilege  to  the  subjects  of  other  powers  than  France  and 
Spain  will  not  encroach  on  the  rights  reserved  by  the  federal  articles  to  the 
individual  States: 


1782]  JAMES  MADISON.  215 

That  without  enquiring  into  the  inconveniences  which  may  result  from  an 
indefinite  permission  to  aliens  to  hold  &  transmit  real  estates  within  this 
country  the  apparent  reluctance  of  some  of  the  States,  notwith [standing]  the 
special  clause  in  the  federal  articles  with  respect  to  France  their  favorable  dispo 
sition  towards  her  to  pass  the  proper  laws  on  this  subject,  renders  their  compli 
ance  in  case  of  a  similar  engagement  to  another  power,  extremely  precarious. 

That  in  order  to  avoid  these  difficulties  &  consequences,  the  committee 
recommend  further: 

That  the  s?  Minister  Plenipo:  be  instructed  in  case  no  steps  inconsistent 
therewith,  shall  have  been  taken,  to  decline  stipulating  to  the  subjects  of  the 
U.  Provinces  any  right  or  privilege  of  holding  any  real  estates  within  the  U. 
States.1 


TO  EDMUND  RANDOLPH.2 

PHILADELPHIA,  July  9,  1782. 

DEAR  SIR, — Your  favors  of  the  twenty-seventh 
were  received  this  morning.  I  sincerely  regret  that 
any  reports  should  have  prevailed  injurious  to  the 
patriotism  of  Williamsburg,  and  particularly  that  my 
name  should,  in  any  manner  whatever,  be  connected 
with  them.  I  informed  Mr.  Jones  that  the  Minister 
of  France  had  been  made  somewhat  uneasy  by  some 
accounts  from  Virginia,  and  desired  him  to  enable  me 
to  remove  it  by  proper  inquiries.  It  must  have  been 
a  very  gross  mistake  that  could  have  built  the  reports 
in  question  on  this  letter,  even  if  its  contents  had 
been  known.  You  saw,  I  presume,  the  letter.  I 
think  I  wrote  you  a  letter  to  the  same  effect,  but  I 
am  not  sure. 

The  trade  with  the  enemy  at  New  York  has  at 
length,  I  am  told,  produced  spirited  and  successful 

1  "  8th  [July].     Last  part  recommitted."     These  words  in  Charles  Thom 
son's  hand. 

2  From  the  Madison  papers  (1840). 


216  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1782 

exertions  among  the  people  of  New  Jersey  for  sup 
pressing  it.  The  same  alarm  and  exertions  seem  to 
be  taking  place  in  Connecticut.  The  ordinance  of 
Congress  against  collusive  captures  on  water  has  not 
yet  passed.  The  mode  of  proof,  and  the  distribution 
of  the  effects,  occasioned  some  diversity  of  opinion, 
and  a  recommitment  ensued.  I  am  not  very  sanguine 
that  any  thing  of  efficacy  will  be  done  in  the  matter. 
Notwithstanding  the  supposed  danger  arising  to  the 
Bank  from  the  exportation  of  hard  money  to  New 
York,  a  dividend  of  four  and  a  half  per  cent,  for  the 
first  half  year  has  been  advertised  to  the  stockholders. 
Will  not  this  be  very  captivating  to  the  avarice  of  the 
Dutchman,  in  case  his  apprehensions  shall  be  removed 
by  a  political  connection  between  the  two  countries  ? 


TO  EDMUND  RANDOLPH.1 

PHILADELPHIA,  July  16,  1782. 

DEAR  SIR, —  Notwithstanding  the  defensive  pro 
fessions  of  the  enemy,  they  seem  to  be  waging  an 
active  war  against  the  post-riders.  The  mail  for  the 
Eastward,  on  Wednesday  last,  shared  the  same  fate 
which  the  Southern  mail  did  a  few  weeks  ago,  and,  it 
is  said,  from  the  same  identical  villains.  This  oper 
ation  has  withdrawn  them  from  their  Southern  stand, 
and  secured  the  arrival  of  the  mail,  which  brings  your 
favor  of  the  fifth  instant.  I  fully  concur  in  the  change 
of  cypher  which  you  suggest,  and  understand  the  ref 
erence  for  a  key-word.  I  have  been  in  some  pain  from 

1  From  the  Madison  Papers  (1840). 


1782]  JAMES  MADISON.  217 

the  danger  incident  to  the  cypher  we  now  use.  The 
enemy,  I  am  told,  have  in  some  instances  published 
their  intercepted  cyphers.  On  our  first  meeting,  I 
propose  to  prepare,  against  another  separation,  a 
cypher  framed  by  Mr.  Livingston  on  a  more  enlarged 
and  complicated  plan  than  ours,  of  which  he  has  fur 
nished  me  several  blank  printed  copies. 

Your  computation  of  the  numbers  in  Virginia  tal 
lies  exactly  with  one  transmitted  by  Mr.  Jefferson,  in 
an  answer  to  several  queries  from  Mr.  Marbois.  It 
is  as  accurate  as  the  official  returns  to  the  Executive 
of  the  Militia  would  admit.  His  proportion  of  the 
fencibles  to  the  whole  number  of  souls  is  stated  pre 
cisely  as  your  computation  states  it. 

You  will  continue  your  information  on  the  case  of 
the  flag,  and  send  me  the  acts  of  the  Legislature  as 
fast  as  they  are  printed.  Will  you  be  so  good,  also, 
as  to  obtain  from  the  Auditors  a  state  of  the  balance 
due  on  the  principles  established  by  law,  and  let  me 
know  when  and  how  it  is  to  be  applied  for  ? — as  also 
what  chance  there  is  of  obtaining  a  regular  remittance 
of  future  allowance  ? 

General  Washington  and  Count  Rochambeau  met 
here  on  Saturday  evening.  The  object  of  their  con 
sultation  is  among  the  arcana  of  war. 

A  despatch  from  the  Commander  in  Chief  commu 
nicated  to  Congress  yesterday  a  late  correspond 
ence  between  him  and  General  Carleton,  principally 
on  the  subject  of  two  traitors,  who,  under  cover  of  a 
flag,  have  exposed  themselves  to  arrest  in  New  Jer 
sey,  and  had  sentence  of  death  passed  upon  them. 


218  THE   WRITINGS  OF  [1782 

General  Carleton,  among  other  observations  on  the 
subject,  says  that,  "  In  a  civil  war,  between  people  of 
one  Empire,  there  can,  during  the  contest,  be  no 
treason  at  all," — and  asks  a  passport  for  General 
Robinson  and  Mr.  Ludlow  to  confer  with  General 
Washington,  or  persons  appointed  by  him,  and  to 
settle  arrangements  on  this  idea.  General  Washing 
ton  declines  the  conference,  observing,  that  the  pro 
posed  subject  of  it  is  within  civil  resort.  Whereupon 
General  Carleton  asks — "  Am  I  to  apply  to  Congress 
to  admit  persons  to  conferences  at  Philadelphia  ?  Can 
any  deputation  be  sent  by  Congress  to  your  camp  to 
meet  persons  appointed  by  me  ?  Or  will  you,  sir,  un 
dertake  to  manage  our  common  interest  ?  "  The  drift 
of  all  this  need  not  be  pointed  out  to  you.  As  a 
counterpart  to  it,  the  British  General  proposes,  in  or 
der  to  remove  all  objection  to  an  exchange  of  sol 
diers  for  seamen,  that  the  latter  shall  be  perfectly 
free,  and  the  former  subject  to  the  condition  of  not 
serving  against  the  thirteen  Provinces  for  one  year, 
within  which  period  he  is  very  sanguine  that  an  end 
will  be  put  to  the  calamities  of  the  present  war. 

The  same  despatch  informs  Congress  that  a  party 
of  the  enemy  have  lately  made  a  successful  incursion 
upon  the  settlements  of  Mohawk,  have  re-occupied 
Oswego,  and  are  extending  themselves  into  the  West 
ern  country.  However  little  these  movements  may 
coincide  with  a  defensive  plan,  they  coincide  perfectly 
with  ideas  which  will  not  fail  to  be  urged  at  a  pacifi 
cation. 

Messrs.  Montgomery  and  Root  returned  yesterday 


1782]  JAMES  MADISON.  219 

from  their  Eastern  deputation.  They  have  not  yet 
made  their  report.  The  former  complains  that  sev 
eral  of  the  States  are  appropriating  the  taxes,  which 
they  lay  as  their  quota  of  the  eight  millions,  to  inter 
nal  uses.  He  owns  that  the  knowledge  he  has  ob 
tained  of  the  case  changed  his  mind  on  that  head, 
and  that  if  the  ground  was  to  be  trodden  over  again, 
he  should  take  a  very  different  part  in  Congress.  He 
adds,  that  the  current  opinion  is,  that  a  vessel  arrived 
at  Quebec  brings  a  Royal  Charter  for  Vermont ;  that 
the  people  there  are  in  much  confusion,  and  many  of 
them  disposed  to  re-unite  with  New  Hampshire.  A 
letter  to  Mr.  Livingston,  from  Mr.  Livermore,  cor 
roborates  this  good  news.  It  imports  that  a  very  un 
expected  turn  had  taken  place  in  the  temper  of  the 
people,  between  the  river  and  the  ridge,  that  they 
were  petitioning  New  Hampshire  to  be  restored  to 
that  State,  and  that  measures  would  be  taken  in  con 
cert  with  New  York  for  that  purpose.  The  revolu 
tion  in  the  sentiments  of  Montgomery  may  be  owing, 
in  part,  to  the  new  relation  in  which  Pennsylvania 
stands  to  Connecticut,  which,  he  says,  is  governed  on 
this  occasion  by  interested  individuals.  The  contro 
versy  between  Pennsylvania  and  Connecticut  will,  I 
suppose,  be  now  resumed,  and  put  into  a  course  for 
decision,  the  return  of  Mr.  Root  having  removed  the 
cause  which  suspended  it. 

In  the  beginning  of  this  month,  committees  were 
appointed,  in  pursuance  of  a  previous  resolution  for 
such  an  appointment  every  half-year,  to  examine  into 
the  proceedings  of  the  several  Executive  Depart- 


220  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1782 

ments,  and  make  report  to  Congress.  This  plan 
was  adopted  not  only  to  discharge  the  general 
duty  of  Congress,  and  to  satisfy  their  constituents, 
but  also  that  such  reports  might  shelter,  in  some  de 
gree,  faithful  officers  from  unmerited  imputations  and 
suspicions,  as  well  as  expose  to  just  censure  those  of 
an  opposite  character. 

This  cypher,  I  find,  is  extremely  tedious,  and  liable 
to  errors. 

General  Carleton,  in  his  letter  to  General  Wash 
ington  above  quoted,  says,  with  respect  to  Lippencot 
only,  that  the  court  had  passed  their  judgment,  and 
that  as  soon  as  the  length  of  the  proceedings  would 
admit,  a  copy  should  be  sent  to  him.  It  is  inferred 
that  this  murderer  will  not  be  given  up,  and  conse 
quently  a  vicarious  atonement  must  be  made  by  the 
guiltless  Asgill. 


TO  EDMUND  RANDOLPH.1 

PHILADELPHIA,  July  23,  1782. 

DEAR  SIR, — I  have  at  length  the  pleasure  of  pre 
senting  you  with  certain,  though  not  official,  intelli 
gence  of  the  recognition  of  our  Independence  by  the 
States  General.  This  event,  with  other  interesting 
particulars,  is  contained  in  the  enclosed  gazettes. 
Among  its  salutary  consequences  to  this  country,  I 
hope  the  people  of  Virginia  will  not  be  inattentive  to 
its  influence  on  the  value  of  its  staple,  on  which  it  is 
very  probable  speculations  will  be  attempted. 

1  From  the  Madison  Papers  (1840). 


1782]  JAMES  MADISON.  221 

The  language  and  measures  of  the  present  Admin 
istration  will  furnish  you  with  copious  matter  for  re 
flection.  If  we  had  received  fewer  lessons  of  caution 
against  sanguine  expectations,  I  should,  with  confi 
dence,  explain  them  by  a  scheme  for  a  general  pacifi 
cation,  and  for  fathering  on  their  predecessors  all  the 
obnoxious  conditions  which  the  public  distresses  may 
expose  them  to.  If  this  solution  were  a  just  one,  it 
ought,  at  the  same  time,  to  be  remembered  that  the 
triumph  of  Rodney  may  give  a  new  turn  to  their  pol 
itics.  It  appears,  from  the  paper  from  which  the  en 
closed  intelligence  is  republished,  that  this  event  had 
reached  London  ;  that  it  was  received  with  great  re 
joicings  ;  but  that  the  public  were  still  haunted  with 
fears  for  Jamaica.  Other  articles,  not  included  in  the 
paper  herewith  sent,  are  the  capture  of  one,  if  not  two, 
French  seventy-fours,  with  a  number  of  transports  for 
the  East  Indies,  by  Admiral  Barrington  ;  the  capture 
of  a  British  frigate,  with  some  transports,  by  a  Dutch 
ship  of  war;  the  capture  of  the  valuable  Island  of 
Ceylon,  from  the  Dutch,  by  Admiral  Hughes  ;  and 
of  Negapatam,  another  of  their  important  possessions, 
on  the  coast  of  Coromandel,  with  two  ships,  richly 
freighted  with  spices  and  other  oriental  productions. 
Ireland  is  likely  to  be  indulged  in  every  thing.  In 
addition  to  a  free  trade  and  a  free  legislation,  they 
have  obtained  the  assent  of  the  Lord  Lieutenant  to 
an  Act  of  Parliament  for  emancipating  the  Catholics 
from  their  shackles  on  their  religious  rights,  and  on 
their  tenures  of  real  property.  Your  philanthropy 
will  be  gratified  by  my  adding,  as  other  proofs  of 


222  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1782 

the  progress  of  light  and  freedom,  the  abolition  of 
the  inquisitorial  jurisdiction  in  Sicily — the  only  part 
of  the  Neapolitan  dominions  where  it  was  in  force — 
and  the  inefficiency  of  the  Pope's  visit  to  Vienna  in 
checking  the  liberal  innovations  of  the  Emperor  in 
his  ecclesiastical  polity.  *  *  * 

General  Washington  is  still  here.  I  have  nothing 
to  add  to  my  last  on  the  subject  of  Lippencot  and 
Asgill. 

TO    EDMUND    RANDOLPH.1 

PHILADELPHIA,  August  9,  1782. 

DEAR  SIR, — Extract  of  a  letter  from  Carleton  and 
Digby  to  General  Washington,  August  the  second  : 
"  We  are  acquainted,  sir,  by  authority,  that  negotia 
tions  for  a  general  peace  have  already  commenced  at 
Paris,  and  that  Mr.  Grenville  is  invested  with  full 
powers  to  treat  with  all  parties  at  war,  and  is  now  at 
Paris  in  execution  of  his  commission.  And  we  are 
likewise,  sir,  further  made  acquainted,  that  His 
Majesty,  in  order  to  remove  all  obstacles  to  that 
peace  which  he  so  ardently  wishes  to  restore,  has 
commanded  his  ministers  to  direct  Mr.  Grenville  that 
the  independency  of  the  Thirteen  Provinces  should 
be  proposed  by  him,  instead  of  making  it  a  condition 
of  a  general  treaty  ;  however,  not  without  the  highest 
confidence  that  the  loyalists  shall  be  restored  to  their 
possessions,  or  a  full  compensation  made  them  for 
whatever  confiscations  may  have  taken  place." 

1  From  the  Madison  papers  (1840). 


1782]  JAMES  MADISON.  223 

This  is  followed  by  information  that  transports  are 
preparing  to  convey  all  American  prisoners  in  Eng 
land  to  the  United  States,  and  a  proposition  for  a 
general  exchange,  in  which  seamen  are  to  be  placed 
against  seamen  as  far  as  they  will  go,  and  the  balance 
in  favor  of  Great  Britain  to  be  redeemed  by  land 
prisoners — the  former  to  be  free,  the  latter  not  to 
serve  in  war  against  the  Thirteen  Provinces  for  one 
year.  An  embarcation  is  taking  place  at  New  York 
for  Charleston,  either  to  reinforce  that  garrison  or 
replace  it. 

The  preceding  letter  was  published  in  New  York, 
at  the  same  time  it  was  sent  to  General  Washington. 
I  commit  this  intelligence  to  your  discretion,  making 
no  other  remark  than  that  it  clearly  calls  for  our 
watchfulness,  at  the  same  time  that  it  flatters  our 
expectations. 

TO    EDMUND    RANDOLPH.1 

PHILADELPHIA,  August  13,  1782. 

DEAR  SIR, — I  transmitted  to  you,  a  few  days  ago, 
by  express,  the  contents  of  a  letter  from  General 
Carleton  and  Admiral  Digby  to  General  Washington, 
announcing  the  purpose  of  the  British  Court  to 
acknowledge  the  independence  of  the  Thirteen  Pro 
vinces.  Our  expected  advices  on  this  head  from 
Europe  are  not  yet  arrived.  A  Mr.  Blake,  an  opulent 
citizen  of  South  Carolina,  who  came  from  Great 
Britain  under  a  passport  from  Mr.  Laurens  to  New 

1  From  the  Madison  Papers  (1840). 


224  THE   WRITINGS  OF  [1782 

York,  and  thence  hither,  assures  us  that  the  Adminis 
tration  are  serious  with  respect  to  peace  and  the  inde 
pendence  of  this  country  ;  that  the  point,  however, 
was  carried  in  the  Cabinet  by  a  majority  of  two 
voices  only  ;  that  their  finances  are  so  disordered  that 
a  continuance  of  the  war  is  in  a  manner  impracticable  ; 
that  the  militia  at  New  York  have  been  thanked  for 
their  past  services,  and  told  explicitly  that  they  would 
not  be  wanted  in  future  ;  that  the  evacuation  of  the 
United  States  will  certainly  take  place  this  fall,  and 
that  a  large  number  of  transports  are  coming  from 
England  to  remove  the  British  garrisons,  probably 
to  the  West  Indies  ;  that  these  transports  will  contain 
about  two  thousand  five  hundred  Germans,  who,  it  is 
supposed,  in  case  of  such  an  evacuation,  will  have 
the  same  destination  ;  that  Carleton  told  him,  and 
desired  him  to  mention  it  at  large,  that  he  was  a  real 
friend  to  America,  and  wished  her  to  be  powerful, 
rich,  united,  and  happy,  and  secure  against  all  her 
enemies ;  that  he  also  intimated,  in  the  course  of 
conversation,  that  Canada  would  probably  be  given 
up  as  a  fourteenth  member  of  the  Confederacy. 
You  will  draw  such  conclusions  from  these  particulars 
as  you  think  fit.  The  gentlemen  of  South  Carolina 
vouch  for  the  veracity  of  Mr.  Blake.  It  appears  to 
me  much  more  clear  that  the  Ministry  really  mean  to 
subscribe  to  our  independence,  than  that  they  have 
renounced  the  hope  of  seducing  us  from  the  French 
connection. 

The  motion  for  revoking  the  power  given  to  France 
has  been  made  again,  and  pushed  with  the  expected 


1782]  JAMES  MADISON.  225 

earnestness,  but  was  parried,  and  will  issue,  I  believe, 
in  an  adoption  of  your  report  with  a  representation 
thereupon  to  the  Court  of  France. 

Among  other  means  of  revenue,  the  back  lands 
have  on  several  late  occasions  been  referred  to,  and 
at  length  recommended  by  a  Grand  Committee  to 
the  consideration  of  Congress.  A  motion  for  assign 
ing  a  day  to  take  up  the  report  was  negatived  by  a 
small  majority.  The  report  has  been  repeated  by 
the  committee,  but  a  second  experiment  has  not  been 
made  in  Congress.  Several  of  the  Middle  States 
seem  to  be  facing  about.  Maryland,  however,  pre 
serves  its  wonted  jealousy  and  obstinacy. 

In  compiling  the  evidence  of  our  title,  I  suppose 
you  will,  of  course,  be  furnished  with  all  Mr.  Jeffer 
son's  lights.  I  have  lately  seen  a  fact  stated  by  him, 
which  shows  clearly  the  ideas  entertained  by  Virginia 
with  respect  to  her  territorial  limits  subsequent  to 
the  resumption  of  the  charter.  In  a  convention 
between  commissioners  on  the  part  of  the  Common 
wealth  of  England,  and  of  the  Grand  Assembly  of 
Virginia  in  1651,  by  which  the  latter  submit  to  the 
new  government,  it  is  stipulated  that  Virginia  shall 
enjoy  the  ancient  bounds  and  limits  granted  by  the 
charters  of  the  former  Kings,  and  that  a  new  charter 
shall  be  issued  from  the  Parliament  against  any  that 
shall  have  entrenched  upon  the  rights  thereof 


VOL.  I. — 15 


226  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1782 


TO    EDMUND    RANDOLPH.1 


PHILADELPHIA,  August  20,  1782. 

DEAR  SIR, — In  my  last  I  informed  you  that  the 
motion  to  rescind  the  control  given  to  F ranee  over 
the  American  Ministers  had  been  parried,  and  would 
probably  end  in  an  adoption  of  your  report.  It  was 
parried  by  a  substitute  so  expressed  as  to  give  a  com 
mittee  sufficient  latitude  in  reporting,  without  imply 
ing  on  the  part  of  Congress  a  design  to  alter  past 
instructions.  The  composition  of  the  committee  ap 
pointed  according  well  with  the  object  of  the  substi 
tute,  a  report  was  made  that  the  expository  report 
should  be  referred  to  the  Secretary  of  Foreign  Affairs, 
to  be  by  him  revised  and  transmitted  to  the  Ministers 
in  Europe,  and  that  the  latter  should  communicate 
so  much  thereof  as  they  might  judge  fit  to  His  Most 
Christian  Majesty.  *  *  * 


TO    EDMUND    RANDOLPH.1 

PHILADELPHIA,  August  27,  1782. 

DEAR  SIR, — Your  favor  of  the  sixteenth  came  duly 
to  hand  yesterday.  The  hints  which  it  gives  with 
regard  to  merchandizes  imported  in  returning  flags, 
and  the  intrusion  of  obnoxious  aliens  through  other 
States,  merit  attention.  The  latter  subject  has,  on 
several  occasions,  been  mentioned  in  Congress,  but,  I 
believe,  no  committee  has  ever  reported  a  remedy 
for  the  abuse.  A  uniform  rule  of  naturalization  ought 

1  From  the  Madison  Papers  (1840). 


1782]  JAMES  MADISON,  227 

certainly  to  be  recommended  to  the  States.  Their 
individual  authority  seems,  if  properly  exerted,  to  be 
competent  to  the  case  of  their  own  citizens.  *  *  * 

We  are  still  left  without  information  concerning 
negotiations  in  Europe.  So  long  a  silence  of  our 
Ministers,  at  so  interesting  a  crisis,  grows  equally 
distressing  and  inexplicable.  The  French  fleet  has 
gone  into  Boston  harbour.  The  arrival  of  a  British 
fleet  on  this  coast  is  reported,  but  disbelieved  by 
many.  The  French  army  is  on  its  way  northward 
from  Baltimore.  It  is  to  proceed  in  five  divisions, 
the  first  of  which  is  to  be  here  about  Friday  next. 

Congress  received  yesterday  a  letter  from  General 
Washington  enclosing  one  to  him  from  Carleton, 
with  the  proceedings  of  the  court-martial  in  the  case 
of  Lippencot.  It  appears  that  this  culprit  did  not 
deny  the  fact  charged  upon  him,  but  undertook  to 
justify  it  as  a  necessary  retaliation,  and  as  warranted 
by  verbal  orders  from  the  Board  of  Refugees.  The 
court  decided  this  warrant  to  be  insufficient,  but  ac 
quitted  him  on  the  pretext  that  no  malicious  intention 
appeared.  Carleton  explicitly  acknowledges  and 
reprobates  the  crime,  and  promises  to  pursue  it  in 
other  modes  ;  complaining,  at  the  same  time,  of  ir 
regularity  in  the  step  taken  by  General  Washington 
of  selecting  and  devoting  to  execution  an  innocent, 
and  even  capitulant,  officer,  before  satisfaction  had 
been  formally  demanded  and  refused.  General 
Washington  seems  to  lean  to  the  side  of  compassion, 
but  asks  the  direction  of  Congress.  What  that  will 
be,  may,  perhaps,  be  communicated  in  my  next. 


228  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1782 

The  consideration  of  your  territorial  report  has 
been  resumed.  The  expedient  which  was  meant  to 
conciliate  both  sides  proved,  as  often  happens,  a 
means  of  widening  the  breach.  The  jealousies  an 
nounced  on  the  side  mentioned  in  my  last  were  an 
swered  with  reciprocal  jealousies  from  the  other, 
and  the  report  between  the  two  was  falling  to  the 
ground,  when  a  commitment,  as  a  lesser  evil,  was 
proposed  and  agreed  to. 

Mr.  Jones  and  his  family  arrived  on  Sunday  at 
Germantown,  without  halting  in  this  city.  Himself, 
his  lady,  and  little  son,  were  all  extremely  sick  dur 
ing  the  whole  journey.  Mrs.  Jones  is  still  very  much 
indisposed,  and  Mr.  Jones  considerably  so.  They  do 
not  propose  to  come  into  the  city  till  the  salubrity  of 
Germantown  shall  have  enabled  them  to  encounter 
its  noise  and  polluted  atmosphere. 

I  cannot,  in  any  way,  make  you  more  sensible  of 
the  importance  of  your  kind  attention  to  pecuniary 
remittances  for  me,  than  by  informing  you  that  I 
have  for  some  time  past  been  a  pensioner  on  the  fa 
vor  of  Haym  Salomon,  a  Jew  broker.  Will  not  the 
agent  of  Mr.  Morris  give  a  draft,  payable  to  me, 
for  notes  payable  to  the  bearer  ?  Or  may  not  the 
notes  be  so  endorsed  as,  in  case  of  accident,  to  pre 
vent  payment  to  another?  In  either  of  those  cases, 
a  remittance  of  notes  (if  they  can  be  procured  for  me) 
by  the  post  will  be  safe.  But  my  present  situation 
renders  such  a  conveyance  preferable  to  delay,  even 
if  neither  of  the  foregoing  expedients  be  practicable. 
Show  this  paragraph  to  Mr.  Ambler,  if  you  please. 


1782]  JAMES  MADISON.  229 


TO    EDMUND    RANDOLPH.1 


PHILADELPHIA,  September  3,  1782. 

DEAR  SIR, — You  will  again  be  disappointed  at  the 
opening  of  this,  since  it  contains  no  European  in 
telligence  on  the  subject  of  peace.  Among  other 
reasons  which  render  it  astonishing  that  we  should  be 
long  uninformed,  a  material  one  is,  that  neither  the 
Court  of  France,  nor  our  Ministers,  can  be  insensible 
of  the  inexpediency  of  leaving  the  people  at  large  so 
exposed  to  misrepresentations  of  the  enemy.  I  am 
happy  to  find,  by  your  letter  of  the  twenty-fourth, 
and  those  received  from  my  other  correspondents  by 
yesterday's  post,  that  so  cautious  an  ear  is  given  to 
every  thing  which  comes  from  them  of  a  flattering 
aspect. 

The  enclosed  hand-bill,  published  a  few  days  ago, 
will  inform  you  of  the  steps  taken  at  Charleston  to 
wards  an  evacuation  of  that  place.  It  is  said  to 
have  given  fresh  violence  to  the  fermentations  in 
New  York. 

Another  petition  from  Kentucky  has  been  received 
by  Congress,  contending  for  the  right  of  Congress 
to  create  new  States,  and  praying  for  an  exertion  of 
it  in  their  behalf.  A  copy  will  be  sent  to  the  Gover 
nor  by  the  Delegates.  Mr.  Lee  moved  that  the  ori 
ginal  should  be  referred  to  him  by  Congress.  The 
debate  which  ensued  was  terminated  by  an  adjourn 
ment,  and  has  not  been  revived. 

General  Washington  writes  to  Congress  that 
Carleton  had  concurred  in  the  proposition  for  a 

1  From  the  Madison  Papers  (1840). 


23o  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1782 

general  cartel  so  far  as  to  appoint  a  Commissioner  for 
that  purpose.  There  is  little  probability,  however, 
that  he  has  authority  to  settle  such  a  cartel  on  the 
principles  which  Congress  had  in  view,  namely,  those 
of  a  National  Convention.  It  was  thought,  by  some, 
that  this  would  put  to  the  test  the  sincerity  of  their 
professions  on  the  subject  of  independence. 

I  believe  I  did  not  acquaint  you,  on  a  former  occa 
sion,  that  the  prisoners  who  had  lately  returned  from 
captivity  in  England  were  discharged,  in  conse 
quence  of  an  agreement,  by  Franklin,  that  a  like 
number  of  the  army  of  Cornwallis  should  be  given 
for  them.  This  bold  step  at  first  gave  much  offence. 
Compassion,  however,  for  the  patriotic  captive  stifled 
reproaches.  They  will  probably  come  out  yet,  un 
less  subsequent  events  discountenance  them. 

There  are,  it  seems,  three  letters  in  the  post-office 
from  Carleton  to  the  Governor,  which  do  not  appear 
to  have  been  licensed,  nor  is  it  known  how  they  got 
into  that  channel.  The  curiosity  of  people  on  this 
point  is  inconceivable. 

A  very  unlucky  accident  has  happened  to  one  of  the 
fleet  of  our  Allies.  After  it  got  safe  into  the  harbour 
of  Boston,  the  unskilfulness  or  negligence  of  a  pilot 
suffered  a  seventy-four  to  strike  on  a  rock,  the  wound 
occasioned  by  which  proved  mortal.  Most  of  the 
furniture  has  been  saved. 

I  have  not  yet  presented  the  note  to  Cohen  which 
you  have  been  so  good  as  to  enclose  me.  The 
general  obstacle  to  advances  here,  to  be  replaced  in 
Virginia,  has  been  the  balance  in  trade  against  the 


1782]  JAMES  MADISON.  231 

latter.  This  is  the  current  answer  to  attempts  to 
negotiate  drafts  on  Virginia.  My  next  will  in 
form  you  of  the  result  of  the  experiment  of  your 
note.  If  its  success  depends  merely  on  a  confidence 
in  your  credit,  it  will  certainly  be  productive.  Mr. 
Ross  has  unlimited  credit  in  this  place.  May  it  not 
be  made  instrumental  to  our  supply  ?  At  least  it 
would  be  well  to  consult  him  when  an  occasion  pre 
sents.  His  bills  on  Whiteside  will  command  any 
sum  that  may  be  wanted. 

The  French  army  has  been  passing  through  this 
place  for  several  days  northward.  The  last  division 
will  pass  to-morrow  or  the  day  after.  The  praises 
bestowed  on  their  discipline  and  sobriety  in  Virginia 
are  repeated  here  with  equal  cordiality  and  justice. 


TO  EDMUND  RANDOLPH.1 

PHILADELPHIA,  September  10,  1782. 

DEAR  SIR, — The  loss  of  the  French  seventy-four 
in  Boston  harbour  presented  an  occasion,  which  was 
embraced  by  Congress,  of  making  a  small  requital 
to  their  Ally  for  his  benevolent  exertions  in  be 
half  of  the  United  States.  They  have  directed  the 
Agent  of  Marine  to  replace  the  loss  by  presenting,  in 
the  name  of  the  United  States,  the  ship  America  to 
the  Chevalier  de  la  Luzerne,  for  the  service  of  His 
Most  Christian  Majesty.  The  States  were  unanimous 
in  this  vote.  The  dissenting  members  were  Bland 
and  Jones,  of  Virginia. 

1  From  the  Madison  Papers  (1840). 


232  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1782 

The  report  of  the  Grand  Committee,  "  that  the 
Western  lands,  if  ceded  to  the  United  States,  would 
be  an  important  fund,"  &c.,  was  the  subject  of  the  de 
liberations  of  Congress  on  Thursday  and  Friday  last. 
After  the  usual  discussion  of  the  question  of  right, 
and  a  proposal  of  opposite  amendments  to  make  the 
report  favor  the  opposite  sides,  a  turn  was  given  to 
the  debate  to  the  question  of  expediency,  in  which 
it  became  pretty  evident  to  all  parties,  that  unless  a 
compromise  took  place,  no  advantage  could  ever  be 
derived  to  the  United  States,  even  if  their  right  were 

o 

ever  so  valid.  The  number  of  States  interested  in 
the  opposite  doctrine  rendered  it  impossible  for  the 
title  of  the  United  States  ever  to  obtain  a  vote  of 
Congress  in  its  favor,  much  less  any  coercive  meas 
ures  to  render  the  title  of  any  fiscal  importance  ; 
whilst  the  individual  States,  having  both  the  will  and 
the  means  to  avail  themselves  of  their  pretensions, 
might  open  their  land  offices,  issue  their  patents,  and, 
if  necessary,  protect  the  execution  of  their  plans  ; 
without  any  other  molestation  than  the  clamors  of  in 
dividuals  within  and  without  the  doors  of  Congress. 
This  view  of  the  case  had  a  manifest  effect  on  the 
most  temperate  advocates  of  the  Federal  title.  With- 
erspoon  moved  a  set  of  resolutions  recommending  to 
the  States  which  had  made  no  cessions  to  take  up  the 
subject ;  and  to  the  States  whose  cessions  were  not 
entirely  conformable  to  the  plan  of  Congress,  to  re 
consider  their  acts  ;  and  declaring,  that  in  case  of  a 
compliance  of  the  several  States  claiming  the  back 
lands,  none  of  their  determinations  with  regard  to 


1782]  JAMES  MADISON.  233 

private  property  within  their  cessions  shall  be  re 
versed  or  altered  without  their  consent,  except  in 
cases  falling  within  the  ninth  Article  of  the  Confed 
eration.  On  this  motion  the  report  was  postponed, 
and  these  resolutions  committed.  The  report  of  the 
committee  on  the  last  article  will  probably  determine 
the  ultimate  sense  of  Congress  on  the  pretensions  of 
the  companies. 

Every  review  I  take  of  the  Western  territory  pro 
duces  fresh  conviction,  that  it  is  the  true  policy  of 
Virginia,  as  well  as  of  the  United  States,  to  bring  the 
dispute  to  a  friendly  compromise.  A  separate  gov 
ernment  cannot  be  distant,  and  will  be  an  insuperable 
barrier  to  subsequent  profits.  If,  therefore,  the  de 
cision  of  the  State  on  the  claims  of  companies  can  be 
saved,  I  hope  her  other  conditions  will  be  relaxed. 


TO    EDMUND    RANDOLPH.1 

PHILADELPHIA,  September  n,  1782. 

DEAR  SIR, — The  gentleman  by  whom  I  wrote  this 
morning  having  waited  till  I  had  the  opportunity  of 
knowing  the  contents  of  the  despatches  from.  Hol 
land,  I  take  advantage  of  it  to  add  that  we  are  dis 
appointed  by  their  silence  with  regard  to  peace. 
Those  from  Mr.  Adams  relate  chiefly  to  his  trans 
actions  with  the  States  General.  A  letter  from  Mr. 
Laurens,  of  the  thirtieth  of  May,  informs  us  that  he 
is  returning  to  the  United  States,  having  declined 
the  service  of  Minister  for  peace.  There  is  an 

1  From  the  Madison  Papers  (1840). 


234  THE   WRITINGS  OF  [1782 

uninteresting  part  of  a  letter  from  Mr.  Dana,  the  first 
pages  of  it  having  been  omitted.  Mr.  Berkley  writes, 
on  the  thirteenth  of  July,  that  the  mail  from  Eng 
land,  subsequent  to  the  resignation  of  Fox,  Burke, 
&c.,  breathes  war.  He  confirms  the  success  of  the 
combined  fleets  against  the  Quebec,  &c.,  and  the 
sailing  of  a  fleet  from  the  Texel,  consisting  of  eleven 
sail  of  the  line,  five  or  six  frigates,  &c.,  to  cruise  in 
the  North  Seas,  and  the  retreat  of  Admiral  Howe 
into  port.  A  New  York  paper  of  the  seventh  con 
tains  a  very  interesting  conversation  on  the  — 
July,  in  the  House  of  Lords,  between  Shelburne  and 
the  Duke  of  Richmond,  on  the  subject  of  ministerial 
politics,  in  which  the  latter  assigns  his  reasons  for 
not  following  the  example  of  Fox,  &c.,  and  both 
their  sentiments  with  respect  to  American  Independ 
ence.  The  Duke  of  Richmond  seems  tolerably  well 
reconciled  to  it,  but  Shelburne  speaks  out  his  an 
tipathy  without  depriving  himself  of  the  plea  of 
necessity.  He  professes  to  adhere,  however,  to  the 
principles  which  the  Administration  carried  into  office 
relative  to  the  war  against  America.  I  have  written 
this  in  extreme  haste  ;  you  will  be  very  sensible  of  it 
by  its  incorrectness. 


TO    EDMUND    RANDOLPH.1 

PHILADELPHIA,  September  17,  1782. 

DEAR  SIR, — My  letters,  by  a  private  hand,  subse 
quent  to   the  last  post,  have  anticipated  the  chief 

1  From  the  Madison  Papers  (1840). 


1782]  JAMES  MADISON.  235 

intelligence  from  Holland,  which  I  had  allotted  for  the 
post  of  this  week.  I  have,  however,  one  important 
article,  which  at  that  date  lay  under  an  injunction  of 
secrecy,  which  has  been  since  taken  off.  Mr.  Adams, 
we  are  informed,  has  contracted  with  a  mercantile 
house  in  Holland  for  the  negotiation  of  a  loan  of  five 
millions  of  guilders,  or  about  ten  millions  of  livres, 
for  which  he  is  to  give  five  per  cent,  interest,  and 
four  and  a  half  per  cent,  for  commission  and  other 
douceurs  and  charges,  which  will  raise  the  interest  to 
about  six  per  cent.  The  principal  is  to  be  discharged 
in  five  annual  payments,  commencing  with  the  tenth 
year  from  the  date  of  the  loan.  When  the  despatches 
left  Holland,  upwards  of  a  million  and  a  half  of 
guilders  had  been  subscribed,  and  upwards  of  one 
million  actually  received.  The  contractors,  however, 
make  it  a  condition  that  none  of  the  money  should 
be  paid  to  the  United  States  until  the  contract 
should  be  ratified  by  Congress.  This  ratification 
passed  on  Saturday,  and  its  arrival  in  Holland  will 
place  under  the  orders  of  Mr.  Morris  the  money 
which  shall  then  have  been  procured.  How  far  the 
amount  will,  by  that  time,  have  been  augmented,  is 
uncertain.  The  contractors  seemed  to  be  tolerably 
sanguine,  but  not  absolutely  sure,  of  getting  the 
whole  sum.  The  partial  subscription  already  secured 
is  a  most  seasonable  relief  to  the  Department  of 
Finance,  which  was  struggling  under  the  most  critical 
difficulties. 

In  addition  to  the  preceding  fund,  Congress  have 
been  led,  by  a  despair  of  supplies  from  the  States,  to 


236  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1782 

sue  for  a  further  loan  of  four  millions  of  dollars  for 
the  service  of  the  ensuing,  and  the  deficiencies  of 
the  present,  year.  This  demand  will  be  addressed, 
in  the  first  instance,  to  the  Court  of  France.  In  case 
of  miscarriage  there,  an  experiment  will  be  made  on 
the  liberality  of  our  new  friends. 

The  Legislature  of  Rhode  Island  has  broke  up 
without  according  to  the  impost  of  five  per  cent. 
Congress  have  apportioned  one  million  two  hundred 
thousand  dollars  on  the  States,  for  the  payment  of 
interest  to  the  public  creditors.  Virginia  is  rated 
somewhat  lower  in  this  requisition  than  in  the  last  ; 
not,  however,  without  complaints  from  some  quar 
ters.  On  these  subjects  you  will  have  full  informa 
tion  from  Mr.  Lee,  who  will  set  off  in  a  few  days, 
he  says,  for  Virginia,  in  order  to  be  at  the  October 
Session. 

I  should  have  told  you  that  some  progress  had 
been  made  by  Mr.  Adams  in  the  Treaty  of  Amity 
and  Commerce  with  their  High  Mightinesses.  His 
propositions,  with  the  remarks  and  amendments  of 
the  College  of  Admiralty,  had  been  taken  ad  refer 
endum.  It  is  somewhat  extraordinary  that  he  should 
omit  to  send  us  a  copy  of  those  propositions  and 
remarks.  He  had  taken  no  steps  towards  a  Treaty 
of  Alliance. 

The  debates  and  explanations  produced  by  the 
resignation  of  Mr.  Fox  and  his  adherents,  have  un 
veiled  some  of  the  arcana  of  the  British  Cabinet. 
I  enclose  them  for  you  complete,  as  far  as  they 
have  been  published  here.  If  there  be  any  sincerity 


1782]  JAMES  MADISON.  237 

in  the  party  remaining  in  office,  it  would  seem  that 
the  war  is  not  to  be  pursued  against  the  United 
States,  nor  the  independence  suffered  to  be  a  bar  to 
peace.  We  shall  be  able  to  judge  better  of  this  sin 
cerity  when  the  proceedings  of  Mr.  Grenville  come  to 
our  knowledge. 

Mr.  Cohen  has  advanced  me  fifty  pounds  of  this 
currency,  which,  he  says,  is  the  utmost  that  his  en 
gagements,  and  the  scarcity  of  money,  will  permit. 
I  have  given  him  an  order  on  you  for  that  sum,  in 
favor  of  his  partner  at  Richmond. 

September  17. 

On  Friday  two  large  French  frigates,  bringing 
money,  &c.  for  the  French  army,  and  despatches 
for  Congress  and  the  French  Minister,  came  into 
Delaware  Bay.  For  want  of  pilots  in  time,  they  got 
entangled  among  the  bars  which  perplex  the  naviga 
tion  of  this  Bay.  The  appearance  and  bearing  of 
the  British  fleet,  after  pilots  were  obtained,  rendered 
it  impossible  for  them  to  return  into  the  proper  chan 
nel.  The  only  expedient  that  remained  was  to  push 
forward  and  attempt,  under  the  advantage  of  high 
water,  to  force  a  passage  through  the  shoal  which 
obstructed  them.  In  this  attempt,  one  of  them  suc 
ceeded.  The  other  stuck  in  the  sand,  and  was  lost. 
All  the  public  stores,  particularly  the  money  on  board, 
have,  however,  been  fortunately  saved.  The  captain 
and  crew,  we  fear,  have  fallen  into  the  hands  of  the 
enemy.  The  ship,  it  is  supposed,  cannot  be  raised 
by  them,  having  been  scuttled  before  they  took  pos 
session  of  her.  The  frigate  which  escaped  is  up  at 


238  THE   WRITINGS  OF  [1782 

Chester.  We  expect  the  despatches  will  be  here 
to-day.  The  Marquis  Viominil,  and  twenty  or  thirty 
other  French  officers,  have  returned  in  these  ships. 


TO    EDMUND    RANDOLPH.1 

PHILADELPHIA,  September  24,  1782. 

DEAR  SIR,  —  The  substance  of  the  despatches 
brought  by  the  French  frigates,  mentioned  in  my 
last,  is,  that  Mr.  Oswald  first,  and  afterwards  Mr. 
Grenville,  had  been  deputed  to  Versailles  on  a  pacific 
mission  ;  that  the  latter  was  still  (twenty-ninth  of 
June)  at  Versailles ;  that  his  proposals,  as  to  the 
point  of  independence,  were  at  first  equivocal,  but  at 
length  more  explicit ;  that  he  associated  with  the  pre 
liminary  that  the  treaty  of  Paris,  of  1 763,  should  be 
the  basis  of  the  treaty  in  question  ;  that  as  to  this 
proposition  he  was  answered,  that  as  far  as  the  treaty 
of  '63  might  be  convenient  for  opening  and  facili 
tating  a  pacification,  it  would  be  admitted  as  a  basis, 
but  that  it  could  not  be  admitted  in  any  sense  that 
should  preclude  His  Most  Christian  Majesty  from 
demanding  such  equitable  arrangements  as  circum 
stances  might  warrant,  and  particularly  in  the  East 
Indies  and  on  the  coast  of  Africa  ;  that  upon  these 
grounds  there  was  at  first  a  prospect  that  negotia 
tions  would  be  opened  with  mutual  sincerity,  and  be 
conducted  to  a  speedy  and  happy  issue  ;  but  that  the 
success  of  the  British  navy  in  the  West  Indies  had 

1  From  the  Madison  Papers  (1840). 


1782]  JAMES  MADISON.  239 

checked  the  ardor  of  the  Ministry  for  peace,  and  that 
it  was  pretty  evident  they  meant  to  spin  out  the 
negotiation  till  the  event  of  the  campaign  should  be 
decided.  You  will  take  notice  that  this  is  a  recital 
from  memory,  and  not  a  transcript  of  the  intelligence. 

The  frigate  L'Aigle,  whose  fate  was  not  completely 
determined  at  the  date  of  my  last,  we  hear,  has  been 
raised  by  the  enemy,  and  carried  to  New  York.  Cap 
tain  De  la  Touche  and  the  crew  were  made  prisoners. 
Besides  merchandize  to  a  great  value,  nearly  fifty 
thousand  dollars  were  lost,  most  of  which  fell  into 
the  hands  of  the  captors.  The  loss  of  this  ship  is  to 
be  the  more  regretted,  as  it  appears  that  the  two 
were  particularly  constructed,  and  destined  for  the 
protection  of  the  trade  of  this  country. 

Our  Ally  has  added  another  important  link  to  the 
chain  of  benefits  by  which  this  country  is  bound  to 
France.  He  has  remitted  to  us  all  the  interest  which 
he  has  paid  for  us,  or  was  due  to  him  on  loans  to  us, 
together  with  all  the  charges  attending  the  Holland 
loan  ;  and  has,  moreover,  postponed  the  demand  of  the 
principal  till  one  year  after  the  war,  and  agreed  to 
receive  it  then  in  twelve  successive  annual  payments. 
These  concessions  amount  to  a  very  considerable  re 
duction  of  the  liquidated  debt.  The  fresh  and  large 
demand  which  we  are  about  to  make  on  him,  will, 
I  fear,  be  thought  an  unfit  return  for  such  favors.  It 
could  not,  however,  be  avoided.  The  arrears  to  the 
army  in  January  next  will  be  upwards  of  six  millions 
of  dollars.  Taxes  cannot  be  relied  on.  Without 
money,  there  is  some  reason  to  surmise  that  it  may 


24o  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1782 

be  as  difficult  to  disband  an  army  as  it  has  been  to 
raise  an  army. 

My  last  informed  you  that  Mr.  Laurens  had  de 
clined  serving  in  the  commission  for  peace.  His 
proceedings,  during  his  captivity,  as  stated  by  him 
self,  are  far  from  unexceptionable.  Congress,  never 
theless,  were  prevailed  on  to  assent  to  a  resolution 
informing  him  that  his  services  could  not  be  dispensed 
with.  A  few  days  after  this  resolution  had  passed, 
several  numbers  of  the  Parliamentary  Register  were 
received  at  the  Office  of  Foreign  Affairs,  in  one  of 
which  was  published  the  enclosed  petition.  The 
petition  was  introduced  by  Mr.  Burke,  was  a  subject 
of  some  debate,  and  finally  ordered  to  lie  on  the 
table.  The  extreme  impropriety  of  a  Representative 
of  the  United  States  addressing  that  very  authority 
against  which  they  had  made  war,  in  the  language 
of  the  address,  determined  Mr.  Jones  and  myself  to 
move  that  the  resolution  above  referred  to  should  not 
be  transmitted  until  the  further  order  of  Congress. 
In  support  of  the  motion  it  was  observed,  that  how 
ever  venial  the  fault  might  be  in  a  private  view,  it 
evidently  rendered  Mr.  Laurens  no  longer  a  fit  deposi 
tory  for  the  public  dignity  and  rights,  which  he  had 
so  far  degraded  ;  and  that  if  Congress  should  rein 
state  him  against  his  own  desire,  and  with  this  fact 
before  their  eyes,  it  would  seem  as  if  they  meant  to 
ratify,  instead  of  disowning,  the  degradation.  The 
motion  was  opposed  on  two  grounds  —  first,  that  the 
character  of  Mr.  Laurens,  and  the  silence  of  his  letter, 
overbalanced  the  testimony  of  the  Register,  and 


1782]  JAMES  MADISON.  241 

rendered  the  fact  incredible  ;  secondly,  that  the  fact, 
although  faulty,  ought  to  have  no  influence  on  the 
public  arrangements.  The  first  objection  was  the 
prevailing  one.  The  second  was  abetted  by  but 
few.  Several  professed  a  readiness  to  renounce  their 
friend,  in  case  the  authenticity  of  the  paper  should 
be  verified.  On  the  question  there  were  five  noes, 
three  ayes,  two  divided,  two  half  votes  aye.  The 
petition  had  been  published  some  time  ago  at  New 
York,  and  had  made  some  noise  in  New  Jersey,  but 
was  ultimately  regarded  as  spurious.  There  are  so 
many  circumstances  relating  to  this  gentleman  during 
his  captivity,  which  speak  a  bias  towards  the  British 
nation,  and  an  undue  cordiality  with  its  new  leaders, 
that  I  dread  his  participation  in  the  work  of  peace. 

Your  favor  of  the  seventh,  which  had  not  arrived 
last  post-day,  came  a  few  days  afterwards,  the  post 
having  been  detained  by  sickness.  The  subsequent 
one  came  to  hand  yesterday  in  due  time.  The  expe 
dient  of  drawing  bills  here  on  funds  in  Virginia,  even 
the  most  unquestionable,  has  been  often  tried  by  us, 
but  in  vain.  The  balance  is  so  much  against  Vir 
ginia  that  no  one  wants  money  there,  and  the  evil 
will  increase  as  the  prospect  of  peace  retires.  Your 
credit  with  Mr.  Cohen,  which  procured  me  fifty 
pounds,  with  two  hundred  dollars  transmitted  by 
Mr.  Ambler,  have  been  of  much  service  to  me,  but  I 
am  relapsing  fast  into  distress.  The  case  of  my 
brethren  is  equally  alarming. 

As  some  of  Mr.  Laurens's  friends  strenuously 
maintain  that  the  petition  enclosed  is  spurious,  I 


242  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1782 

would  not  wish  it  to  be  made  public  through  me 
until  the  matter  be  ascertained,  or  he  be  present  to 
explain  it. 


TO    EDMUND    RANDOLPH.1 

PHILADELPHIA,  September  30,  1782. 

DEAR  SIR,  -  -  The  remittance  to  Colonel  Bland  is  a 
source  of  hope  to  his  brethren.  I  am  almost  ashamed 
to  reiterate  my  wants  so  incessantly  to  you,  but  they 
begin  to  be  so  urgent  that  it  is  impossible  to  sup 
press  them.  The  kindness  of  our  little  friend  in 
Front  street,  near  the  coffee-house,  is  a  fund  which 
will  preserve  me  from  extremities,  but  I  never  resort 
to  it  without  great  mortification,  as  he  obstinately  re 
jects  all  recompense.  The  price  of  money  is  so 
usurious,  that  he  thinks  it  ought  to  be  extorted 
from  none  but  those  who  aim  at  profitable  specula 
tions.  To  a  necessitous  Delegate  he  gratuitously 
spares  a  supply  out  of  his  private  stock. 

No  addition  has  been  made  to  our  stock  of  intelli 
gence  from  Europe  since  the  arrival  of  the  French 
frigates.  Some  letters  from  the  Marquis  de  la  Fay- 
ette  and  others  have  since  come  to  hand,  but  they 
are  all  of  the  same  date  with  the  despatches  then 
received.  One  of  the  Marquis's  paragraphs,  indeed, 
signifies  the  tergiversation  of  Mr.  Grenville,  which 
had  been  only  in  general  mentioned  to  us  before. 
On  the  communication  made  by  this  gentleman  to 
the  Count  de  Vergennes  of  the  object  of  his  mission, 

1  From  the  Madison  Papers  (1840). 


1782]  JAMES  MADISON,  243 

he  proposed  verbally  the  unconditional  acknowledg 
ment  of  American  Independence  as  a  point  to  which 
the  King  had  agreed.  The  Count  de  Vergennes  im 
mediately  wrote  it  down,  and  requested  him  to  put  his 
name  to  the  declaration.  Mr.  Grenville  drew  back, 
and  refused  to  abide  by  any  thing  more  than  that 
the  King  was  disposed  to  grant  American  Independ 
ence.  This  illustrates  the  shade  of  difference  between 
Shelburne  and  Fox. 


TO    EDMUND    RANDOLPH.1 

PHILADELPHIA,  October  8,  1782. 

DEAR  SIR,  —  Your  favor  of  the  twenty-seventh  of 
September  came  to  hand  yesterday,  and  is  a  fresh 
instance  of  the  friendly  part  you  take  in  my  necessi 
ties.  In  consequence  of  the  hint  in  your  last  of  a 
pressing  representation  to  the  Executive,  our  public 
letter  of  last  week  touched  on  that  subject,  but  the  let 
ter  received  yesterday  from  the  Governor,  which  seems 
to  chide  our  urgency,  forbids  much  expectation  from 
such  an  expedient.  The  letter  from  Mr.  Ambler 
enclosed  for  me  a  second  bill  on  Mr.  Holker,  for  two 
hundred  dollars,  which  very  seasonably  enabled  me 
to  replace  a  loan  by  which  I  had  anticipated  it. 
About  three  hundred  and  fifty  more  (and  not  less) 
would  redeem  me  completely  from  the  class  of 
debtors. 

I  omitted,  in  my  last,  to  inform  you  that  the 
Swedish  Minister  at  Versailles  had  announced  to  Dr. 

1  From  the  Madison  Papers  (1840). 


244  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1782 

Franklin  the  wish  of  his  King  to  become  an  Ally 
of  the  United  States,  and  that  the  treaty  might  be 
negotiated  with  the  Doctor  in  particular.  A  pleni 
potentiary  commission  has,  in  consequence,  issued  for 
that  purpose.  The  model  transmitted  by  Congress 
is  pretty  analogous  to  the  treaty  with  France,  but  is 
limited  in  duration  to  fifteen  years. 


TO    EDMUND    RANDOLPH.  * 

PHILADELPHIA,  October  15,  1782. 

DEAR  SIR, — The  offensive  paragraph  in  the  corre 
spondence  of  Mr.  L.  with  Mr.  P.,  spoken  of  in  your 
favor  of  the  fifth,  was,  as  you  supposed,  communicated 
to  me  by  Mr.  Jones.  I  am,  however,  but  very  im 
perfectly  informed  of  it. 

We  have  not  yet  received  a  second  volume  of  the 
negotiations  at  Versailles  ;  nor  any  other  intelligence 
from  Europe,  except  a  letter  from  Mr.  Carmichael, 
dated  about  the  middle  of  June,  which  is  chiefly  con 
fined  to  the  great  exertions  and  expectations  with 
respect  to  Gibraltar.  Whilst  the  siege  is  depending, 
it  is  much  to  be  apprehended  that  the  Court  of 
Madrid  will  not  accelerate  a  pacification. 

Extract  of  a  letter  from  Sir  Guy  Carleton  to 
General  Washington,  dated  New  York,  September 
twelfth,  1782. 

"  Partial  though  our  suspension  of  hostilities  may 
be  called,  I  thought  it  sufficient  to  have  prevented 
those  cruelties  in  the  Jerseys  (avowed)  which  I  have 

1  From  the  Madison  Papers  (1840). 


1782]  JAMES  MADISON.  245 

had  occasion  to  mention  more  than  once  ;  but  if  war 
was  the  choice,  I  never  expected  this  suspension 
should  operate  further  than  to  induce  them  to  carry 
it  on  as  is  practised  by  men  of  liberal  minds.  I  am 
clearly  of  opinion  with  Your  Excellency,  that  mutual 
agreement  is  necessary  for  a  suspension  of  hostility, 
and,  without  this  mutual  agreement,  either  is  free  to 
act  as  each  may  judge  expedient ;  yet  I  must,  at  the 
same  time,  frankly  declare  to  you,  that  being  no 
longer  able  to  discern  the  object  we  contend  for,  I 
disapprove  of  all  hostilities  both  by  sea  and  land,  as 
they  only  tend  to  multiply  the  miseries  of  individuals, 
when  the  public  can  reap  no  advantage  from  success. 
As  to  the  savages,  I  have  the  best  assurances,  that 
from  a  certain  period,  not  very  long  after  my  arrival 
here,  no  parties  of  Indians  were  sent  out,  and  that 
messengers  were  despatched  to  recall  those  who  had 
gone  forth  before  that  time  ;  and  I  have  particular 
assurances  of  disapprobation  of  all  that  happened  to 
your  party  on  the  side  of  Sandusky,  except  so  far  as 
was  necessary  for  self-defence." 

It  would  seem,  from  this  paragraph,  that  the  insid 
ious  object  of  a  separate  convention  with  America 
was  still  pursued. 

The  symptoms  of  an  evacuation  of  New  York  be 
came  every  day  less  apparent.  Our  next  intelli 
gence  from  Charleston  will  probably  confirm  our 
expectations  as  to  that  metropolis. 


246  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1782 

TO    EDMUND    RANDOLPH.1 

PHILADELPHIA,  October  22,  1782. 

DEAR  SIR, — By  the  vessel  spoken  of  in  my  last, 
Congress  have  received  a  letter  from  Mr.  Adams, 
dated  Hague,  August  the  eighteenth,  which  enclosed 
a  copy  of  the  plenipotentiary  commission  issued  to 
Mr.  Fitzherbert,  the  British  Minister  at  Brussells. 
The  following  skeleton  of  the  commission  will  give 
you  an  idea  of  its  aspect  towards  America : 

"  Georgius  tertius,  etc.,  omnibus,  etc.,  salutem. 
Cum,  belli  incendio  jam  nimis  diu  diversis  orbis  ter- 
rarum  partibus  flagrante,  in  id  quam  maxime  in- 
cumbamus  ut  tranquillitas  publica,  tot  litibus,  etc., 
rite  compositis,  reduci,  etc.,  possit,  —  cumque  ea  de 
causa,  virum  quendam  tanto  negotio  parem,  ad  bo- 
num  fratrem  nostrum,  Regem  Chrismum  mittere  de- 
crevimus  :  Sciatis  igitur  quod  nos,  fide,  etc.  Alleini 
Fitzherbert,  etc.,  confisi,  eundem  nominavimus,  etc., 
nostrum  Plenipotentiarum,  dantes,  etc.,  eidem  om- 
nem  potestatem,  etc.,  nee  non  mandatum  generale 
pariter  ac  speciale,  etc.,  in  aula  praedicti  bon.  frat. 
Reg.  Chrismi  pro  nobis  et  nostro  nomine,  una  cum 
Plenipotentiariis,  tarn  Celsorum  et  Prcepotentium  Domi- 
norum,  ordinum  Generalium  Fozderati  Belgii,  quam 
quorumcunque  Principum  et  Statuum  quorum  inter esse 
poterit,  sufficiente  auctoritate  instructis,  tarn  singula- 
tim  ac  divisim  quam  aggregatim  ac  conjunctim,  con- 
grediendi,  etc.,  atque  cum  ipsis  de  pace,  concordia, 
etc.,  praesentibus,  etc.  etc.  In  palatio  nostro,  etc., 
24  Julii,  1782. 

1  From  the  Madison  Papers  (1840). 


1782]  JAMES  MADISON.  247 

The  only  further  circumstance  contained  in  his 
letter,  relative  to  the  business  of  a  pacification,  is 
the  appointment  of  a  Plenipotentiary  by  the  States 
General,  who  was  to  set  out  for  Paris  in  about  three 
weeks  after  the  date  of  the  letter. 

The  States  of  Holland  and  West  Friesland  had 
determined  upon  the  proposed  treaty  of  commerce, 
and  Mr.  Adams  expected  to  have  a  speedy  confer 
ence  with  the  States  General,  in  order  to  bring  it  to 
a  conclusion. 

The  Secretary  of  War  lately  communicated  to 
Congress  an  extract  of  a  letter  from  General  Wash 
ington  of  a  very  unwelcome  tenor.  It  paints  the 
discontents  of  the  army  in  very  unusual  colors,  and 
surmises  some  dangerous  eruption,  unless  a  payment 
can  be  effected  within  the  present  year.  The  Secre 
tary  is  gone  to  head-quarters  at  the  request  of  the 
General.  How  far  their  joint  precautions  will  calm 
the  rising  billows,  must  be  left  to  the  result. 

Congress  have  reduced  the  estimate  for  the  ensuing 
year  to  six  millions  of  dollars,  and  the  requisitions  on 
the  States,  for  the  present,  to  one-third  of  that  sum. 
A  call  for  the  residue  is  suspended  till  the  result  of 
the  applications  for  loans  shall  be  known. 

The  combined  fleets  have  certainly  gone  to  support 
the  siege  of  Gibraltar.  The  Dutch  has  returned  to 
the  Texel.  According  to  the  preconcerted  plan,  it 
was  to  have  proceeded  North,  after  disposing  of  its 
convoy,  and  have  reinforced  the  combined  fleet.  The 
disappointment  is  traced  up  to  the  machinations  of 
the  Prince  of  Orange,  whose  attachment  to  the 


248  TIiE  WRITINGS  OF  [1782 

enemies  of  the  Republic  seems  to  be  fatal  to  all  her  ex 
ertions.  For  other  particulars  taken  from  foreign 
gazettes,  I  refer  to  those  herewith  enclosed,  and  those 
enclosed  to  Mr.  Ambler. 


TO    EDMUND    RANDOLPH.1 

PHILADELPHIA,  October  29,  1782. 

DEAR  SIR, — Some  intelligence  has  been  received 
from  the  frontiers  of  New  York,  which  revives  the 
apprehensions  of  further  inroads  from  Canada,  and 
co-operation  on  the  part  of  the  Vermonters.  The 
tenor  of  Carleton's  letter  to  General  Washington  on 
this  subject,  and  other  circumstances,  render  this 
article  at  least  extremely  doubtful. 

The  British  fleet  at  New  York  has  been  busy  in 
preparing  for  sea,  and  will  probably  soon  depart  from 
that  station.  The  West  Indies  most  naturally  occur 
as  the  object  of  its  destination.  It  is  said  their  prep 
arations  have  been  much  expedited  by  the  most  di 
rect  and  undisguised  supplies  from  the  people  of 
New  Jersey. 

Congress  have  been  occupied  for  several  days  past 
with  the  case  of  Lippencot,  referred  to  them  by  Gen 
eral  Washington.  On  one  side  it  was  urged,  that 
the  disavowal  and  promises  by  the  British  Com 
mander,  the  abolition  of  the  obnoxious  board  of 
refugees,  and  the  general  change  of  circumstances, 
rendered  retaliation  unnecessary  and  inexpedient. 
On  the  other  side  it  was  contended,  that  a  departure 

1  From  the  Madison  Papers  (1840). 


1782]  JAMES  MADISON.  249 

from  the  resolution  so  solemnly  adopted  and  repeated 
by  General  Washington,  with  equal  solemnity  ratified 
by  Congress,  would  be  an  indelible  blot  on  our  char 
acter  ;  that  after  the  confessions  on  the  part  of  the 
enemy  of  the  deed  complained  of,  a  greater  inflexibility 
on  our  part  would  be  looked  for  ;  that  after  such 
confessions,  too,  the  enemy  would  never  suffer  the 
innocent  to  perish,  if  we  persisted  in  demanding  the 
guilty  ;  and  finally,  that  if  they  should  suffer  it, 
the  blood  would  be  on  their  heads,  not  on  ours.  No 
definitive  resolution  has  yet  passed  on  the  subject. 
All  the  intermediate  steps  have  been  very  properly 
entered  on  the  secret  journals. 

General  Lincoln  has  just  returned  from  the  army. 
He  has  not  yet  made  a  report  to  Congress.  He  says, 
I  understand,  that  his  visit  has  had  a  very  salutary 
operation,  but  that  some  pay  must  be  found  for  the 
army.  Where  it  is  to  be  found,  God  knows.  The 
state  of  the  public  finances  has  already  compelled 
the  Superintendant  to  give  a  discharge  to  the  former 
contractors,  and  to  accept  of  a  new  contract,  by  which 
thirty  per  cent,  is  added  to  the  price  of  a  ration  in 
consideration  of  credit  for  three  months.  He  has,  on 
this  occasion,  written  a  pressing  exhortation  to  the 
States,  which,  I  suppose,  is  accessible  to  you. 

Mr.  Carroll  moved,  yesterday,  a  resolution  for  ac 
cepting  the  territorial  cession  of  New  York.  It 
stands  the  order  for  to-day.  I  regret  much,  on  this 
occasion,  the  absence  of  Mr.  Jones. 


DEBATES 

IN   THE 

CONGRESS  OF  THE  CONFEDERATION, 

FROM  NOVEMBER  4TH,    1782,  TO  FEBRUARY   I3TH,    1783. 

MAD.  MSS. 

IN  CONGRESS,  NOVEMBER  4™   1782,  MONDAY. 

Elias  Boudinot  was  chosen  President  by  the  votes  of  N.  Hamp 
shire  represented  by  John  Taylor  Oilman  and  Phillips  White — 
Rhode  Island  by  Jonathan  Arnold  and  David  Howell — Connecti 
cut  by  Benjamin  Huntington  &  Eliphalet  Dyer — N.  Jersey  by 
Elias  Boudinot  &  John  Witherspoon — Pennsylvania  by  Thomas 
Smith  George  Clymer,  and  Henry  Wynkoop — Delaware  by 
Thomas  McKean  &  Samuel  Wharton — Maryland  by  John  Han 
son,  Daniel  Carroll  &  William  Hemsley.  The  votes  of  Virgf  rep 
resented  by  James  Madison  &  Theodorick  Bland  &  of  S. 
Carolina  represented  by  John  Rutledge  Ralph  Izard,  David 
Ramsay,  &  John  Lewis  Gervais,  were  given  to  Mr.  Bland — The 
vote  of  N.  York  represented  by  James  Duane  and  Ezra  L'Hom- 
medieu  to  Abner  Nash.  The  vote  of  N.  C.  by  Abner  Nash, 
Hugh  Williamson  &  William  Blount  to  John  Rutledge.  Massa- 
chus1.5  having  no  Delegate  but  Samuel  Osgood  had  no  vote. 
Georgia  had  no  Delegate. 

A  Letter  dated  Oc'  30 — 1782  from  Ge!  Washington,  was 
read,  informing  Congress  of  his  putting  the  army  into  Winter 
Quarters,  &  of  the  sailing  of  14  ships  of  the  line  from  N.  York, 
supposed  to  be  for  the  W.  Indies  &  without  Troops. 

d?  July  8  from  Mr.  Carmichael  at  St.  Ildefonso  informing  Con 
gress  of  the  good  effect  in  Europe  of  the  rejection  of  the  proposal 
of  Carleton,  by  Congress  &  the  States  ;  that  the  King  of  Spain 
speaking  of  the  news  at  table  praised  greatly  the  probity  of  the 

250 


1782]  JAMES  MADISON.  251 

Americans,  raising  his  voice  in  such  a  manner  that  all  the  foreign 
Ministers  might  hear  him.  Mr.  Carmichael  adds  that  He  had 
discovered  that  the  Imperial  &  Russian  Ministers  by  directions 
from  their  Courts  had  renewed  their  offered  mediation  to  His  M. 
C.  M.  and  that  he  suspected  England  was  at  the  bottom  of  it. — 
Quere. 

do.  Nants  Sep'  5.  from  M*  Laurens,  notifying  his  intention  to 
return  to  America  ;  that  being  so  advised  by  his  friends  he  had 
applied  to  the  C  of  London  for  a  passport  via  Falmouth  ;  that 
Cornwallis  had  interested  himself  therein  &  that  the  passport 
had  been  promised.1 

1  November  5,  1782,  Madison  wrote  to  Edmund  Randolph  (italics  stand  for 
cypher) : 

"  My  last  informed  you  that  a  proposition  had  been  made  in  Congress  for 
accepting  the  territorial  cession  of  N.  York.  The  paper  enclosed  contains  the 
proceedings  which  ensued.  The  acceptance  of  this  cession  singly  met  with  a 
negative  from  Virginia  for  obvious  reasons.  In  the  first  place  such  a  measure, 
instead  of  terminating  all  controversy  as  to  the  western  country,  the  object  pro 
posed  by  the  original  plan,  introduces  new  perplexities.  And  in  the  2d  place, 
an  assent  from  us  might  be  hereafter  pleaded  as  a  voluntary  acceptance  of  the 
U.  States  in  the  room  of  N.  York,  as  litigants  against  Virginia. 

"On  the  subsequent  motion  you  will  find  Virgn  divided.  The  proviso  ex 
pressed  in  this  motion  if  referred  to  the  territory  retained  by  N.  York  appeared 
to  me  to  be  at  least  nugatory,  or  rather  to  imply  that  a  Resolution  of  Congress 
might  operate  towards  depriving  another  State  of  the  benefits  of  the  Confedera 
tion  ;  and  if  referred  to  the  territory  ceded  by  N.  Y.  to  imply  that  the  9*  art : 
was  the  constitutional  rule  of  deciding  controversies  as  well  where  the  U.  S.  as 
where  a  particular  state  were  the  party.  All  that  Congress  could,  as  I  supposed, 
have  properly  done,  would  have  been  to  guard  against  any  biass  on  future  de 
cisions  by  declaring  that  their  acceptance  of  the  cession  of  N.  Y.  was  not  to  be 
considered  as  expressing  any  opinion  as  to  the  rightful  claims  or  limits  of  that 
State.  But  I  did  not  feel  myself  at  liberty  to  substitute  such  a  proposition  be 
cause  it  militated  against  the  guaranty  required  by  Virg  f  and  would  have  pre 
judged  that  condition  of  her  cession. 

"The  success  of  the  Middle  States  in  obtaining  the  cession  of  N.  Y.  has 
given  great  encouragement ;  and  they  are  pursuing  steadily  the  means  of  avail 
ing  themselves  of  the  other  titles.  That  of  Connecticut  is  proposed  for  the 
next  object.  Virginia  will  be  postponed  for  the  last.  By  enlisting  the  two  pre 
ceding  into  their  party  they  hope  to  render  their  measures  more  effectual  with 
respect  to  the  last. 

"  Besides  the  effect  which  may  be  expected  from  this  coalition  with  Ne^v  York 
on  territorial  questions  in  Congress  it  will  I  surmise  prove  very  unfriendly  to  the 


252  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1782 

TUESDAY    NOV?  5. 

A  Resolution  passed  authorizing  Gen!  Washington  to  obtain 
the  exchange  of  2  foreign  officers  notwithstanding  the  Resol"  of 
the  1 6  of  Ocr  declaring  that  Congress  will  go  into  no  partial 

pretentions  of  Vermont.  Duane  seems  not  Mnapprized  of  the  advantage  which 
New  York  has  gained,  and  is  already  taking  measures  for  a  speedy  vote  on  that 
question.  Upon  the  whole  New  York  has  by  a  fortunate  coincidence  of  circum 
stances,  or  by  skilful  management  or  by  both  succeeded  in  a  very  important 
object  by  ceding  a  claim  which  was  tenable  neither  by  force  nor  by  right ;  she  has 
acquired  with  Congress  the  merit  of  liberality  rendered  the  title  to  her  reserva 
tion  more  respectable  and  at  least  dampt  the  zeal  with  which  Vermont  has  been 
abetted.  If  you  should  be  surprized  that  these  considerations  did  not  dissuade 
Connecticut  from  an  tinqualified  acceptance  of  the  cession  of  New  York  you  will 
only  be  affected  as  others  were  at  the  time.  The  truth  is  they  were  surprized  at 
it  themselves  after  it  was  too  late  and  would  gladly  have  revoked  their  error. 

"  You  were  also  informed  in  my  last  of  the  situation  in  wc.h  the  affair  of  Lip- 
pencot  remained.  In  the  midst  of  our  perplexities  a  letter  arrived  from 
Gen1.  Washington  enclosing  an  intercession  from  the  Count  de  Vergennes  in 
favour  of  the  life  of  young  Asgill,  founded  on  a  most  pathetic  and  importunate 
memorial  from  his  mother.  The  C.1  writes  to  Genl.  Washington,  as  he  says  not 
in  the  quality  of  a  public  minister,  but  of  a  man  who  feels  the  force  of  Mr.s  As- 
gills  supplications.  He  backs  his  intercession  however,  with  the  desire  of  the 
King  &  Queen  who  were  much  affected  with  the  memorial,  observes  that,  altho' 
Asgill  is  no  doubt  a  prisoner  to  the  U.  States,  yet  as  he  became  such  by  an  event 
to  which  the  arms  of  his  Majesty  contributed,  the  interest  he  takes  in  behalf  of 
this  officer,  is  the  more  admissible,  &  signifies  that  if  the  British  commander 
should  not  in  this  instance  fully  comply  with  the  demands  of  Justice  there  is 
reason  to  believe  that  future  instances  of  barbarity  will  be  presented. 

"  The  judgment  formed  of  this  intercession  by  different  members  is  very  differ 
ent.  All  agree  that  retaliation  cannot  be  executed  in  the  face  of  it,  but  some  are 
of  opinion  that  it  luckily  affords  and  ought  to  be  made  the  ground  of  mreat  front 
that  measure ;  whilst  others  suppose  that  our  honour  will  be  more  wounded  by 
such  a  public  exposition  both  of  our  obsequiousness  to  France  and  of  her  disap 
probation  of  our  views  than  by  a  retreat  of  ourselves  on  the  ground  of  Carleton's 
promise  of  continued  pursuit  of  the  murderer.  Some  fear  also  that  an  omission 
in  our  act  of  the  wish  expressed  by  the  King  &  Queen  of  France  may  give 
umbrage.  Others  again  infer  from  the  circumstance  of  the  letter  from  the 
count  being  addressed  to  Genl.  Washington  not  to  Congress  and  in  his  private  not 
official  quality  that  a  public  notice  of  it  can  not  be  expected  and  that  a  private 
explanation  by  the  secretary  of  foreign  affairs  to  the  minister  of  France  will  be  as 
much  as  will  be  proper. 

"  The  minister  also  received  an  instruction  to  interest  himself  in  the  affair 
and  had  even  prepared  a  memorial  to  Congress  relative  to  it.  Having  discovered 


1782]  JAMES  MADISON.  253 

exchanges  until  a  general  cartel  be  settled  on  national  principles. 
This  measure  passed  without  due  consideration  by  the  votes  of 
N.  H.,  R.  I.,  Cont:  Del:  Maryland  N.  C.  &  S.  C.  On  the  motion 

however  the  diversity  of  sentiments  prevailing'  in  Congress  and  being  apprehen 
sive  that  his  interposition  might  render  the  case  more  perplexing  and  possibly 
be  not  treated  with  d^^e  notice  in  the  final  act  of  Congress  he  has  very  prudently 
desisted  from  his  purpose. 

"  Untill  Congress  shall  have  come  to  some  decision  with  respect  to  the  notice 
to  be  taken  of  the  intercession  above  mentioned  I  would  not  wish  it  to  be  gener 
ally  spoken  of  from  this  letter. 

********* 

"A  letter  from  Carmichael  dated  8  July,  says  that  the  Resolutions  of  Con 
gress  £  the  States  against  separate  negociations  with  the  new  British  Ministry 
were  exceedingly  applauded  at  the  Spanish  court ;  and  that  he  had  discovered 
that  the  Imperial  &  Russian  Ministers  had  renewed  an  offer  of  the  mediation 
of  their  Courts  to  Spain.  The  silence  of  our  other  ministers  in  letters  of  later 
date  renders  the  latter  article  very  doubtful. 

"  A  letter  of  the  5*  of  Sep*  from  M  5  Laurens  at  Nantz  repeats  his  purpose 
to  return  to  America  ;  adding  that  the  risk  of  capture  &  and  the  advice  of  his 
friends  had  led  him  to  apply  to  the  Court  of  London  for  a  passport  via  Fal- 
mouth  £  N.  York  to  Philad*  that  L<j  Cornwallis  had  interested  himself  in  his 
case,  and  that  the  passport  was  to  be  transmitted  to  him.  It  was  uncertain 
whether  he  was  to  embark  this  fall,  or  wait  till  the  Spring.  Unless  the  em- 
barkation/rcw  a  British  port  was  more  [necessary]  than  I  am  aware,  a  direct 
passport  from  France  would  in  my  view  have  been  more  eligible. 

"The  army  we  are  informed  by  a  letter  from  Gen1.  Washington  of  the 
30*  ult.  are  going  into  their  winter  cantonments.  Part  of  the  British  fleet, 
consisting  of  14  ships  of  the  line,  I  of  40  guns,  7  frigates  &  14  transports  sailed 
from  N.  York  on  the  261!1  supposed  to  be  bound  to  the  W.  Indies,  and  to  have 
no  troops  on  board.  Two  vessels  were  dispatched  it  is  said  for  Charlestown 
immediately  after  the  arrival  of  the  last  packet,  for  the  purpose  of  counter 
manding  the  evacuation. 

"  Mf  Jones  has  recovered  rapidly  within  a  few  days  past  £  has  once  more 
got  about. 

"  Your  favor  of  the  26*  past  was  duly  received  yesterday.  I  am  anxious  for 
the  new  Cypher  which  it  promises  as  well  for  my  use  as  yours  ;  and  for  the  same 
reasons.  I  conclude  from  your  silence  as  to  my  late  communications  in  L — Is 
Cypher  that  the  key  I  sent  you  some  time  ago  answered  its  purpose." — Mad. 
MSS. 

The  affair  of  Asgill  alluded  to  above  was  this  : 

Captain  Huddy,  commanding  a  body  of  troops  in  Monmouth  County,  N.  J., 
was  captured  by  a  band  of  refugees  and  hung  in  New  York  by  Captain  Lippen- 
cot,  of  the  British  army.  In  retaliation,  Captain,  afterwards  Sir  Charles,  Asgill, 
a  prisoner  in  Washington's  hands,  was  chosen  by  lot  to  suffer  the  same  fate. 


254  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1782 

of  Mr.  Osgood  it  was  reconsidered  in  order  to  refer  the  case  to  the 
Sec?  of  War  &  Gen!  Washington  to  take  order.  By  Mr.  Madison 
opposition  was  made  ag5?  any  partial  exchange  in  the  face  of  the 
solemn  declaration  passed  on  the  16  Od,1  as  highly  dishonorable 
to  Congress,  especially  as  that  declaration  was  made  in  order  to 
compel  the  enemy  to  a  national  convention  with  the  U.  S.  All 
exchanges  had  been  previously  made  on  the  part  of  the  former  by 
the  Military  authority  of  their  Generals.  After  the  letter  of 
Genl.  Carleton  &  Admiral  Digby  notifying  the  purpose  of  the 
British  King  to  acknowledge  our  Independence,  it  was  thought 
expedient  by  Congress  to  assume  a  higher  tone.  It  was  supposed 
also  at  the  time  of  changing  this  mode  that  it  would  be  a  test  of 
the  enemy's  sincerity  with  regard  to  Independence.  As  the  trial 
had  been  made  &  the  British  Comander  either  from  a  want  of 
power  or  of  will  had  declined  treating  of  a  cartel  on  national 
ground,  it  would  be  peculiarly  preposterous  &  pusilanimous  in 
Congress  to  return  to  the  former  mode.  An  adjournment  sus 
pended  the  vote  on  the  question  for  referring  the  case  to  the 
Se?  &  General  to  take  order. 


WEDNESDAY,  NOV?  6TH. 
No  Congress. 


THURSDAY,  NOV?    7. 

On  the  reconsideration  of  the  Resol:  for  exchanging  the  two 
for:  officers  Its  repeal  was  unanimously  agreed  to. 

A  motion  was  made  by  Mr.  Osgood  to  assign  an  early  day  for 
filling  up  the  vacancy  in  the  Court  of  Appeals.  It  was  opposed 
on  the  principle  of  economy,  and  the  expedient  suggested  by  Mr. 
Duane,  of  empowering  a  single  Judge  to  make  a  Court  until  the 
public  finances  would  better  bear  the  expense.  In  favor'of  the  mo 
tion  it  was  argued  i.  that  the  proceedings  of  the  Court  were  too 

1  "  Resolved,  That  Congress  will  not  go  into  any  partial  exchange  of  prisoners 
of  war  in  future,  but.  will  take  the  most  effectual  measures  in  their  power,  for 
the  safe  keeping  of  all  prisoners  of  war,  until  a  general  cartel  on  liberal  and 
national  principles  be  agreed  to  and  established." — Journals  of  Congress, 
iv.,  90. 


1782]  JAMES  MADISON.  255 

important  to  be  confided  to  a  single  Judge.  2.  that  the  decisions 
of  a  single  judge  would  be  less  satisfactory  in  cases  where  a  local 
connection  of  the  judge  subsisted  with  either  of  the  parties.  3.' 
that  a  single  judge  would  be  more  apt  by  erroneous  decisions  to 
embroil  the  U.  S.  in  disputes  with  foreign  powers.  4.  that  if 
there  were  more  than  one  Judge,  &  one  formed  a  court,  there 
might  at  the  same  time  be  two  interfering  jurisdictions,  and  that 
if  any  remedy  could  be  applied  to  this  difficulty,  the  course  of  de 
cisions  would  unavoidably  be  less  uniform,  &  the  provision  of  the 
confederation  for  a  court  of  universal  appellant  Jurisdiction  so  far 
contravened.  5.  as  there  was  little  reason  to  expect  that  the  pub 
lic  finances  wd.  during  the  war  be  more  equal  to  the  public  bur 
dens  than  at  present,  and  as  the  cases  within  the  cognizance  of 
this  court  would  cease  with  the  war,  the  qualification  annexed  to 
the  expedient  ought  to  have  no  effect.  The  motion  was  disagreed 
to  &  a  committee  which  had  been  appointed  to  prepare  a  new  ordi 
nance  for  constituting  the  Court  of  Appeals,  was  filled  up  &  in 
structed  to  make  report. — on  the  above  motion  an  opinion  was 
maintained  by  Mr.  Rutledge  that  as  the  court  was  acceding  to 
the  ordinance  in  force  to  consist  of  three  Judges  any  two  df  whom 
to  make  a  court,  unless  three  were  in  actual  appointment  yhe  de 
cisions  of  two  were  illegal. 

Congress  went  into  the  consideration  of  the  report  ctf  the 
Comittee  on  the  case  of  Capt.  Asgill  the  British  officer  allotted  to 
suffer  retaliation  for  the  murder  of  Capt.  Huddy.  The  report 
proposed 

"  That  considering  the  letter  of  the  29^  of  July  last  from  ihe 
Count  de  Vergennes  to  Genl.  Washington  interceding  for  Ca] 
Asgill,  the  Commander-in-Chief  be  directed  to  set  him  a\ 
liberty." 

Previous  to  the  receipt  of  this  letter  from  the  Count  de  Ver 
gennes  Congress  had  been  much  divided  as  to  the  propriety  of 
executing  the  retaliation,  after  the  professions  on  the  part  of  the 
British  commanders,  of  a  desire  to  carry  on  the  war  on  humane 
principles,  and  the  promises  of  Sr  G.  Carleton  to  pursue  as  effec 
tually  as  possible  the  real  authors  of  the  murder  ;  some  supposing 
that  these  circumstances  had  so  far  changed  the  ground  that  Con 
gress  ought  to  recede  from  their  denunciations,  others  supposing 


256  THE   WRITINGS  OF  [1782 

that  as  the  condition  of  the  menace  had  not  been  complied  with, 
and  the  promises  were  manifestly  evasive,  a  perseverance  on 
the  part  of  Congress  was  essential  to  their  honor  &  that  more 
over  it  would  probably  compel  the  enemy  to  give  up  the  notorious 
author  of  the  confessed  murder.  After  the  receipt  of  the  letter 
from  the  Count  de  Vergennes,  Congress  were  unanimous  for  a  re 
laxation.  Two  questions  however  arose  on  the  report  of  the  com 
mittee.  The  i5-1  was  on  what  considerations  the  discharge  of 
Cap.  Asgill  ought  to  be  grounded.  On  this  question  a  diversity 
of  opinions  existed.  Some  concurred  with  the  committee  in 
resting  the  measure  entirely  on  the  intercession  of  the  French 
Court :  alledging  that  this  was  the  only  plea  that  could  apologize 
to  the  world  for  such  a  departure  from  the  solemn  declaration 
made  both  by  Congress  and  the  Commander  in  Chief.  Others 
were  of  opinion  that  this  plea  if  publicly  recited  would  mark  an 
obsequiousness  to  the  French  Court  and  an  impeachment  of  the 
humanity  of  Congress,  which  greatly  outweighed  the  circum 
stance  urged  in  its  favor  ;  and  that  the  disavowal  of  the  outrage,  by 
the  British  Genl.  and  a  solemn  promise  to  pursue  the  guilty  au 
thors  of  it,  afforded  the  most  honorable  ground  on  which  Con 
gress  might  make  their  retreat  ;  others  again  contended  for  an 
enumeration  of  all  the  reasons  which  led  to  the  measure  ;  lastly 
others  were  against  a  recital  of  any  reasons  &  for  leaving  the 
justification  of  the  measure  to  such  reasons  as  would  occur  of 
themselves.  This  last  opinion  after  considerable  discussions  pre 
vailed,  and  the  Resol.  left  as  it  stands  on  the  Journals.  The 
2d  question  was  whether  this  release  of  Cap:  Asgill  should  be  fol 
lowed  by  a  demand  on  Gel  Carleton  to  fulfil  his  engagement  to 
pursue  with  all  possible  effect  the  authors  of  the  Murder. 

On  one  side  it  was  urged  that  such  a  demand  would  be  nuga 
tory  after  the  only  sanction  which  could  enforce  it  had  been  re 
linquished  ;  that  it  would  not  be  consistent  with  the  letter  of  the 
Count  de  Vergennes  which  solicited  complete  oblivion,  and  that 
it  would  manifest  to  the  public  a  degree  of  confidence  in  British 
faith  which  was  not  felt  and  ought  not  to  be  affected. 

On  the  opposite  side  it  was  said  that  after  the  confession  & 
promise  of  justice  by  Gel  Carleton,  the  least  that  could  be  done 
by  Gel  Washington  would  be  to  claim  a  fulfilment ;  that  the 


1782]  JAMES  MADISON.  257 

intercession  of  the  C-  de  Vergennes  extended  no  farther  than  to 
prevent  the  execution  of  Capt:  Asgill,  and  the  substitution  of  any 
other  innocent  victim  ;  and  by  no  means  was  meant  to  shelter  the 
guilty  ;  that  whatever  blame  might  fall  on  Congress  for  seeming 
to  confide  in  the  promises  of  the  enemy,  they  would  be  more 
blamed  if  they  not  only  dismissed  the  purpose  of  retaliating  on 
the  innocent,  but  at  the  same  time  omitted  to  challenge  a  prom 
ised  vengeance,  on  the  guilty,  that  if  the  challenge  was  not  fol 
lowed  by  a  compliance  on  the  part  of  the  enemy,  it  would  at  least 
promulge  and  perpetuate,  in  justification  of  the  past  measures  of 
Congress,  the  confessions  &  promises  of  the  enemy  on  which  the 
challenge  was  grounded  ;  &  would  give  weight  to  the  charges 
both  of  barbarity  and  perfidy  which  had  been  so  often  brought 
ag-'  them. 

In  the  vote  on  this  question,  6  States  were  in  favor  of  the  de 
mand  &  the  others  either  divided  or  against  it. 


FRIDAY,    NOV?      8. 

The  preceding  question  having  been  taken  again,  on  a  further 
discussion  of  the  subject.  There  were  in  favor  of  the  demand, 
N.  H.,  R.  I.,  N.  Y.  Pa  Del.  Maryd.  Virga.  &  of  the  other  States 
some  were  divided. 

A  motion  was  made  by  Mr.  Rutledge  of  S.  C.  "That  the 
Comder  in  chief  &  of  the  S.  Department  be  respectively  directed 
whenever  the  Enemy  shall  commit  any  act  of  cruelty  or  violence 
contrary  to  the  laws  &  usage  of  war  on  the  Citizens  of  these 
States  to  demand  adequate  satisfaction  for  the  same,  and  in  case 
such  satisfaction  shall  not  be  immediately  given,  but  refused  or 
evaded  under  any  pretext  whatsoever,  to  cause  suitable  retalia 
tion  to  be  forthwith  made  on  British  officers  without  waiting  for 
directions  from  Congress  on  the  subject." 

When  this  motion  was  first  made  it  was  espoused  by  many  ; 
with  great  warmth  in  particular  by  the  Delegates  of  N.  C  &  S.  C., 
as  necessary  to  prevent  the  delays  &  uncertainties  incident  to  a 
resort  by  the  Military  Commanders  to  Congress,  and  to  convince 

VOL.  I. — 17 


258  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1782 

the  enemy  that  notwithstanding  the  dismission  of  Capt:  Asgill 
the  general  purpose  of  retaliation  was  firmly  retained.1 

Against  the  motion  it  was  objected  i.  that  the  time  &  place  in 
which  it  stood  would  certainly  convey  an  indirect  reprehension  of 
Gen1  Washington  for  bringing  before  Congress  the  case  of  Capt: 
Asgill  &  Huddy:  2.  that  it  manifested  a  distrust  in  Congress  which 
however  well  founded  it  might  be  with  respect  to  retaliation 
ought  not  to  be  proclaimed  by  themselves.  3.  that  political  & 
national  considerations  might  render  the  interference  of  the 
Supreme  authority  expedient,  of  wch  the  letter  from  the  C  de 
Vergennes  in  the  late  case  furnished  an  instance;  that  the  resort  of 
the  Military  Commanders  to  the  Sovefign  for  direction  in  great 
and  difficult  cases,  such  as  those  of  retaliation  would  often  prove, 
was  a  right  of  which  they  ought  not  to  be  deprived;  but  in  the 
exercise  of  which  they  ought  rather  to  be  countenanced.  These 
objections  reduced  the  patrons  of  the  motion  to  the  Delegates  of 
N.  C.  &  S.  C.  alone  or  nearly  so.  In  place  of  it  the  declaratory 
motion  on  the  Journals  was  substituted.  This  again  was  objected 
to  as  implying  that  in  the  cases  of  retaliation  taken  up  by  the 
Mil?"  commanders,  they  had  proceeded  on  doubtful  authority.  To 
remove  this  objection,  the  amendment  was  proposed,  limiting  the 
preamble  to  the  single  act  of  discharging  Capt :  Asgill.  This 
however  was  not  entirely  satisfactory  because  that  particular  act 
could  have  no  constructive  influence  on  the  Reputed  authority  of 
the  Generals.  It  was  acceded  to  by  the  votes  of  several  who  were 
apprehensive  that  in  case  of  rejecting  it,  the  earnestness  of  some 
might  obtrude  a  substitute  less  harmless,  or  that  the  Resolution 
might  pass  without  the  preamble,  &  be  more  offensive  to  the  Com 
mander  in  Chief.  The  first  apprehension  was  the  prevailing  mo 
tive  with  many  to  agree  to  the  proposition  on  the  final  question. 

1  "  We  have  recd  no  intelligence  from  Europe  since  my  last.  I  have  inclosed 
to  the  Gov*  a  copy  of  a  late  letter  from  Carlton,  which  breathes  a  much  less 
conciliatory  spirit  than  his  preceding  correspondence.  No  steps  have  been 
taken  by  Congress  as  to  the  cessions  since  the  acceptance  of  that  of  N.  York. 
Asgill  is  directed  to  be  set  at  liberty,  without  any  special  reason  being  assigned 
for  it,  and  Gl  Washington  instructed  to  call  upon  G1  Carlton  to  fulfil  his 
promise  to  pursue  the  guilty.  If  the  interval  between  this  &  the  post  produces 
any  thing,  you  shall  then  have  it." — Madison  to  Edmund  Randolph,  Nov.  10, 
1782.  Mad.  MSS. 


1782]  JAMES  MADISON.  259 

This  day  a  letter  was  rec?  from  Ge1  Washington,  inclosing  one 
of  the  25  of  Oc'  from  S'  G.  Carleton  relative  to  the  demand  made 
on  him  for  a  liquidation  of  accts  and  payment  of  the  balance  due 
for  the  maintenance  of  Prisoners  of  war,  in  which  the  latter  used 
an  asperity  of  language  so  much  the  reverse  of  his  preceding 
correspondence  that  many  regard  it  as  portending  a  revival  of  the 
war  against  the  U  S. 

SATURDAY     &    MONDAY. 
No  Congress. 


The  reappointment  of  W-  Jefferson  as  Minister  Plenipo  :  for 
negotiating  peace  was  agreed  to  unanimously  and  without  a  single 
adverse  remark.1  The  act  took  place  in  consequence  of  its  being 

1  Madison  sent  the  resolution  to  Edmund  Randolph  November  i2th  : 
' '  Resolved 

"That  the  appointment  of  T.  Jefferson  Esqr  as  a  Minist  :  for  nego  : 
peace  made  on  the  day  be  &  the  same  is  hereby  renewed  :  &  that  on  his 
acceptance  thereof  he  be  invested  with  all  the  powers  &  subject  to  all  the  instruc 
tions  which  have  been  or  may  be  issued  by  Congress  to  the  Min's  [torn]  for  nego  : 
peace,  in  the  same  manner  as  if  his  original  app'.  had  taken-effect. 

"  This  Resolution  passed  a  few  minutes  ago  I  sent  you  a  line  for  the  post 
but  I  fear  too  late  This  catches  Doc1:  Tucker  in  the  street  proceeding  by  the 
State  House.  You  will  let  it  be  known  to  M*  J.  as  quickly  as  secrecy  will 
admit.  An  official  notification  will  follow  by  the  first  oppy.  This  will  prepare 
him  for  it  :  It  passed  unan:  &  with*  a  single  remark  adverse  to  it.  On  this 
subj*  again  by  the  post  next  week  or  by  Col:  B.  if  earlier 

Adieu  " 

November  I4th,  he  wrote  again  : 

"  By  a  line  dropped  from  the  post,  tho'  perhaps  too  late  to  get  into  the  mail, 
and  by  another  by  D*  Tucker  who  soon  followed,  I  informed  you  of  the  re- 
appointment  of  M?  Jefferson,  that  the  act  passed  unanimously  &  without  even 
an  unfavorable  remark.  Col.  Bland  by  whom  this  goes,  conveys  an  official  noti 
fication  from  M*  Livingston  undercover  to  Col.  Monroe.  As  you  will  probably 
in  consequence  of  it,  if  not  before  have  an  interview  with  Mr  [J.],  no  observa 
tions  on  the  subject  are  necessary.  I  confide  in  his  acceptance  and  flatter  myself 
with  the  pleasure  of  soon  seeing  him  in  Philad? 

"  I  inclose  you  the  late  papers  which  are  very  barren,  but  contain  everything 
which  falls  under  the  head  of  news."  Mad.  MSB. 


26o  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1782 

suggested  that  the  death  of  Mr.s  J.  had  probably  changed  the 
sentiments  of  M?  J.  with  regard  to  public  life,  &  that  all  the 
reasons  which  led  to  his  original  appointment  still  existed  and 
indeed,  had  acquired  additional  force  from  the  improbability  that 
Mr.  Laurens  would  actually  assist  in  the  negotiation. 

"  A  motion  was  made  by  Mr.  Rutledge  declaring  that  when  a 
matter  was  referred  to  any  of  the  departments  to  take  order,  it  was 
the  sense  &  meaning  of  Congress  that  the  same  should  be  carried 
into  execution."  On  this  motion  some  argued  that  such  reference 
amounted  to  an  absolute  injunction,  others  insisted  that  it  gave 
authority,  but  did  not  absolutely  exclude  discretion  in  the  Execu 
tive  Departments.  The  explanation  that  was  finally  acquiesced 
in  as  most  rational  &  conformable  to  practice  was  that  it  not  only 
gave  authority,  but  expressed  the  sense  of  Congress  that  the 
measure  ought  to  be  executed  :  leaving  it  so  far  however  in  the 
discretion  of  the  Executive  Department,  as  that  in  case  it  differed 
in  opinion  from  Congress  it  might  suspend  execution  &  state  the 
objections  to  Congress  that  their  final  direction  might  be  given. 
In  the  course  of  debate  it  was  observed  by  Mr.  Madison  that  the 
practice  of  referring  matters  to  take  order,  especially  where  money 
was  to  be  issued,  was  extremely  exceptionable  inasmuch  as  no 
entry  of  such  proceedings  was  made  on  the  Journals,  but  only 
noted  in  a  memorandum  book  kept  by  the  Secretary,  and  then 
sent  to  the  Department  with  the  reference  to  take  order  indorsed 
by  the  Secy,  but  not  signed  by  him.  So  that  the  transaction  even 
where  public  in  its  nature,  never  came  before  the  public  eye,  &  the 
Dep*  was  left  with  a  precarious  voucher  for  its  justification.  The 
motion  was  in  the  end  withdrawn,  the  mover  alledging  that  as  he 
only  aimed  at  rendering  an  uncertain  point  clear,  &  this  had  been 
brought  about  by  a  satisfactory  explanation,  he  did  not  wish  for 
any  Resolution  on  the  subject. 


WEDNESDAY    13    NOV? 
No  Congress. 


1782]  JAMES  MADISON.  261 

THURSDAY    14  NOV? 

The  proceedings  were  confined  to  the  Report  of  the  Committee 
on  the  case  of  Vermont  entered  on  the  Journals.  As  it  was 
notorious  that  Vermont  had  uniformly  disregarded  the  Recom 
mendation  of  Congress,  of  1779,  the  Report  which  ascribed  the 
evils  prevalent  in  that  district  to  a  late  act  of  N.  Y.  which  vio 
lated  that  recommendation  was  generally  admitted  to  be  unjust  & 
unfair.  Mr.  Howel  was  the  only  member  who  openly  supported 
it.  The  Delegates  from  N.  Y.  denied  the  fact  that  any  violation 
had  been  committed  on  the  part  of  that  State.  The  temper  of 
Congress  on  this  occasion  as  the  yeas  &  nays  shew,  was  less 
favorable  to  Vermont  than  on  any  preceding  one, — the  effect 
probably  of  the  territorial  Cession  of  N.  York  to  the  U.  S.  In 
the  course  of  the  debate  Mr.  Howel  cited  the  case  of  Kentucky 
as  somewhat  parallel  to  that  of  Vermont,  said  that  the  late  crea 
tion  of  a  separate  Court  by  Virga  for  the  former  resembled  the 
issuing  of  Commissions  by  N.  Y.  to  the  latter  that  the  jurisdic 
tion  would  probably  be  equally  resisted  &  the  same  violences 
would  follow  as  in  Vermont.  He  was  called  to  order  by  Mr. 
Madison.  The  President  &  the  plurality  of  Congress  supported 
and  enforced  the  call. 


No  Congress  till 

Nov1-  Monday   18  )       The  Journals  sufficiently  explain  the  pro- 
Tuesday   19  )  ceedings  of  those  days.1 

1  Under  date  of  November  igth,  Madison  wrote  to  Randolph  : 
"  The  prospect  derived  from  the  impost  of  the  five  Per  C'  seems  to  be  pretty 
thoroughly  blasted  by  a  unanimous  &  final  veto  by  the  Assembly  of  Rhode 
Island.  This  State,  by  its  Delegates  (who  fully  represent  the  aversion  of  their 
constituents  to  the  impost)  voted  in  Congress  That  6  Millions  of  Dollars  were 
necessary  for  the  year  '83,  that  2  Millions  were  as  much  as  the  States  could 
raise  &  as  ought  to  be  required  by  Congress,  and  that  applications  for  loans  in 
Europe  ought  to  be  relied  on  for  the  residue.  And  yet  they  absolutely  refuse 
the  only  fund  which  could  be  Satisfactory  to  lenders.  The  indignation  against 
this  perverse  sister  is  increased  by  her  shameful  delinquency  in  the  constitu 
tional  requisitions. 

"  The  tribunal  erected  for  the  controversy  between  Connecticut  and  Pennsa  was 
I  hear  to  be  opened  to-day.     The  Judges  who  compose  it  are  Mr.  Whipple  of 


262  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1782 

WEDNESDAY    NOV?   2OT.H 

Congress  went  into  consideration  of  the  Report  of  A  Commit 
tee  consisting  of  Mr.  Carrol,  Mr.  McKean  &  Mr.  Howel  on  two 
Memorials  from  the  Legislature  of  Pennsylvania.  The  Memorials 
imported  a  disposition  to  provide  for  the  Creditors  of  the  U.  S. 
within  the  State  of  Pen?  out  of  the  Revenues  allotted  for  Con 
gress,  unless  such  provision  could  be  made  by  Congress.  The 
Report  as  an  answer  to  the  Memorials  acknowledged  the  merit  of 
the  public  Creditors,  professed  the  wishes  of  Congress  to  do  them 
justice ;  referring  at  the  same  time  to  their  recommendation  of 
the  Impost  of  5  Per  C,  which  had  not  been  acceded  to  by  all 
the  States  ;  to  the  requisition  of  1,200,000  Dr.s,  for  the  payment  of 
one  year's  interest  on  the  public  debt,  and  to  their  acceptance 
of  the  territorial  cession  made  by  N.  Y.  After  some  general  con 
versation  in  which  the  necessity  of  the  Impost  as  the  only  fund 
on  which  loans  could  be  expected  &  the  necessity  of  loans  to 
supply  the  enormous  deficiency  of  taxes,  were  urged,  as  also  the 
fatal  tendency  of  the  plan  intimated  in  the  Memorials,  as  well  to 
the  Union  itself,  as  to  the  system  actually  adopted  by  Congress, 
the  Report  was  committed.1 

N.  Hampshire,  Mr.  Arnold  of  Rhode  Island,  the  Chief  Justice  &  another 
gentlemn  of  N.  Jersey  &  Mr.  C.  Griffin  of  Virga.  Mr.  Rutledge,  Mr.  Jones  & 
Gen1  Nelson  have  declined  the  service.  On  the  part  of  Penna,  appear  Mr. 
Wilson  Mr.  Reed,  Mr.  Bradford  &  Mr.  Sergeant.  Mr.  Osborne  assists  in  the 
capacity  of  Solicitor.  On  the  part  of*  Connecticut  are  deputed  Mr.  Dyer,  Mr. 
Root,  &  Doc!  Sam1  Johnson.  The  first  &  the  last  I  am  told,  are  on  the  spot. 
It  is  supposed  that  the  first  object  of  Con1  will  be  to  adjourn  the  cause  to  a 
distant  day  on  the  plea  that  many  of  their  essential  documents  are  beyond  the 
Atlantic.  In  a  national  view  it  is  not  perhaps  advisable  to  invalidate  the  title 
of  this  State  however  defective  it  may  be,  until  a  more  important  controversy  is 
terminated.  I  will  make  the  earliest  communication  of  the  issue  of  this  trial. 
You  will  not  forget  a  like  promise  which  your  letter  makes  with  respect  to  the 
case  lately  decided  by  the  Court  of  Appeals." — Mad.  MSS. 

1  Madison  set  forth  the  delinquency  of  Virginia  in  complying  with  the  requi 
sitions  of  Congress  in  the  following  letter  to  Edmund  Randolph,  dated  Novem 
ber  26th  (cypher  represented  by  italics) : 

"  The  Governor  in  his  letter  to  the  Delegates  of  the  8^  of  the  pres*  month, 
after  observing  that  the  great  scarcity  of  cash  in  Virga  will  put  it  out  of  her 
power  to  comply  with  the  demands  of  Congress,  unless  the  Financier  will 
accept  Tob?  in  payment,  desires  us  to  sound  the  latter  on  that  subject.  We 


1782]  JAMES  MADISON.  263 

A  motion  was  made  by  Mr.  Rutledge,  2ded  by  Mr.  Williamson, 
to  instruct  the  committee  to  Report  the  best  mode  of  liquidating 
the  domestic  debts,  and  of  obtaining  a  valuation  of  the  land 

accordingly  called  on  M?  Morris,  and  to  our  astonishment  were  told  that  a 
proposition  to  this  very  effect,  and  to  the  amount  of  sixty  thousand  dollars  had 
been  a  considerable  time  lying  before  him  that  his  agent  had  been  in 
structed  to  allow  the  current  price  and  that  he  wished  to  have  obtained  the 
tobacco  because  it  could  be  immediately  sent  under  a  fortunate  convoy  to  Hol 
land  where  its  influence  on  public  credit  might  be  critical  and  important. 
Either  therefore  M*  M.  must  have  been  basely  deceived  by  his  agent  which  can 
hardly  be  supposed  or  the  Governor  must  in  the  first  case  have  rejected  a  fair 
offer  and  in  the  next  imposed  on  us  a  very  nugatory  and  awkward  negotiation 
as  we  concealed  from  the  Superintend*  that  our  enquiries  with  the  Gov*.  he 
escaped  the  risk  to  which  he  had  exposed  his  character  with  that  Minister  [sic] 
I  cannot  pass  over  this  circumstance  without  a  lamentation  on  the  obloquy 
which  Virginia  brings  on  herself  by  submitting  to  be  eclipsed  by  even  the  feeble 
efforts  of  other  states.  The  monthly  lash  of  the  Receiver's  proclamation,  which 
has  roused  so  many  other  states  into  some  degree  of  emulation  has  produced  no 
effect  on  her.  In  our  conversation  with  M*  M.  we  were  indeed  told  that 
M1;  Webb  had  a  prospect  of  between  two  and  three  thousand  dollars.  But  if  any 
thing  can  add  to  the  mortification  which  we  feel  at  the  receipt  of  nothing  it  will 
be  the  receipt  of  so  beggarly  a  sum.  I  confide  therefore  that  there  is  at  least 
enough  of  pride  in  the  state  to  prevent  it. 

"  The  obstinacy  of  Rhode  Island  in  rejecting  the  Impost  is  a  subject  of  very 
general  pointed  crimination  not  only  among  the  public  creditors  and  their 
friends  who  deem  it  equivalent  to  denial  of  jttstice,  but  among  the  most  en 
lightened  patrons  of  the  fcedral  interests  who  pronounce  it  a  blow  to  our  credit 
abroad,  as  well  as  our  future  credit  at  home.  And  in  truth  who  can  combine 
this  consideration  with  the  paltry  payments  on  the  last  requisition  of  Congress 
and  not  shudder  at  the  prospect.  This  obstinacy  on  the  part  of  R.  I.  is  sup 
posed,  on  good  grounds,  to  be  much  cherished  by  the  limited  manner  in  which 
other  states  have  acceded  to  the  impost  from  which  she  infers  a  latent  repugnance 
to  the  measure.  Would  it  not  then  be  prudent  in  Virga.  to  revise  and  enlarge 
her  act  of  compliance  ?  If  her  example  should  prove  less  efficacious  than  might 
be  wished  it  would  at  least  have  a  conciliatory  effect  on  other  states  and  gain  her 
general  credit.  I  see  no  possible  objection,  unless  indeed  she  wishes  the  plan 
to  be  frustrated ;  in  which  case  I  can  only  give  it  as  my  firm  opinion  that  a 
thorough  knowledge  of  public  affairs  would  speedily  reconcile  her  to  it.  If 
your  own  ideas  correspond  with  those  here  expressed,  and  the  temper  of  the 
Legislature  be  not  unfavorable,  you  will  give  such  suggestions  as  may  be  best 
adapted  to  the  object,  and  make  them  the  subject  of  a  future  paragraph." — 
Mad.  MSS. 


264  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1782 

within  the  several  States,  as  the  Article  of  Confederation  directs — 
The  first  part  of  the  instruction  was  negatived,  provision  having 
been  previously  made  on  that  head.  In  place  of  it  the  Super 
intend*  of  Finance  was  instructed  to  report  the  causes  which 
impede  that  provision.  The  2d  part  was  withdrawn  by  the  mover. 
A  committee  however  was  afterwards  appointed,  consisting  of 
Mr.  Rutledge,  Mr.  Nash  Mr.  Duane  Mr.  Osgood  &  Mr.  Madi 
son,  to  report  the  best  scheme  for  a  valuation. 


THURSDAY,    NOV*   21. 

A  report  was  made  by  a  Committee  to  whom  had  been  referred 
several  previous  reports  &  propositions  relative  to  the  salaries  of 
foreign  Ministers,  delivering  it  as  the  opinion  of  the  Committee 
that  the  Salaries  allowed  to  Ministers  Plenipo^  to  wit  ^2500 
Sterlg.  would  not  admit  of  reduction  ;  but  that  the  saly  allowed 
to  Secretaries  of  legations,  to  wit  ^1000.  Sterl^,  ought  to  be  re 
duced  to  ^500.  This  Committee  consisted  of  Mr.  Duane,  Mr. 
Izard  &  Mr.  Madison  the  last  of  whom  disagreed  to  the  opinion 
of  his  colleagues  as  to  the  reduction  of  the  ^2500  allowed  to 
Mr?  Plenipo5: 

Ag5'  a  reduction  it  was  argued  that  not  only  justice,  but  the  dig 
nity  of  the  U.  S.  required  a  liberal  allowance  to  foreign  servants  ; 
that  gentlemen  who  had  experienced  the  expence  of  living  in 
Europe  did  not  think  that  a  less  sum  would  be  sufficient  for  a 
Decent  style  ;  and  that  in  the  instance  of  Mr.  A.  Lee,  the  ex- 
pences  claimed  by  him  &  allowed  by  Congress  exceeded  the  fixed 
salary  in  question. 

In  favor  of  a  reduction  were  urged  the  poverty  of  the  U.  S., 
the  simplicity  of  Republican  Governments,  the  inconsistency  of 
splendid  allowances  to  Ministers  whose  chief  duty  lay  in  display 
ing  the  wants  of  their  Constituents  and  soliciting  a  supply  of 
them  ;  and,  above  all,  the  policy  of  reconciling  the  army  to  the 
economical  arrangements  inposed  on  them,  by  extending  the 
reform  to  every  other  Department. 

The  result  of  this  discussion  was  a  reference  of  the  Report  to 
another  Committee,  consisting  of  Mr.  Williamson,  Mr.  Osgood  & 
Mr.  Carrol. 


1782]  JAMES  MADISON.  265 

A  motion  was  made  by  Mr.  Howel,  2dfd  by  Mr.  Arnold,  recom 
mending  to  the  several  States  to  settle  with  &  satisfy  at  the 
charge  of  the  U.  S.  all  such  temporary  corps  as  had  been  raised 
by  them  respectively  with  the  approbation  of  Congress.  The 
repugnance  which  appeared  in  Congress  to  go  into  so  extensive 
&  important  a  measure  at  this  time,  led  the  mover  to  withdraw  it. 

A  motion  was  made  by  Mr.  Madison  seconded  by  Mr.  Jones, 
"  That  the  Secy  of  F.  Affairs  be  authorized  to  communicate  to 
Forn  Ministers  who  may  reside  near  Congress,  all  such  articles  of 
Intelligence  recd.  by  Congress  as  he  shall  judge  fit  &  that  he  have 
like  authority  with  respect  to  acts  &  Resolutions  passed  by  Con 
gress  ;  reporting  nevertheless  the  communications  which,  in  all 
such  cases  he  shall  have  made." 

It  was  objected  by  some  that  such  a  Resolution  was  unneces 
sary,  the  See*  being  already  possessed  of  the  authority  ;  it  was 
contended  by  others  that  he  ought  previously  to  such  communica 
tion,  to  report  his  intention  to  do  so  ;  others  again  were  of  opinion 
that  it  was  unnecessary  to  report  at  all. 

The  motion  was  suggested  by  casual  information  from  the 
Secy,  that  he  had  not  comunicated  to  the  French  Minister  the  re- 
appointment  of  Mr.  Jefferson,  no  act  of  Congress  having  em 
powered  or  instructed  him  to  do  so. 

The  motion  was  committed  to  Mr.  Williamson  Mr.  Madison 
&  Mr.  Peters. 


FRIDAY,   NOVR    22. 

A  considerable  time  previous  to  this  date  a  letter  had  been 
recd  by  Congress  from  Mr.  H.  Laurens,  informing  them  of  his 
discharge  from  captivity,  and  of  his  having  authorized  in  the 
British  Ministry  an  expectation  that  Earl  Cornwallis  sd  in  his 
turn  be  absolved  from  his  parole.  Shortly  after  a  letter  from 
Docf  Franklin  informed  Congress  that  at  the  pressing  instance  of 
Mr.  L.,  and  in  consideration  of  the  offer  of  Gen1  Burgoyne  for 
Mr.  L.  by  Congress,  as  well  as  the  apparent  reasonableness  of  the 
thing,  he  had  executed  an  instrument  setting  Cornwallis  at  lib 
erty  from  his  parole,  until  the  pleasure  of  Congress  should  be 
known.  These  papers  had  been  committed  to  Mr  Rutledge  Mr 


266  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1782 

Mongomery  &  Mr  Madison,  who  reported  in  favor  of  the  ratifica 
tion  of  the  measure,  against  the  opinion  however  of  Mr.  R.  the 
first  member  of  the  Committee.  The  Report  after  some  discus 
sion  had  been  recommitted  &  had  lain  in  their  hands,  until  being 
called  for,  it  was  thought  proper  by  the  Committee  to  obtain  the 
sense  of  Congress  on  the  main  question  whether  the  act  sd  be 
ratified  or  annulled  ;  in  order  that  a  report  might  be  made  corre 
spondent  thereto.  With  this  view  a  motion  was  this  day  made  by 
Mr.  M.,  2ded  by  Mr.  Osgood  that  the  Committee  be  instructed  to 
report  a  proper  act  for  the  ratification  of  the  measure.  In  sup 
port  of  this  motion  it  was  alledged,  that  whenever  a  public 
minister  entered  into  engagements  without  authority  from  his  Sov 
ereign,  the  alternative  which  presented  itself  was  either  to  recall  the 
minister,  or  to  support  his  proceedings,  or  perhaps  both  ;  that 
Congress  had  by  their  Resolution  of  the  [seventeenth]  day  of 
[September]  refused  to  accept  the  resignation  of  Mr.  L.  and  had 
insisted  on  his  executing  the  office  of  a  Minister  Plenipo:  and 
that  on  the  [twentieth]  day  of  [September]  they  had  rejected  a 
motion  for  suspending  the  said  Resolution  ;  that  they  had  no  op 
tion  therefore  but  to  fulfil  the  engagement  entered  into  on  the 
part  of  that  Minister  ;  that  it  would  be  in  the  highest  degree  pre 
posterous  to  retain  him  in  so  dignified  and  confidential  a  service, 
and  at  the  same  time  stigmatize  him  by  a  disavowal  of  his  conduct 
and  thereby  disqualify  him  for  a  proper  execution  of  the  service  ; 
that  it  was  improper  to  send  him  into  negotiations  with  the  Enemy 
under  an  impression  of  supposed  obligations  ;  that  this  reasoning 
was  in  a  great  degree  applicable  to  the  part  which  Dod  Franklin 
had  taken  in  the  measure  ;  that  finally  the  Marquis  de  la  Fayette, 
who  in  consequence  of  the  liberation  of  Cornwallis,  had  under 
taken  an  exchange  of  several  officers  of  his  family,  would  also 
participate  in  the  mortification  ;  that  it  was  overrating  far  the  im 
portance  of  Cornwallis,  to  sacrifice  all  these  considerations  to  the 
policy  or  gratification  of  prolonging  his  captivity. 

On  the  opposite  side  it  was  said,  that  the  British  Gov*  having 
treated  Mr.  L.  as  a  Traitor  not  as  a  Prisoner  of  war,  having  refused 
to  exchange  him  for  Gen1  Burgoyne,  and  having  declared  by  the 
British  Gen1  at  N.  York  that  he  had  been  freely  discharged,  neither 
Mr.  L.  nor  Congress  would  be  bound  either  in  honor  or  justice  to 


1782]  JAMES  MADISON.  267 

render  an  equivalent ;  and  that  policy  absolutely  required  that  so 
barbarous  an  instrum*  of  war,  and  so  odious  an  object  to  the  peo 
ple  of  the  U.  S.  should  be  kept  as  long  as  possible  in  the  chains 
of  captivity  ;  that  as  the  latest  advices  rendered  it  probable  that 
Mr.  L.  was  on  his  return  to  America,  the  commission  for  peace 
would  not  be  affected  by  any  mark  of  disapprobation  which  might 
fall  on  his  conduct ;  that  no  injury  could  accrue  to  Docf  Franklin, 
because  he  had  guarded  his  act  by  an  express  reservation  for  the 
confirmation  or  disallowance  of  Congress  ;  that  the  case  was  the 
same  with  the  Marquis  de  la  Fayette  ;  that  the  declaration  agst 
partial  exchanges  until  a  Cartel  on  national  principles  sd  be  estab 
lished  wd  not  admit  even  an  exchange  anteced*  thereto. 

These  considerations  were  no  doubt  with  some  the  sole  motives 
for  their  respective  votes.  There  were  others  however  who  at 
least  blended  with  them,  on  one  side,  a  personal  attachment  to 
Mr.  L.,  and  on  the  other,  a  dislike  to  his  character,  and  a  jealousy 
excited  by  his  supposed  predilection  for  G.  B.  by  his  intimacy 
with  some  of  the  new  Ministry,  by  his  frequent  passing  to  &  from 
G.  B.  by  the  eulogiums  pronounced  on  him  by  Mr  Burke  in  the 
House  of  Commons,  and  by  his  memorial  whilst  in  the  Tower,  to 
the  Parliam1.  The  last  consideration  was  the  chief  ground  on 
which  the  motion  had  been  made  for  suspending  the  Resolution 
which  requested  his  continuance  in  the  Commission  for  peace. 

In  this  stage  of  the  business  a  motion  was  made  by  Mr.  Duane 
2dfd  by  Mr.  Rutledge  to  postpone  the  consideration  of  it  ;  which 
being  lost,  a  motion  was  made  by  Mr.  Williamson  to  substitute  a 
Resolution  declaring,  that  as  the  B.  Gov*  had  treated  Mr.  L.  with 
so  unwarrantable  a  rigor  &  even  as  a  Traitor,  and  Cornwallis  had 
rendered  himself  so  execrable  by  his  barbarities,  Congress  could 
not  ratify  his  exchange — An  adjournment  was  called  for  in  order 
to  prevent  a  vote  with  so  thin  &  divided  a  house. 


No  Congress  till 

MONDAY,   NOVR  25. 

A  letter  from  the  L1  Govf  of  R.  I.  was  read  containing  evidence 
that  some  of  the  leaders  in  Verm1,  and  particularly  Luke  Nolton 


268  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1782 

who  had  been  deputed  in  the  year  1780  to  Congress  as  agent  for 
that  party  opposed  to  its  independence  but  who  had  since  changed 
sides  had  been  intriguing  with  the  enemy  in  N.  Y.  The  letter  was 
committed.  See  Nor  27. 

The  consideration  of  the  motion  for  ratifying  the  discharge  of 
Cornwallis  was  resumed.  Mr.  Williamson  renewed  his  motion 
which  failed.  Mr.  McKean  suggested  the  expedient  of  ratify 
ing  the  discharge,  on  condition  that  a  General  cartel  should  be 
acceded  to.  This  was  relished  at  first  by  several  members,  but 
a  development  of  its  inefticacy  and  inconsistency  with  national 
dignity  stifled  it. 

A  motion  was  made  by  Mr.  Rutledge,  2ded  by  Mr.  Ramsay,  that 
the  discharge  should  be  ratified  in  case  Mr.  L.  should  undertake 
the  office  of  commissioner  for  peace.  This  proposition  was  gen 
erally  considered  as  of  a  very  extraordinary  nature,  and  after  a 
brief  discussion  withdrawn. 

In  the  course  of  these  several  propositions  most  of  the  argu 
ments  stated  on  friday  last  were  repeated.  Col:  Hamilton  who 
warmly  &  urgently  espoused  the  ratification,  as  an  additional 
argument  mentioned,  that  some  intimations  had  been  given  by 
Colonel  L.  of  the  army  with  the  privity  of  Gen1  W.,  to  Cornwallis 
previous  to  his  capitulation,  that  he  might  be  exchanged  for  his 
father,  then  in  the  Tower. 

The  Rep*  of  the  Committee  on  Mr.  Ms  motion  on  the  21  inst: 
relative  to  the  Secy  of  F.  Affairs,  passed  without  opposition. 


TUESDAY,    NOVR    26. 

No  Congress  but  a  Grand  Committee  composed  of  a  member 
from  each  State. 

The  States  of  N.  H.  &  Massts  having  redeemed  more  than  their 
quota  of  the  Emissions  prior  to  the  i8th  of  March  1780,  had  called 
on  Congress  to  be  credited  for  the  surplus,  on  which  the  Super 
intend^  of  Finance  reported  that  they  ought  to  be  credited  at  the 
rate  of  i  Dollar  specie  for  40  of  the  sd  Emission,  according  to  the 
Act  of  March  aforesaid.1  This  report  being  judged  by  Congress 

1  This  act  recited  the  depreciation  of  the  bills  of  credit  to  at  least  ff  below 
their  nominal  value  and  the  necessity  of  decreasing  the  quantity  of  paper  in 


1782]  JAMES  MADISON.  269 

unjust  as  the  money  had  been  called  in  by  those  States  at  a  greater 
depreciation,  was  disagreed  to.  Whereupon  a  motion  was  made  by 
Mr.  Osgood,  that  the  States  who  had  redeemed  a  surplus  should 
be  credited  for  the  same  according  to  its  current  value  at  the  time 
of  redemption. 

This  motion  with  a  letter  afterwards  recd  from  the  State  of 
Mass:  on  the  same  subject,  was  referred  to  the  Grand  Committee 
in  question. 

The  Committee  were  unanimous  that  justice  required  an  allow 
ance  to  the  States  who  sd  sink  a  surplus,  to  be  apportioned  on 
the  different  States.  The  different  expedients  were 

i.  That  Congress  sd  renew  their  call  on  the  States  to  execute 
the  Acts  of  the  i8th  of  M.,  1780  and  leave  it  to  the  States  to  level 
the  money  by  negotiations  among  themselves.  This  was  Mr. 
Hamilton's  idea.  The  objections  against  it  were  that  either  no 
thing  wd  be  done  in  the  case  or  the  deficient  States  wd  be  at  the 
mercy  of  the  hoarding  States  ;  altho  the  former  were  per 
haps  prevented  from  doing  their  part  by  invasions  ;  &  the  pros 
perity  of  the  latter  enabled  them  to  absorb  an  undue  proportion. 

By  Mr.  Madison  it  was  proposed  that  Congress  should  declare 
that  whenever  it  sd  appear  that  the  whole  of  the  bills  emitted 
prior  to  the  i8th  of  M.,  1780  shall  have  been  collected  into  the 
treasuries  of  the  several  States,  Congress  wd  proceed  to  give  such 
credit  for  any  surplus  above  the  quotas  assigned  as  equity  might 
require,  and  debit  the  deficient  States  accordingly.  In  favor  of 
this  expedient  it  was  supposed  that  it  would  give  a  general  en 
couragement  to  the  States  to  draw  the  money  outstanding  among 
individuals  into  the  public  treasuries,  and  render  a  future  equita 
ble  arrangem'  by  Congress  easy.  The  objections  were  that  it  gave 
no  satisfaction  immediately  to  the  complaining  States,  &  would 


circulation.  It  was  resolved  that  the  States  should  pay  their  quotas  at  the  rate  of 
one  Spanish  milled  dollar  for  forty  dollars  of  the  bills,  that  the  bills  as  paid  in 
be  destroyed,  that  as  fast  as  funds  should  be  provided  other  bills  should  be  issued 
not  to  exceed  one-twentieth  part  of  the  nominal  sum  of  bills  destroyed,  that  the 
new  bills  bear  interest  at  five  per  cent,  per  annum  and  be  redeemed  within  six 
years  in  specie,  that  the  new  bills  be  issued  to  the  States  in  proportion  accord 
ing  to  their  monthly  quotas. — Journals  of  Congress,  iii.,  443. 


270  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1782 

prolong  the  internal  embarrassments  which  have  hindered  the 
States  from  a  due  compliance  with  the  requisitions  of  Congress. 
It  was  lastly  proposed  by  Mr.  Fitzsimmons  that  the  Commis 
sioners  appointed  to  traverse  the  U.  S.,  for  the  purpose  of  settling 
accounts  should  be  empowered  to  take  up  all  the  outstanding  old 
money  and  issue  certificates  in  place  of  it,  in  specie  value  accord 
ing  to  a  rule  to  be  given  them  by  Congress  the  amount  of  the 
certificates  to  be  apportioned  on  the  States  as  part  of  the  public 
debt,  the  same  rule  to  determine  the  credit  for  redemptions  by 
the  States.  This  proposition  was  on  the  whole  generally  thought 
by  the  Committee  least  objectionable  and  was  referred  to  a  sub 
committee  composed  of  Mr.  Rutledge,  Mr.  Fitzsimmons  &  Mr 
Hamilton  to  be  matured  &  laid  before  the  G.  Corn6.  One  con 
sideration  suggested  by  Mr.  Hamilton  in  its  favor  was  that  it 
would  multiply  the  advocates  for  federal  funds  for  discharging 
the  public  debts,  and  tend  to  cement  the  Union.1 

1  "Its  reasonableness  and  its  fate  both  will  depend  much  on  the  scale  by 
which  as  well  the  redeemed  as  the  outstanding  bills  is  to  be  valued.  In  all  ques 
tions  relative  to  this  subject,  the  defect  of  information  under  which  we  lie 
makes  it  difficult  for  us  to  deduce  the  general  interest  from  a  just  &  fair  com 
parison  of  particular  interests.  To  supply  in  some  degree  this  defect  with  re 
gard  to  Virginia  I  shall  enclose  to  M?  Ambler  for  his  answers,  a  number  of 
queries,  of  which  I  herein  add  a  copy  for  you.  Some  of  the  queries  indeed 
have  a  greater  reference  to  other  subjects.  If  you  can  assist  Mr.  A.  or  can  en 
large  the  plan  by  other  queries  I  beg  you  to  do  it.  If  the  sense  of  the  leading 
members  of  the  Assembly  can  be  conveniently  gathered  it  might  also  be  of  use. 
A  public  consultation  would  -violate  the  secrecy  which  is  judged  necessary  to  pre 
vent  a  revival  of  speculation  and  which  led  me  to  the  use  of  the  cypher  on  this 
occasion." — Madison  to  Edmund  Randolph,  Dec.  3,  1782.  (Italics  for  cypher.) 

"  Queries  put  to  [Jaquelin]  Ambler  [Treasurer  of  Virginia]. 

"i.  What  is  the  amount  of  the  old  Cont1.  bills  actually  sunk  by  Virg*  in 
pursuance  of  the  Act  of  i8l.h  of  March? 

"2.  What  is  the  probable  sum  remaining  in  the  hands  of  Individuals  in 
Virg?  ? 

"  3.     Does  it  circulate  and  at  what  value? 

"  4.  How  stands  the  law  with  respect  to  it  &  what  is  the  prospect  of  its  fur 
ther  redemption  ? 

"  5.     How  much  of  the  xVhs  °f  the  new  Cont1   emissions  has  been  issued  ? 

"  6.     How  much  of  the  sum  issued  has  been  redeemed? 

"7.     At  what  value  was  it  generally  issued  ? 


1782]  JAMES  MADISON.  271 

WEDNESDAY,    NOVR    27th. 

The  report  of  the  Committee  on  the  letter  from  the  L*  Govr  of 
R.  Island  (see  Novr  25)  was  made  &  taken  into  consideration. 

"8.     At  what  value  does  the  outstanding  sum  (if  any)  circulate? 

"  9.  Have  the  state  emissions  been  all  funded  at  I  for  1000  under  the  act 
for  that  purpose  and  what  is  the  sum  of  the  specie  certificates  issued  there 
upon  ? 

"  10.     At  what  rate  are  these  certificates  negociated  ? 

"  n.  What  is  the  conjectured  amount  of  certificates  in  Virg?  issued  by  con 
tinental  officers  ?  and  at  what  rate  are  they  negociated  ? 

"  12.  What  is  the  conjectured  amount  of  certificates  issued  by  the  state  for 
continental  purposes  ?  and  at  what  rate  negociated  ? 

"13.  What  is  the  amount  of  debits  in  the  auditor's  office  ag?*  the  U.  S.  for 
advances  made  by  Virginia  independent  of  the  Requisitions  of  Congress  ? 

"  14.     What  is  the  amount  of  credits  independent  of  the  same  ? 

"15.  In  what  degree  and  at  what  times  is  there  a  prospect  of  payments  un 
der  the  Requisition  of  8  million  for  the  current  year  ? 

"  16.  What  appears  from  the  returns  to  be  the  aggregate  valuation  of  lands 
made  under  the  act  of  JanY  I,  1782  directing  the  same? 

"17.  Is  the  valuation  deemed  pretty  true  on  the  whole  and  pretty  equal 
among  individuals  ? 

"  1 8.     What  is  the  computed  number  of  white  inhabitants  ? 

"19.     What  of  Black  do  ? 

"  20.  What  is  the  amount  of  the  losses  from  the  enemy  returned  under  the 
act  of  June  6.  last." 

Answers  to  all  the  questions  are  not  found.  He  replied  to  Question  9  :  "A 
small  sum  only  has  been  funded,  the  greater  part  being  laid  out  in  the  purchase 
of  back  lands — The  time  continued  for  bringing  in  the  same  til  first  June  next." 
To  Question  10 :  "No  demand  for  such  —  the  day  of  redemption  being 
too  distant."  To  Question  n  :  "  About  ^100,000. — has  been  issued  to 
Con1,  officers  in  Certificates,  and  others  daily  issuing — negociated  from  2. 
to  4.  for  i. — Those  issued  by  them  cannot  be  ascertained."  To  Questions 
12,  13,  and  14:  "The  Auditors  of  public  accounts  can  only  answer  these, 
who  are  much  ingaged  at  present.  —  The  debits  are  supposed  to  be  very 
large."  To  Question  15:  "No  probability  soon — Taxes  for  the  Current 
year  are  not  payable  till  first  May  —  &  those  chiefly  commutable  for;  as 
you  will  observe  by  the  Gazette  of  the  I?*  Feby."  To  Question  16  :  "^6,- 
042,401.2.5 — N.  B.  Eight  Counties  have  made  no  returns."  To  Question  17  : 
"  Very  unequal,  especially  among  Individuals — a  law  passed  last  Session  for 
equalizing  the  land  Tax,  is  intended  to  remedy  the  evil  complained  of."  To 
Question  18  :  "Many  of  the  Returns  did  not  distinguish  between  the  whites 
&  blacks,  so  that  this  cannot  be  at  present  answered."  To  Question  19: 
"  About  230,000."  To  Question  20  :  "  Returns  not  fully  made." — Mad.  MSS. 


272  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1782 

It  was  moved  by  Mr.  McKean  to  insert  in  the  first  clause  on 
the  Journal,  after  directing  the  apprehension  by  Gen1  W.,  "  in 
order  that  the  sd  persons  may  be  brought  to  trial."  The  reason 
urged  for  the  motion  was  that  it  might  appear  that  the  interposi 
tion  was  not  meant  to  supersede  civil  process  further  than  the  ne 
cessity  of  the  case  required.  Agst  the  motion  it  was  urged,  that 
it  would  lead  to  discussions  extremely  perplexing  &  dilatory  & 
that  it  would  be  more  proper  after  the  apprehension  sd  have 
taken  place. — The  motion  was  lost,  6  States  only  being  for  it. 

With  respect  to  the  main  question  it  was  agreed  on  all  sides 
that  it  was  indispensable  to  the  safety  of  the  U.  S.  that  a  traitor 
ous  intercourse  between  the  inhabitants  of  Vermont  &  the  Enemy 
should  be  suppressed.  There  were  however  two  modes  proposed 
for  the  purpose,  viz  :  the  direct  &  immediate  interposition  of  the 
military  force  according  to  the  Report,  and,  2dly  A  reference  in 
the  first  instance  to  the  acting  Authority  in  Vermont,  to  be  fol 
lowed  in  case  of  refusal  or  neglect  of  Justice  on  the  offenders,  by 
an  exertion  of  compulsive  measures  against  the  whole  body. 

In  favor  of  the  i"  mode  it  was  sd,  that  it  would  be  the  only  effect 
ual  one  &  the  only  one  consistent  with  the  part  Congress  had  ob 
served  with  regard  to  Vermont  ;  since  a  reference  to  the  Authority 
of  Vermont,  which  had  itself  been  suspected  &  accused  would 
certainly  be  followed  at  the  best  by  a  mere  mock  trial  ;  and 
would  moreover  be  a  stronger  recognition  of  its  independence 
than  Congress  had  made  or  meant  to  make. 

In  favor  of  the  2d  mode  it  was  alledged,  that  the  body  of  the 
people  in  Vermont  were  well  attached  to  the  Revolution,  that 
a  sudden  march  of  military  force  into  the  Country  might  alarm 
them,  that  if  their  Rulers  abetted  the  Traitors,  it  wd  disgrace  them 
in  the  eyes  of  their  own  people,  and  that  Congress  would  be  justi 
fied  in  that  event  to  "  split  Vermont  up  among  the  other  States." 
This  expression,  as  well  as  the  arguments  on  this  side  in  general 
came  from  Mr.  Howell,  of  R.  I.,  whose  object  was  to  render 
the  proceedings  of  Congress  as  favorable  as  possible  to  the  inde 
pendence  of  Vermont. 

In  order  to  compromise  the  matter  Mr.  Arnold  moved  that  the 
Comander  in  Chief  sd  be  directed  to  make  a  previous  communica 
tion  of  his  intentions  &  the  evidence  on  which  they  were  founded 


1782]  JAMES  MADISON.  273 

to  the  persons  exercising  authority  within  the  district  in 
question. 

It  was  suggested  by  Mr.  Madison,  as  a  better  expedient  that 
he  sd  be  authorized  to  make  the  communication  if  he  should  deem 
it  conducive  to  the  more  certain  apprehension  of  the  suspected 
persons. 

The  Delegates  from  N.  Y.  said  they  would  agree  that  after  the 
apprehension  should  have  been  effected,  the  Commander  might 
give  notice  thereof  to  the  Persons  exercising  authority  in  Ver 
mont. 

It  was  finally  compromised  as  it  stands  on  the  Journal. 

In  the  course  of  the  Debate  Mr.  Clark  informed  Congress,  that 
the  Delegates  of  N.  Jersey  could  not  vote  for  any  act  which 
might  oppose  force  to  the  Authority  of  Vermont,  the  Legislature 
of  that  State  having  so  construed  the  Resolutions  of  the  7  &  20* 
of  Aug  :  as  to  be  incompatible  therewith  &  accordingly  instructed 
their  Delegates. 

The  communication  directed  to  the  States  on  this  occasion 
thro'  the  Commander  in  Chief  was  objected  to  by  several  mem 
bers  as  an  improper  innovation.  The  object  of  it  was  to  pre 
vent  the  risk  of  discovery,  if  sent  before  the  plans  which  might 
be  taken  by  Gen1  W  were  sufficiently  advanced,  of  which  he  was 
the  proper  Judge. 


THURSDAY    NOVR    28TH. 
No  Congress. 

Mr.  Livingston,  Sec?'  of  F.  Affairs  called  upon  me  &  men 
tioned  his  intention  to  resign  in  a  short  time  his  office  ;  observing 
that  as  he  ultimately  was  decided  to  prefer  his  place  of  Chancel 
lor  in  N.  York  to  the  other,  and  the  two  had  become  incompati 
ble  by  the  increase  of  Business  in  the  former,  he  thought  it 
expedient  not  to  return  to  Phil3,  after  a  visit  to  N.  Y.  which  was 
required  by  this  increase.  In  the  course  of  conversation  he  took 
notice  that  the  expence  of  his  appoin1  under  Congress  had  ex 
ceeded  his  salary  about  3000  Dollrs  per  Annum.  He  asked  me 

VOL.  I. — 18 


274  THE   WRITINGS  OF  [1782 

whether  it  was  probable  Mr.  Jefferson  would  accept  the  vacancy, 
or  whether  he  would  accept  Mr.  Jay's  place  in  Spain,  and  leave 
the  vacancy  to  the  latter.  I  told  him  I  thought  Mr.  J.  wd  not 
accept  it  himself  &  doubted  whether  he  would  concur  in  the  lat 
ter  arrangement,  as  well  as  whether  Congress  would  be  willing  to 
part  with  Mr.  Jay's  services  in  the  Negotiations  of  peace  ;  but 
promised  to  sound  Mr.  J.  on  these  points  by  the  first  oppor 
tunity.1 


No  Congress  untill 


MONDAY,    DEC*    2. 


The  Secy  of  foreign  Affairs  resigned  his  office,  assigning  as  a 
reason  the  increase  of  business  in  his  office  of  Chancellor  of  N.  Y., 
whereby  it  was  become  impossible  for  him  to  execute  the  duties 
of  both  ;  informing  Congress  at  the  same  time  as  a  rule  for  provid 
ing  for  his  successor,  that  his  expences  exceeded  his  salary  upwards 
of  3000  Dollr.s  per  annum.  The  letter  of  resignation  was  com 
mitted  to  Mr.  McKean,  Mr.  Osgood,  &c.2 

1  Dec.  3,   Madison  wrote  to  Randolph  (italics  for  cypher):   "I  leave  it  to 
yourself  to  decide  how  far  it  may  be  worth  while  to  feel  the  pulse  of  our  friend 
McClurg  with  respect  to  the  vacancy  in  question." — Mad.  MSS. 

2  Livingston  consented  to  remain  until  the  following  May  and  did  in  fact  serve 
until  June  4.      The    office  of    Secretary   for   Foreign  Affairs  was  practically 
vacant  from  Livingston's  departure  until  Jay  entered  upon  the  duties  of  the 
office  September  21,   1784.     Livingston,   however,  expressed  a  willingness  to 
return  and  temporarily  resume  the  office  in  order  to  affix  his  signature  to  a  final 
treaty  of  peace.     He  wrote  to  Madison  from  Clermont,  his  seat  on  the  Hudson 
River,  July  19,    1783:    "I  believe  I   mentioned  to  you  before  I   left  Phila 
delphia  that  if  Congress  should  make  no  appointment  of  a  secretary  before  the 
arrival  of  the  treaty  it  would  give  me  great  pleasure  to  be  permitted  to  sign  it 
in  that  character  &  thus  conclude  my  political  career.     ...     As  the  grand 
treaty  which    sets    the   seal  to  our  independance   should  not  want  the  usual 
forms,    &  as  several  little  matters  may  be  necessary  in  consequence  thereof, 
perhaps  they  may  be  induced  to  recite  that  their  removal  &  their  want  of  a 
full    representation   having   prevented    their  supplying  the  place  of    the    late 
Secretary    for   foreign    affairs    that   it  would   be   agreeable   to    them    that   he 
resume  the  direction  of  the  department   till  the  ratification  of  the  definitive 
treaty" — Mad.  MSS. 


1782]  JAMES  MADISON.  275 


TUESDAY,    DECR    3. 

After  a  verbal  report  of  the  Committee  above  mentioned,  who 
acquainted  Congress  that  in  conference  with  Mr.  Livingston  he 
professed  a  willingness  to  remain  in  office  till  the  ist  of  Jany,  to 
give  time  for  the  choice  of  a  Successor,  Mr.  McKean  proposed 
the  Resolution  which  stands  on  the  Secret  Journals  ;  several 
alterations  having  been  made  however  in  the  course  of  its  consid 
eration.  With  respect  to  the  Preamble  particularly,  a  change 
took  place.  As  it  was  first  moved  it  recited  as  the  ground  of 
the  resignation  the  incompatibility  of  the  office  of  foreign  Affairs 
with  the  Chancellorship  of  N.  Y.  To  this  recital  it  was  objected 
by  Mr.  Madison,  that  such  a  publication  of  preference  of  the 
office  of  Chancellor  of  &  particular  State  to  the  office  of  foreign 
Affairs  under  the  U.  S.,  tended  to  degrade  the  latter.  Where 
upon  the  Preamble  on  me  Journal  was  substituted.  In  the 
course  of  this  business  the^xpediency  of  augmenting  the  salary 
was  suggested,  but  not  much  supported.  Mr.  Howel  &  Mr.  Clark 
opposed  it  strenuously. 

The  Report  of  the  Committee  on  the  case  of  Vermont  men 
tioned  on  Thursday  the  1^4  of  Novr.  was  called  for  by  Mr. 
McKean,  &  postponed  on/his  motion  to  make  way  for  a  set  of 
Resolutions  declaring  tnat  as  Vermont  in  contempt  of  the 

authority  of  Congress  &  their  Recommendations  of 1799, l 

exercised  jurisdiction  over  sundry  persons  professing  allegiance 
to  the  State  of  N.  Y.,  banishing  them  and  stripping  them  of  their 
possessions,  the  former  be  required  to  make  restitution  &c.  and 
that  in  case  of  refusal  or  neglect  Congress  will  enforce  the  same, 
&c.  A  motion  was  made  by  Mr.  Clark  2nd  by  Mr.  Howel  to 
strike  out  the  latter  clause  ;  in  favor  of  which  it  was  said  that 
such  a  menace  ought  to  be  suspended  until  Vermont  should  refuse 

1  May  22,  1799,  it  was  resolved  that  no  state  should  be  divested  of  any  land 
over  which  it  held  jurisdiction  before  the  separation  from  Great  Britain,  and 
that  no  part  of  the  states  should  be  permitted  to  separate  and  become  indepen 
dent  without  the  consent  of  the  states  concerned,  and  that  the  inhabitants  of  the 
pretended  state  of  Vermont  be  recommended  to  return  peaceably  to  their  former 
jurisdiction,  those  who  had  separated  from  New  York  to  New  York  and  those 
who  had  separated  from  New  Hampshire  to  New  Hampshire. — Journals  of 
Congress,  iii.,  285,  286. 


276  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1782 

to  comply  with  the  Requisition,  especially  said  Mr.  Howel  as  the 
present  proceeding  being  at  the  instance  of  Phelps  &  other  exiles, 
was  an  ex  parte  one. 

Against  the  motion  for  expunging  the  clause,  it  was  observed 
that  a  requisition  on  Vermont  without  such  a  menace  wd  have  no 
effect,  that  if  Congress  interposed  they  ought  to  do  it  with  a 
decisive  tone ;  that  as  it  only  enforced  restitution  in  cases  where 
spoliations  had  been  committed  and  therefore  was  conditional, 
the  circumstance  of  its  being  ex  parte  was  of  no  weight,  especially 
as  Congress  cd  not  call  on  Verm*  to  appear  as  a  party  after  her 
repeated  protestations  agst  appearing. 

On  this  occasion,  Mr.  Carroll  informed  Congress  that  he  had 
entirely  changed  his  opinion  with  regard  to  the  policy  requisite 
with  regard  to  Verm*  being  thoroughly  persuaded  that  its  leaders 
were  perfidious  men  &  that  the  interest  of  the  U.  S.  required 
their  pretensions  to  be  discountenanced  ;  that  in  this  opinion  he 
was  not  a  little  confirmed  by  a  late  conversation  with  Gen1  Whipple 
of  N.  Hampshire  at  Trenton  in  which  this  Gentleman  assured  him, 
that  the  Governing  party  in  Vermont  were  perfidiously  devoted 
to  the  British  interests  &  that  he  had  reason  to  believe  that  a 
British  Comission  for  a  Govr  of  that  district  had  come  over 
&  was  ready  to  be  produced  at  a  convenient  season.  Some  of 
the  members  having  gone  out  of  Congress  &  it  being  uncertain 
whether  there  would  be  more  than  six  States  for  the  clause,  an 
adjournment  was  moved  for  &  voted. 

The  proceedings  on  this  subject  evinced  still  more  the  con 
ciliating  effect  of  the  territorial  cession  of  N.  York,  on  several 
States  &  the  effect  of  the  scheme  of  an  ultra-montane  State  within 
Pennsa,  on  the  latter  State.  The  only  States  in  Congress  which 
stood  by  Vermont  were  Rhode  Island,  which  is  supposed  to  be 
interested  in  lands  in  Verm1,  and  N.  Jersey  whose  Delegates  were 
under  instructions  on  the  subject. 


WEDNESDAY  DECR  4. 
After  the  passing  of  the  Resolution  concerning  Cap:  P.  Jones,1 

1  "  Resolved,  That  the  agent  of  marine  be  informed,  that  Congress  havi^^ 
high  sense  of  the  merit  and  services  of  Capt.  J.  P.  Jones,  and  being  dispr 
favour  the  zeal  manifested  by  him   to  acquire  improvement  in  the  lir 


1782]  JAMES  MADISON.  277 

a  motion  was  made  by  Mr.  Madison  to  reconsider  the  same,  that 
it  might  be  referred  to  the  Agent  of  Marine  to  take  order,  as  a  better 
mode  of  answering  the  same  purpose  ;  since  it  did  not  betome 
the  sovereign  body  to  give  public  sanction  to  a  recommendation 
of  Capt:  Jones  to  the  Commander  of  the  French  Squadron, 
especially  as  there  was  no  written  evidence  that  the  latter  had  sig 
nified  a  disposition  to  concur  in  the  project  of  Capt:  Jones.  The 
motion  was  lost  ;  a  few  States  only  being  in  favor  of  it. 

The  reason  assigned  by  those  who  voted  against  the  promotion 
of  Col:s  to  Brigad-  according  to  districts  was  that  such  a  division 
of  the  U.  S.  tends  to  foster  local  ideas,  and  might  lead  to  a 
dismemberment. 

The  Delegates  from  Penna  reminded  Congress  that  no  answer 
had  been  given  to  the  memorials  (see  Novr  20)  from  that  State 
that  the  Legislature  were  proceeding  in  the  measure  intimated  in 
the  said  memorials  and  that  they  meant  to  finish  it  &  adjourn  this 
evening.1  The  reasons  mentioned  by  the  Delegates  as  prevailing 

profession,  do  grant  the  permission  which  he  requests  ;  and  that  the  said  agent 
be  instructed  to  recommend  him  accordingly  to  the  countenance  of  his  excel 
lency  the  Marquis  de  Vaudreuil."  The  committee  making  the  report  was  com 
posed  of  Osgood,  Madison  and  Hamilton. — Journals  of  Congress  iv.,  in. 

1  Madison  wrote  to  Edmund  Randolph,  Dec.  10,  1782.  (Italics  for  cypher.) 
"  The  Assembly  of  Penna  have  with  much  difficulty  been  prevailed  on  to 
desist  from  a  plan  in  which  a  part  of  the  Requisition  of  Congress  allotted  for 
other  uses  was  to  be  appropriated  to  their  Citizen  Creditors  of  the  U.  S.  The 
consequences  apprehended  by  Congress  from  such  an  example,  and  the  prob 
ability  that  the  plan  will  be  renewed  at  the  next  meeting  unless  some  inter 
mediate  provision  be  made  for  the  Credit  of  the  U.  S.,  have  produced  two 
Resolutions,  Is*  an  instruction  to  the  Superintend1  of  Finance  to  represent  to 
the  States  the  pernicious  tendency  of  such  unconstitutional  appropriation  ; 
2dl-y ,  a  deputation  of  Mr.  Osgood,  Mr.  Mifflin  &  Mr.  Nash,  to  enforce  on 
Rhode  I.  the  impost  of  5  Per  O.  The  latter  Resolution  besides  its  tendency  to 
the  immediate  end  proposed  by  the  first,  was  called  for  [by]  the  general  pres 
sure  of  our  necessities.  Our  official  letter  incloses  these  Resolutions  to  the  Ex 
ecutive,  and  hazards  some  very  free  and  alarming  remarks  for  the  legislature \ 
directly  pointing  to  a  fuller  compliance  with  the  impost.  I  have  added  a  private 
letter  to  the  Governor  which  is  still  more  explicit  &  pointed  on  the  subject. 

n  the  present  situation  of  our  Affairs,  we  did  not  think  less  would  justify  us 

JUl  -uselves  or  to  our  constituents. 

who  ATr.  Harrison  at  Cadiz  has  advised  the  Secy  of  Foreign  Affairs  that    the 

Congrej  fleet   under   Admiral   Howe  had    effected  the  relief  of  Gibralter,   by 


278  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1782 

with  the  Legislature  were  i",  the  delay  of  Congress  to  give  an 
answer  which  was  deemed  disrespectful  2?  the  little  chance  of  any 
funds  being  provided  by  Congress  for  their  internal  debts  ;  3dly, 
the  assurance  (given  by  one  of  their  members  Mr.  Jos  Mont — g — y, 
mentioned  privately  not  on  the  floor)  that  no  impediment  to  the 
support  of  the  war  cd  arise  from  it,  since  Congress  had  provided 
means  for  that  purpose  in  Europe. 

A  Committee  consisting  of  Mr.  Rutledge  Mr.  Madison  &  Mr. 
Hamilton  was  appointed  to  confer  immediately  with  a  Committee 
from  the  Legislature  on  the  subject  of  the  Memorials  &  were  in 
structed  to  make  such  communications  relative  to  our  affairs 
abroad  as  would  correct  misinformations.  The  comittee  which 
met  them  on  the  part  of  the  Legislature,  were  Mr.  Jos:  Mont 
gomery,  Mr.  Hill  &  Mr.  Jacob  Rush. 

The  Committee  of  Congress  in  the  conference  observed  that 
the  delay  of  an  answer  had  proceeded  in  part  from  the  nature  of 
so  large  an  assembly  of  which  the  Comittee  of  the  Legislature 
cd  not  be  insensible,' but  principally  from  the  difficulty  of  giving 
a  satisfactory  one  until  Rhode  Island  sd  accede  to  the  Impost  of 

destroying  the  combined  fleets  from  their  station,  &  throwing  in  Succours, 
before  the  weather  would  allow  the  latter  to  regain  it.  He  says  the  British  fleet 
on  the  return  was  pursued  by  the  Combined  fleet.  The  Vessel  by  which  the 
letter  came  reports  that  she  passed  through  the  Combined  fleet  after  she  left 
Cadiz,  and  that  two  Spanish  Ships  had  been  lost,  one  fallen  into  the  hands  of 
the  Enemy  &  the  other  chased  on  shore  by  them.  Mr  Harrison  adds  as  a 
more  welcome  Article  that  a  detachment  of  Frigates  &c.  which  had  been  sent 
from  Cape  Francois  for  the  demolition  of  the  British  Fortress  on  Hudson's 
Bay  had  arrived  in  Europe  with  a  report  of  complete  success,  having  destroyed 
&  taken  effects  to  the  value  of  half  a  Million  Sterls. 

"  The  Secy  of  F.  A.  has  resigned  his  office  in  form,  but  will  continue  to  act 
for  the  present  month  to  prevent  an  interregnum  in  the  Department.  The 
19th  instant  is  fixed  for  the  choice  of  a  Successor.  None  has  yet  been  put  in 
nomination. 

44  By  Mr.  Jefferson's  letter  to  the  Office  of  F.  A.  and  a  private  one  to  myself, 
he  may  be  expected  here  about  the  end  of  this  month.  It  is  improper  therefore 
to  address  anything  to  him. 

"  The  Grand  Committee  have  had  another  meeting  on  the  subject  mentioned 
in  a  late  letter.  The  Scheme  of  Mr.  Fitz[simo]ns  was  adopted  with  the  rates  of 
depreciation  left  blank.  The  ideas  on  this  point  varied  from  forty  to  one 
hundred  and  and  upwards  for  one." — Mad.  MSS. 


1782]  JAMES  MADISON.  279 

5  Per  C  of  which  they  had  been  in  constant  expectation  ;  that 
with  respect  to  the  prospect  from  Congress  for  the  public  Credit 
ors  Congress  had  required  of  the  States  interest  for  the  ensuing 
year,  had  accepted  the  territorial  Cession  of  N.  Y.   and  meant 
still  to  pursue  the  scheme  of  the  impost ;  that  as  to  their  affairs 
in  Europe  the  loan  of  6  Millions  of  livres  only  last  year  had  been 
procured  from  France  by  Dr.  Franklyn,  in  place  of   12  asked  by 
him,   the  whole   of  which  had  been   applied  ;  that   the  loan  of 
5.000.000  Guilders  opened  by  Mr.  Adams  had  advanced  to  about 
i^  Million  only  and  there  seemed  little  progress  to  have  been 
made  of  late  ;  that  the  application  for  4  Million  as  part  of  the 
estimate  for  the  ensuing  year  was  not  founded  on  any  previous 
information  in  its  favor  but  against  every  intimation  on  the  sub 
ject,  &  was  dictated  entirely  by  our  necessities  ;  so  that  if  even  no 
part  of  the  requisitions  from  the  States  sd  be  denied,  or  diverted, 
the  support  of   the  war  the  primary  object,  might  be  but  defi 
ciently  provided  for.     That  if  this  example  which  violated  the 
right  of  appropriation  delegated  to  Congress  by  the  federal  Arti 
cles,  should  be  set  by  Pa,  it  would  be  both  followed  by  other 
States  &  extended  to  other  instances  ;  that  in  consequence,  our 
system  of  administration,  and  even  our  bond  of  Union  wd  be  dis 
solved  ;  that  the  enemy  would  take  courage  from  such  a  prospect 
and  the  war  be  prolonged  if  not  the  object  of  it  be  endangered  ; 
that  our  national  credit  would  fail  with  other  powers,  &  the  loans 
from  abroad  which  had  been  our  chief  resource  fail  with  it.    That 
an  assumption  by  individual  States  of  the  prerogative  of  paying 
their  own  Citizens  the  debts  of  the  U.  S.  out  of  the  money  re 
quired  by  the  latter  was  not  only  a  breach  of  the  federal  system 
but  of  the  faith  pledged  to  the  public  Creditors  ;  since  payment 
was  mutually  guaranteed  to  each  &  all  of  the  Creditors  [by]  each 

6  all  of  the  States  ;  and  that  lastly  it  was  unjust  with  respect  to 
the  States  themselves  on  whom  the  burden  would  fall  not  in  pro 
portion  to  their  respective  abilities,  but  to  the  debts  due  to  their 
respective  Citizens  ;  and  that  at  least  it  deserved  the  considera 
tion  of  Pa  whether  she  would  not  be  loser  by  such  an  arrange 
ment. 

On  the  side  of  the  other  Comittee  it  was  answered  that  the 
measure  cd  not  violate  the  confederation,  because  the  re^s<::on 


28o  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1782 

had  not  been  founded  on  a  valuation  of  land  ;  that  it  would  not  be 
the  first  example,  N.  H.  &  N.  Y.  hav?  appropriated  money  raised 
under  requisitions  of  Congress  ;  that  if  the  other  States  did  their 
duty  in  complying  with  the  demands  of  Congress  no  inconvenience 
would  arise  from  it,  that  the  discontents  of  the  Creditors  wd  pre 
vent  the  payment  of  taxes  ;  Mr.  Hill  finally  asking  whether  it  had 
been  considered  in  Congress  how  far  delinquent  States  cd  be 
eventually  coerced  to  do  justice  to  those  who  performed  their 
part  ?  To  all  which  it  was  replied  that  a  valuation  of  land  had 
been  manifestly  impossible  during  the  war — that  the  apportion 
ments  made  had  been  acquiesced  in  by  Pa,  and  therefore  the 
appropriation  could  not  be  objected  to  ;  that  altho  other  States 
might  have  set  previous  examples,  these  had  never  come  before 
Congress,  &  it  wd  be  more  honorable  for  Pa  to  counteract  than  to 
abet  them  especially  as  the  example  from  her  weight  in  the  Union 
&  the  residence  of  Congress  wd  be  so  powerful,  that  if  other  States 
did  their  duty  the  measure  wd  be  superfluous  ;  that  the  discon 
tents  of  the  Creditors  might  always  be  answered  by  the  equal 
justice  &  more  pressing  necessity  which  pleaded  in  favor  of  the 
army,  who  had  lent  their  blood  &  services  to  their  Country,  and 
on  whom  its  defence  still  rested  ;  that  Congress  unwilling  to  pre 
sume  a  refusal  in  any  of  the  States  to  do  justice,  cd  not  anticipate 
it  by  a  consideration  of  the  steps  wch  such  refusal  might  require, 
&  that  ruin  must  ensue  if  the  States  suffered  their  policy  to  be 
swayed  by  such  distrusts.  The  Comittee  appeared  to  be  consid 
erably  impressed  with  these  remarks,  &  the  Legislature  suspended 
their  plan. 

THURSDAY,    DECR    5T.H    1782 

Mr.  Lowel  &  Mr.  Reed  were  elected  Judges  of  the  Court  of 
Appeals.  Mr.  P.  Smith,  of  N.  Jersey  had  the  vote  of  that  State  ; 
and  Mr.  Merchant,1  of  Rhode  Island  the  vote  of  that  State. 

The  Resolutions  respecting  Vermont  moved  by  Mr.  McKean 

on  the    [twenty-seventh]    day  of   [November,]  were  taken    into 

Consideration.     They  were  seconded  by  Mr.  Hamilton,  as  entered 

on  the  Journal  of  this   day.     Previous   to   the   question   on   the 

1  Henry  Marchant. 


1782]  JAMES  MADISON.  281 

coercive  clause,  Mr.  Madison  observed  that  as  the  preceding 
clause  was  involved  in  it,  &  the  federal  articles  did  not  delegate 
to  Congress  the  authority  about  to  be  enforced,  it  would  be  proper 
in  the  first  place  to  amend  the  recital  in  the  previous  clause,  by 
inserting  the  ground  on  which  the  Authority  of  Congress  had 
been  interposed.  Some  who  voted  against  this  motion  in  this 
stage  having  done  so  from  a  doubt  as  to  the  point  of  order,  it  was 
revived  in  a  subsequent  stage  when  that  objection  did  not  lie. 
The  objections  to  the  motion  itself  were  urged  chiefly  by  the 
Delegates  from  Rhode  Island,  and  with  a  view  in  this  as  in  all 
other  instances,  to  perplex  &  protract  the  business.  The  objec 
tions  were  i"  that  the  proposed  insertion  was  not  warranted  by 
the  Act  of  N.  Hampshire  which  submitted  to  the  judgment  of 
Congress  merely  the  question  of  jurisdiction.  2dly  That  the  Resolu 
tions  of  Aug  :  1781,  concerning  Vermont,  havg  been  acceded  to  by 
Vermont,  annulled  all  antecedent  acts  founded  on  the  doubtful 
ness  of  its  claim  to  independence.  In  answer  To  the  ist  obj?  the 
Act  of  N.  H.  was  read  wch  in  the  utmost  latitude  adopted  the 
Resolu?  of  Congress  which  extended  expressly  to  the  preservation 
of  peace  &  order  &  prevention  of  acts  of  confiscation  by  one 
party  agst  another.  To  the  2d  objn  it  was  answered  Is*  that  the 
sd  Resons  of  Aug  :  being  conditional  not  absolute,  the  accession 
of  Vermont  cd  not  render  them  definitive  ;  but  2d.ly  that  prior  to 
this  accession,  Vermont  havg  in  due  form  rejected  the  Resolns>  and 
notified  the  rejection  to  Congress,  the  accession  could  be  of  no 
avail  unless  subsequently  admitted  by  Congress,  3dly>  that  this 
doctrine  had  been  maintained  by  Vermont  itself  wch  had  declared 
that  inasmuch  as  the  Resolns  of  Aug  :  did  not  correspond  wth 
their  overtures  previously  made  to  Congress  these  had  ceased  to 
be  obligatory  ;  wch  act  it  was  to  be  observed  was  merely  declara 
tory,  not  creative,  of  the  annulment. 

The  original  motion  of    Mr.  McKean  &  Mr.  Hamilton  [was 
agreed  to]  seven  States  voting  for  it;  R.  I.  &  N.  J.  in  the  negative. 


FRIDAY     6     DEC? 

An  ordinance,  extending  the  privilege  of  Franking  letters  to  the 
Heads  of  all  the  Departments  was  reported  &  taken  up.  Various 
ideas  were  thrown  out  on  the  subject  at  large  ;  some  contending 


282  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1782 

for  the  extension  proposed  some  for  a  partial  adoption  of  it,  some 
for  a  total  abolition  of  the  privilege  as  well  in  members  of 
Congress  as  in  others.  Some  for  a  limitation  of  the  privilege  to  a 
definite  number  or  weight  of  letters.  Those  who  contended  for  a 
total  abolition,  represented  the  privilege  as  productive  of  abuses, 
as  reducing  the  profits  so  low  as  to  prevent  the  extension  of  the 
establishment  throughout  the  U.  S.  and  as  throwing  the  whole 
burden  of  the  establishment  on  the  mercantile  intercourse. — On 
the  other  side  it  was  contended  that  in  case  of  an  abolition  The 
Delegates,  or  their  Constituents,  would  be  taxed  just  in  propor 
tion  to  their  distance  from  the  seat  of  Congress  ;  which  was 
neither  just  nor  politic,  considering  the  many  other  disadvantages 
which  were  inseparable  from  that  distance  ;  that  as  the  correspon 
dence  of  the  Delegates  was  the  principal  channel  through  which  a 
general  knowledge  of  public  affairs,  was  diffused,  any  abridgment 
of  it  would  so  far  confine  this  advantage  to  the  States  within  the 
neighbourhood  of  Congress  ;  &  that  as  the  correspondence  at 
present  however  voluminous  did  not  exclude  from  the  mail  any 
private  letters  which  wd  be  subject  to  postage,  and  if  postage  was 
extended  to  letters  now  franked  the  n°  &  size  of  them  would  be 
essentially  reduced,  the  revenue  was  not  affected  in  the  manner 
represented.  The  Ordinance  was  disagreed  to  &  the  subject  re 
committed,  wth  instruction  to  the  Committee  giving  them  ample 
latitude  for  such  Report  as  they  should  think  fit. 

A  Boston  Newspaper  containing  under  the  Providence  Head, 
an  extract  of  a  letter  purporting  to  be  written  by  a  Gentleman  in 
Philada  and  misrepresenting  the  state  of  our  loans,  as  well  as  be 
traying  the  secret  proposal  of  the  Swedish  Court  to  enter  into  a 
Treaty  with  the  U.  S;  with  the  view  of  disproving  to  the  people  of  R. 
Island  the  necessity  of  the  Impost  of  5  P  C-  ;  had  been  handed 
about  for  several  days.  From  the  style  and  other  circumstances, 
it  carried  strongly  the  appearance  of  being  written  by  a  Member 
of  Congress.  The  unanimous  suspicions  were  fixed  on  Mr. 
Howel.  The  mischievous  tendency  of  such  publications  &  the 
necessity  of  the  interposition  of  Congress  were  also  general  sub 
jects  of  conversation.  It  was  imagined  too  that  a  detection  of 
the  person  suspected  would  destroy  in  his  State  that  influence 
which  he  exerted  in  misleading  its  counsels  with  respect  to  the 


1782]  JAMES  MADISON.  283 

Impost.  These  circumstances  led  Mr.  Williamson  to  move  the 
proposition  on  this  subject.1 

It  was  opposed  by  no  one. 

Mr.  Clark  supposing  it  to  be  levelled  in  part  at  him,  rose  &  in 
formed  Congress,  that  not  considering  the  article  relative  to 
Sweden  as  secret  in  its  nature,  and  considering  himself  at  liberty 
to  make  any  communications  to  his  Constituents,  he  had  disclosed 
it  to  the  Assembly  of  N.  Jersey.  He  was  told  that  the  motion 
was  not  aimed  at  him,  but  the  doctrine  advanced  by  him  was 
utterly  inadmissible.  Mr.  Rutledge  observed  that  after  this 
frankness  on  the  part  of  Mr.  Clarke  as  well  as  from  the  respect 
due  from  every  member  to  Congress  &  to  himself,  it  might  be 
concluded  that  if  no  member  present  should  own  the  letter  in 
question,  no  member  present  was  the  author  of  it.  Mr.  H.  was 
evidently  perturbated  but  remained  silent. 

The  conference  with  the  Committee  of  the  Legislature  of 
Pennf,  with  subsequent  information  had  rendered  it  very  evident 
that  unless  some  effectual  measures  were  taken  against  separate 
appropriations  &  in  favor  of  the  public  Creditors  the  Legislature 
of  that  State,  at  its  next  meeting,  would  resume  the  plan  which 
they  had  suspended.  Mr.  Rutledge  in  pursuance  of  this  convic 
tion  moved  that  the  Superintend'  of  Finance  be  instructed  to 
represent  to  the  several  States  the  mischiefs  which  such  appro 
priations  would  produce.  It  was  observed  with  respect  to  this 
motion  that  however  it  might  be  as  one  expedient,  it  was  of  itself 
inadequate  ;  that  nothing  but  a  permanent  fund  for  discharging 
the  debts  of  the  public  would  divert  the  States  from  making  pro 
vision  for  their  own  Citizens  ;  that  a  renewal  of  the  call  on  R.  Island 
for  the  impost  ought  to  accompany  the  motion  ;  that  such  a  com 
bination  of  these  plans  would  mutually  give  efficacy  to  them, 

1  Carroll  seconded  the  motion  :  "  Whereas  there  is  reason  to  suspect,  that  as 
well  the  national  character  of  the  United  States  and  the  honor  of  Congress,  as 
the  finances  of  the  said  states  may  be  injured,  and  the  public  service  greatly  re 
tarded,  by  some  publications  that  have  been  made  concerning  the  foreign  affairs 
of  said  states  : 

"  Resolved,  that  a  committee  be  appointed  to  enquire  into  this  subject,  and 
report  what  steps  they  conceive  are  necessary  to  be  taken  thereon." — Jourtials 
of  Congress  iv.,  114. 


284  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1782 

since  R.  Island  would  be  solicitous  to  prevent  separate  appropri 
ations,  &  the  other  States  would  be  soothed  with  the  hope  of  the 
Impost.  These  observations  gave  rise  to  the  Motion  of  Mr. 
Hamilton,  which  stands  on  the  Journal.1  Ag5.4  Mr.  Rutledge's 
part  of  the  motion  no  objection  was  made.  But  The  sending  a 
deputation  to  Rhode  Island  was  a  subject  of  considerable  debate, 
in  which  the  necessity  of  the  impost,  in  order  to  prevent  separate 
appropriations  by  the  States,  to  do  equal  justice  to  the  Public 
creditors,  to  maintain  our  national  character  &  credit  abroad,  to 
obtain  the  loans  essential  for  supplying  the  deficiencies  of  reve 
nue,  to  prevent  the  encouragement  which  a  failure  of  the  scheme 
would  give  the  Enemy  to  persevere  in  the  war,  was  fully  set  forth. 
The  objections,  except  those  wc.h  came  ag5*  the  scheme  itself  from 
the  Delegates  of  R.  Island,  were  drawn  from  the  unreasonable 
ness  of  the  proposition.  Congress  ought  it  was  said  to  wait  for 
an  official  answer  to  their  demand  of  an  explicit  answer  from  R. 
I.  before  they  could  with  propriety  repeat  their  exhortations. 
To  which  it  was  replied  that  altho'  this  objection  might  have 
some  weight,  Yet  the  urgency  of  our  situation,  and  the  chances  of 
giving  a  favorable  turn  to  the  negotiations  on  foot  for  peace  ren 
dered  it  of  little  comparative  significance.  The  objections  were 
finally  retracted,  and  both  the  propositions  agreed  to.  The  Depu 
tation  elected  were  Mr.  Osgood,  Mr.  Mifflin  &  Mr.  Nash  taken 
from  different  parts  of  the  U.  S.,  &  each  from  States  that  had 
fully  adopted  the  Impost,  and  would  be  represented  in  Congress 
w^out  them  ;  except  Mr.  Osgood  whose  State,  he  being  alone, 
was  not  represented  without  him. 

1  It  directed  the  superintendent  of  finance  to  represent  to  the  several  State 
legislatures  the  necessity  of  complying  with  the  requisitions  of  Congress  for 
$1,200,000  for  a  year's  interest  on  the  domestic  debt,  and  $2,000,000  estimated 
as  the  expenses  for  the  ensuing  year,  and  the  injuries  to  the  public  service 
likely  to  arise  from  the  States  individually  making  appropriations  of  any  part 
of  the  $2,000,000  or  other  monies  required  by  Congress  ;  also  that  a  deputation 
be  sent  to  Rhode  Island  to  represent  the  condition  of  affairs  and  induce  that 
State  to  comply  with  the  national  demands. — Journals  of  Congress,  iv.,  115. 


1782]  JAMES  MADISON.  285 

SATURDAY,  DEC?  7. 
No  Congress. 

The  Grand  Committee  met  again  on  the  business  of  the  old 
paper  emissions,  and  agreed  to  the  plan  reported  by  the  sub-com 
mittee  in  pursuance  of  Mr.  Fitzsimmons'  motion,  vz  :  that  the 
outstanding  bills  should  be  taken  up  &  certificates  issued  in  place 

thereof  at  the  rate  of  i  real  Dollar  for  nominal  ds.,  and 

that  the  surpluses  redeemed  by  particular  States  sho?  be  credited 
to  them  at  the  same  rate.  Mr.  Carrol  alone  dissented  to  the 
plan,  alledging  that  a  law  of  Maryland  was  adverse  to  it  which  he 
considered  as  equipollent  to  an  instruction.  For  filling  up  the 
blank,  several  rates  were  proposed.  is.f,  i  for  40  on  which  the 
votes  were  no  except  Mr.  Howell.  2d,  i  for  75  no  Mr.  White  & 
Mr.  Howell,  ay.  3?,  i  for  100  no  Mr.  Hamilton  &  Mr.  Fitzsim 
mons  ay.  4l.h,  i  for  150  no  Mr.  Fitzsimmons  ay.  The  reasons 
urged  in  favor  of  i  for  40  were — first  an  adherence  to  public 
faith,  secondly  that  the  depreciation  of  the  certificates  would  re 
duce  the  rate  sufficiently  low,  they  being  now  negotiated  at  the 
rate  of  three  or  four  for  one.  The  reason  for  i  for  75,  that  the 
bills  passed  at  that  rate  when  they  were  called  in,  in  the  Eastern 
States  ;  for  i  for  100 — that  as  popular  ideas  were  opposed  to  the 
stipulated  rate,  and  as  adopting  the  current  rate  might  hurt  the 
credit  of  other  securities  which  derived  their  value  from  an  opin 
ion  that  they  would  be  strictly  redeemed,  it  was  best  to  take  an 
arbitrary  rate,  leaning  to  the  side  of  liberality, — for  i  for  150 
that  this  was  the  medium  depreciation  when  the  circulation 
ceased.  The  opposition  to  these  several  rates  came  from  the 
Southern  Delegates,  in  some  of  whose  States  none,  in  others  but 
little  had  been  redeemed,  &  in  all  of  which  the  depreciation  had 
been  much  greater.  On  this  side  it  was  observed  by  Mr.  Madi 
son,  that  the  States  which  had  redeemed  a  surplus,  or  even  their 
quotas,  had  not  done  it  within  the  period  fixed  by  Congress  but  in 
the  last  stages  of  depreciation,  &  in  a  great  degree,  even  after  the 
money  had  ceased  to  circulate  ;  that  since  the  supposed  Cessa 
tion  the  money  had  generally  changed  hands  at  a  value  far  below 
any  rate  that  had  been  named  ;  that  the  principle  established  by 


286  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1782 

the  plan  of  the  iS1!1  of  March  1780,  with  respect  to  the  money  in 
question  was,  that  the  Holder  of  it  s?  receive  the  value  at  which 
it  was  current,  &  at  which  it  was  presumed  he  had  received  it ; 
that  a  different  rule  adopted  with  regard  to  the  same  money  in 
different  stages  of  its  downfall  w?  give  general  dissatisfaction. 
The  Committee  adjourned  without  coming  to  any  decision. 


MONDAY  9™  DEC1 
No  Congress. 


TUESDAY,   IO  DEC? 

A  motion  was  made  by  Mr.  Ramsay  directing  the  Sec?  at  War 
who  was  ab*  to  visit  his  family  in  Massachusetts,  to  take  Vermont 
in  his  way  &  deliver  the  Resolutions  passed  a  few  days  since  to 
Mr.  Chittenden.  For  the  motion  it  was  urged  that  it  would 
ensure  the  delivery  would  have  a  conciliating  effect,  and  would 
be  the  means  of  obtaining  true  and  certain  knowledge  of  the 
disposition  &  views  of  that  people.  On  the  opposite  side  it  was 
exclaimed  ag5*  as  a  degradation  of  so  high  a  Serv'  of  the  U.  S.,  as 
exposing  him  to  the  temerity  of  leaders  who  were  on  good  ground 
suspected  of  being  hostile  to  the  U.  S.,  and  as  treating  their  pre 
tensions  to  Sovereignty  with  greater  complaisance  than  was  con 
sistent  with  the  eventual  resolutions  of  Congress.  The  motion 
was  rejected. 

A  motion  was  made  by  Mr.  Gilman  that  a  day  be  assigned  for 
determining  finally  the  affair  of  Vermont.  The  opposition  made 
to  the  motion  itself  by  Rhode  Island  &  the  disagreement  as  to  the 
day  among  the  friends  of  the  motion  prevented  a  decision  &  it 
was  suffered  to  lie  over. 

For  the  letter  of  the  Superintend'  of  Finance  to  T[homas] 
B[arclay]  l  Com'  for  settling  accounts  in  Europe,  agreed  to  by 
Cong',  see  Secret  Journal  of  this  date. 

1  The  letter  gave  Barclay  careful  instructions  for  settling  the  accounts  of  de 
Beaumarchais  and  other  debts  in  Europe. — Secret  Journals  of  Congress,  For. 
Affs.  255,  et.  seq. 


1782]  JAMES  MADISON.  287 

WEDNESDAY,    I  I1?1  DECR 

The  Sec^  at  War  was  authorized  to  permit  the  British  prison 
ers  to  hire  themselves  out  on  condition  of  a  bond  from  the  Hirers 
for  their  return.  The  measure  was  not  opposed,  but  was  acqui 
esced  in  by  some,  only  as  conformable  to  antecedent  principles 
established  by  Congress  on  this  subject.  Col  Hamilton  in  par 
ticular  made  this  explanation. 

Mr.  Wilson  made  a  motion  referring  the  transmission  of  the 
Resolutions  concerning  Vermont  to  the  Sec^  at  War  in  such  words 
as  left  him  an  option  of  being  the  Bearer,  without  the  avowed 
sanction  of  Congress.  The  votes  of  Virgf  &  N.  York  negatived 
it.  The  Presid*  informed  Congress  that  he  should  send  the  Reso 
lutions  to  the  Commander  in  Chief  to  be  forwarded. 


THURSDAY,  DEC?   12. 

The  Report  made  by  Mr.  Williamson,  Mr.  Carrol,  and  Mr. 
Madison  touching  the  publication  in  the  Boston  paper,  supposed 
to  be  written  by  Mr.  Howel,  passed  with  the  concurrence  of  R. 
Island ;  Mr.  Howel  hesitating  &  finally  beckoning  to  Mr.  Col 
lins  his  collegue,  who  answered  for  the  State  in  the  affirmative. 
As  the  Report,  stood  the  Executive  of  Massachusetts,  as  well  as  of 
Rho.  Island  was  to  be  written  to,  the  Gazette  being  printed  at 
Boston.  On  the  motion  of  Mr.  Osgood  who  had  seen  the  orig 
inal  publication  in  the  Providence  Gazette  and  apprehended  a 
constructive  imputation  on  the  Mass  Delegates  by  such  as  would 
be  ignorant  of  the  circumstances,  the  Executive  of  Mass1-5  was  ex 
punged. 


FRIDAY,  DEC     I3TH. 

Mr.  Howel  verbally  acknowledged  himself  to  be  the  writer  of 
the  letter  from  which  the  extract  was  published  in  the  Providence 
Gazette.  At  his  instance  the  subject  was  postponed  until  Mon 
day. 


288  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1782 

SATURDAY,  DEC?   I4/TH. 
No  Congress. 


MONDAY,   DECEMBER   l6TH. 

The  answer  to  the  objections  of  Rho:  Island,1  as  to  the  Impost, 
penned  by  Mr.  Howel,  passed  without  opposition,  8  States  being 
present,  of  which  Rho:  Is"?  was  one,  a  few  trivial  alterations  only 
being  made  in  the  course  of  discussion. 

Mr.  Howell,  contrary  to  expectation,  was  entirely  silent  as  to 
his  affair. 


TUESDAY,   DEC-   1 7TH. 

Mr.  Carrol  in  order  to  bring  on  the  affair  of  Mr.  Howel  moved 
that  the  Sec^  of  Foreign  Affairs  be  instructed  not  to  write  to  the 
Gov*  of  Rhode  Island  on  the  subject.  The  state  in  wc.h  such  a 
vote  would  leave  the  business  unless  the  reason  of  it  was  expressed, 
being  not  adverted  to  by  some,  and  others  being  unwilling  to 

1  The  committee  were  Madison,  Hamilton,  and  Fitzsimmons.  It  is  probable 
that  Madison  was  the  author  since  he  included  the  letter  in  his  address  to  the 
States  of  April  25.  The  letter  combated  the  statement  of  Rhode  Island 
that  the  proposed  duty  would  bear  hardest  on  the  commercial  states.  It 
was,  it  said,  an  established  general  principle,  "  '  That  every  duty  on  imports  is 
incorporated  with  the  price  of  the  commodity,  and  ultimately  paid  by  the  con 
sumer,  with  a  profit  on  the  duty  itself,  as  a  compensation  to  the  merchant  for 
the  advance  of  his  money."  "  As  a  consumer  the  merchant  paid  his  share  of  the 
duty.  It  thus  bore  upon  all  classes  in  just  proportion,  and  promoted  frugality 
by  taxing  extravagance.  That  the  collection  of  the  impost  would  introduce  into 
the  states  officers  unaccountable  to  them  was  an  idle  objection,  since  it  would 
apply  equally  to  postmasters,  and  if  acceded  to  would  militate  against  the 
appointment  of  any  federal  internal  officers.  No  government  could  exist  under 
these  circumstances.  The  proposed  measure  was  one  of  necessity.  The 
revenue  was  insufficient  and  could  no  longer  be  supplied  by  loans.  The 
measure  was  within  the  spirit  of  the  confederation.  Congress  was  vested  with 
the  power  to  borrow  money,  and  by  implication  with  power  to  concert  the 
nucleus  necessary  to  accomplish  that  end.  The  measure  proposed  they  had 
decided  upon  after  the  most  solemn  deliberation. — Cont.  Cong. 


1782]  JAMES  MADISON.  289 

move  in  the  case,  this  motion  was  incautiously  suffered  to  pass. 
The  effect  of  it  however  was  soon  observed,  and  a  motion  in 
consequence  made  by  Mr.  Hamilton,  to  subjoin  the  words,  "  Mr. 
Howel  having  in  his  place  confessed  himself  to  be  the  Author  of 
the  publication."  Mr.  Ramsay  thinking  such  a  stigma  on  Mr. 
Howel  unnecessary,  &  tending  to  place  him  in  the  light  of  a 
persecuted  man  whereby  his  opposition  to  the  Impost  might  have 
more  weight  in  his  State,  proposed  to  substitute  as  the  reason, 
"  Congress  hav?  recd  the  information  desired  on  that  subject. 
The  yeas  &  nays  being  called  for  by  Mr.  Hamilton,  Mr.  Howell 
grew  very  uneasy  at  the  prospect  of  his  name  being  thereby 
brought  on  the  Journals  ;  and  requested  that  the  subject  might 
be  suspended  until  the  day  following.  This  was  agreed  to  & 
took  place  on  condition  that  the  ne[ga]tived  counter  direction  to 
the  Sec?  of  F.  A.  should  be  reconsidered  &  lie  over  also. 


WEDNESDAY,   DEC?   l8TH. 

This  day  was  chiefly  spent  on  the  case  of  Mr.  Howel,  whose 
behaviour  was  extremely  offensive,  and  led  to  a  determined  oppo 
sition  to  him,  those  who  were  most  inclined  to  spare  his  reputation. 
If  the  affair  could  have  been  closed  without  an  insertion  of  his 
name  on  the  Journal,  he  seemed  willing  to  withdraw  his  protest ; 
but  the  impropriety  which  appeared  to  some,  &  particularly  to  Mr. 
Hamilton,  in  suppressing  the  name  of  the  Author  of  a  piece  wc.h 
Congress  had  so  emphatically  reprobated,  when  the  author  was 
found  to  be  a  member  of  Congress,  prevented  a  relaxation  as  to 
the  yeas  &  nays.  Mr.  Howell,  therefore  as  his  name  was  neces 
sarily  to  appear  on  the  Journal,  adhered  to  the  motion  which 
inserted  his  protest  thereon.1  The  indecency  of  this  paper,  and 

1  Howell's  protest  was  : — That  Congress  had  no  power  to  call  any  member  to 
account  for  information  conveyed  to  his  constituents,  "  the  secrets  only  of 
Congress  excepted,"  and  especially  not  to  call  to  account  a  member  of  the  late 
Congress  ;  that  the  appointment  of  a  committee  to  examine  into  the  matter  of  a 
publication  in  the  public  press  was  undignified  and  "  a  precedent  dangerous  to 
the  freedom  of  the  press  "  ;  that  the  report  of  the  committee  demanding  the  de 
livery  up  by  the  Executive  of  Rhode  Island  of  the  writer  of  the  publication  was 
VOL.  i. — 19. 


29o  THE   WRITINGS  OF  [1782 

the  pertinacity  of  Mr.  Howell  in  adhering  to  his  assertions  with 
respect  to  the  non-failure  of  any  application  for  foreign  loans,  ex 
cited  great  &  (excepting  his  Colleagues  or  rather  Mr.  Arnold) 
universal  indignation  and  astonishment  in  Congress  ;  and  he  was 
repeatedly  premonished  of  the  certain  ruin  in  wc.h  he  w?  thereby 
involve  his  character  &  consequence  ;  and  of  the  necessity  wc.h 
Congress  w^  be  laid  under  of  vindicating  themselves  by  some  act 
which  would  expose  and  condemn  him  to  all  the  world. 


THURSDAY,  DEC!"    IQTH, 
See  Journals. 


FRIDAY,  DEC?  2OTH. 

A  motion  was  made  by  Mr.  Hamilton  for  revising  the  requisi 
tions  of  the  preceding  and  present  years,  in  order  to  reduce  them 
more  within  the  faculties  of  the  States.  In  support  of  the  motion 
it  was  urged  that  the  exorbitancy  of  the  demands  produced  a  de 
spair  of  fulfilling  them  which  benumbed  the  efforts  for  that  pur 
pose.  On  the  other  side  it  was  alledged  that  a  relaxation  of  the 
demand  would  be  followed  by  a  relaxation  of  the  efforts  ;  that 
unless  other  resources  were  substituted,  either  the  States  would  be 
deluded  by  such  a  measure  into  false  expectations,  or,  in  case  the 
truth  £  be  disclosed  to  prevent  that  effect,  that  the  Enemy  w? 
be  encouraged  to  persevere  in  the  war  ags.1  us.  The  motion  meet 
ing  with  little  patronage  it  was  withdrawn. 

an  infraction  of  the  fifth  article  of  the  confederation,  which  allowed  freedom  of 
speech  and  debate  in  Congress,  and  as  a  consequence  free  communication  of  such 
speeches  and  debates  to  the  constituents  ;  that  the  facts  stated  concerning  the  for 
eign  loans  were  substantially  true  [that  they  had  been  successful  and  there  was 
danger  of  incurring  too  large  a  debt]  ;  that  he  was  not  alone  in  his  opinions  ; 
that  it  was  unfair  to  report  on  a  single  paragraph  of  his  letter  and  had  a  tendency 
to  establish  a  despotism  over  the  minority  by  deterring  the  members  of  it  from 
writing  freely  to  their  constituents  ;  that  he  was  well  known  as  an  opponent  of 
the  five  per  cent,  impost,  and  his  constituents  expected  him  to  oppose  it,  the 
lower  assembly  of  his  state  having  unanimously  rejected  it  ;  that  he  was  ac 
countable  to  his  constituents  and  was  their  servant,  and  not  the  servant  of 
Congress. — Journals  of  Congress  iv. ,  121. 


1782]  JAMES  MADISON.  291 

The  report  of  the  committee  on  the  motion  of  Mr.  Hamilton 
proposed  that  the  Sect  of  Congress  should  transmit  to  the  Execu 
tive  of  Rhode  Island  the  several  acts  of  Congress  with  a  state  of 
foreign  loans.  The  object  of  the  committee  was  that  in  case  Rho  : 
Island  should  abet  or  not  resent  the  misconduct  of  their  Rep 
resentative,  as  w?  most  likely  be  the  event,  Congress  should  com 
mit  themselves  as  little  as  possible  in  the  mode  of  referring  it  to 
that  State.  When  the  Report  came  under  consideration  it  was 
observed,  that  the  Presid*  had  always,  transmitted  acts  of  Con 
gress  to  the  Executives  of  the  States,  and  that  such  a  change  on 
the  present  occasion  might  afford  a  pretext  if  not  excite  a  disposi 
tion  in  Rho  :  Island  not  to  vindicate  the  honor  of  Congress.  The 
matter  was  compromised  by  substituting  the  Secy.  of  F.  A.  who 
ex  officio,  corresponds  with  the  Governors  &c.  within  whose  de 
partment  the  facts  to  be  transmitted  as  to  foreign  loans,  lay.  No 
motion  or  vote  opposed  the  report  as  it  passed. 


SATURDAY  21   DEC?. 

The  Committee  to  confer  wl.h  Mr.  Livingston  was  appointed 
the  preceding  day  in  consequence  of  the  unwillingness  of  several 
States  to  elect  either  Genf  Schuyler,  Mr.  Clymer,  or  Mr.  Read  the 
Gentlemen  previously  put  into  nomination,  and  of  a  hint  that  Mr. 
L.  might  be  prevailed  on  to  serve  till  the  spring.  The  Committee 
found  him  in  this  disposition  and  their  report  was  agreed  to  with 
out  opposition.1  See  the  Journal. 


MONDAY,   23  DEC?. 

The  motion  to  strike  out  the  words  "  accruing  to  the  use  of  the 
U.  S.,"  was  grounded  on  a  denial  of  the  principle  that  a  capture  & 
possession  by  the  enemy  of  moveable  property  extinguished  or 
effected  the  title  of  the  original  owners.  On  the  other  side  this 
principle  was  asserted  as  laid  down  by  the  most  approved  writers, 
and  conformable  to  the  practice  of  all  nations  ;  to  which  was  added 
that  if  a  contrary  doctrine  were  established  by  Congress,  innumer- 

1  See  note,  p.  74. 


292  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1782 

able  claims  would  be  brought  forward  by  those  whose  property 
had,  on  recapture  been  applied  to  the  public  use.1     See  Journal. 

Letters  were  this  day  rec^  from  Dr.  Franklin,  Mr.  Jay  &  the 
Marquis  de  la  Fayette.  They  were  dated  the  i4th  of  Ocr.  That 
from  the  first  inclosed  copy  of  the  2?  Comission  to  Mr.  Oswald 
with  sundry  prelim?'  articles,  and  distrusted  the  British  Court. 
That  from  the  2?  expressed  great  jealousy  of  the  French  Gov*,  & 
referred  to  an  intercepted  letter  from  Mr.  Marbois,  opposing  the 
claim  of  the  U.  S.  to  the  Fisheries.  This  despatch  produced 
much  indignation  ag^  the  author  of  the  intercepted  letter,  and 
visible  emotions  in  some  ags.'  France.  It  was  remarked  here  that 
our  Ministers  took  no  notice  of  the  distinct  com0"5  to  Fitzherbert 
&  Oswald  ;  that  altho'  on  a  supposed  intimacy  and  joined  in 

1  The  following  letter  is  from  Madison  to  Edmund  Randolph,  December  17, 
(cypher  being  represented  by  italics)  : 

"  Since  the  appointment  of  the  deputation  to  Rho  :  Island  Congress  have 
recd  a  copy  of  the  refusal  of  the  Legislature  of  that  State  to  concur  in  the  im 
post,  with  the  reasons  on  which  the  refusal  is  grounded.  The  reasons  assigned 
are  Is.1  the  inequality  of  the  tax  which  will  bear  hardest  on  the  commercial 
States,  and  peculiarly  hard  on  Rho  :  Island  which  is  the  most  commercial ;  2d.ly 
the  inexpediency  of  admitting  to  a  collection  within  the  State  of  so  large  a  tax 
an  officer  unknown  to  the  Constitution,  and  unaccountable  to  the  authority  of 
the  State.  3d.ly  the  danger  to  public  liberty  from  such  an  accession  of  weight 
to  the  federal  Government.  I  give  this  recital  from  memory  and  therefore  only 
of  the  substance  of  the  objections.  They  are  in  the  hands  of  a  Committee,  who 
will  report  such  observations  as  they  may  deem  a  fit  answer  to  them.  The  dep 
utation  has  not  yet  set  out,  but  probably  will  in  the  course  of  this  week. 

"Vermont  has  been  again  on  the  tapis.  Its  only  advocates  were  the  Dele 
gates  of  Rho  :  Island  who  are  charged  with  interested  views  in  the  case,  and 
those  of  N.  Jersey  who  are  fettered  by  instructions  from  their  constituents.  I 
understand  that  a  Mr.  Tichner  one  of  the  Agents  formerly  here  is  arrived  from 
Vermont  probably  in  consequence  of  a  signal  given  of  the  revolution  w0!1  is  tak 
ing  place  in  the  federal  Councils  with  respect  to  them.  A  little  time  will 
display  his  errand. 

"  General  Greene  has  referred  to  Congress  a  case  which  admonishes  them  of 
the  necessity  of  a  code  for  captures  &  recaptures  on  land  as  well  as  on  water. 
A  detachment  of  the  Continental  forces  having  retaken  a  number  of  Horses 
which  had  been  taken  by  the  enemy  from  the  Citizens  of  S.  Carolina  ;  the  Ex 
ecutive  Authority  of  the  State  demanded  a  restitution,  on  the  general  principle 
that  the  Original  owners  were  entitled  to  all  recaptured  property.  This 
demand  was  laid  before  a  Council  of  Officers  which  decided  against  its  validity. 


1782]  JAMES  MADISON.  293 

the  same  com0.",  they  the  Ministers,  wrote  separately  &  breathed 
opposite  sentiments  as  to  the  views  of  France.  Mr.  Livingston  told 
me  that  the  letter  of  the  C  de  Vergennes,  as  read  to  him  by  the 
Chev'  Luzerne,  very  delicately  mentioned  &  complained  that  Ameri 
can  Ministers  did  not  in  the  negotiations  with  the  British  Ministers, 
maintain  the  due  com.  with  those  of  France.  Mr.  Livingston  in 
ferred  on  the  whole  that  France  was  sincerely  anxious  for  peace. 
The  Presid'  acquainted  Congress  that  C  Rochambeau  had 
communicated  the  intended  embarkation  of  the  French  troops  for 
the  W.  Indies,  with  an  assurance  from  the  King  of  France,  that 
in  case  the  war  s"?  be  renewed  ags.1  U.  S.  they  should  immediately 
be  sent  back. 

"  The  General  has  submitted  the  case  to  Congress  for  their  final  judgment.  It 
appears  from  a  review  of  the  proceedings  of  Congress,  that  a  very  defective 
provision  only  has  been  made  for  captures,  and  no  provision  at  all  for  recaptures, 
on  land.  The  opinion  of  the  Council  of  war  is  conformable  to  the  practice  of 
the  Army  in  like  cases,  and  to  the  rules  observed  by  other  nations.  The  de 
mand  of  restitution  in  favor  of  the  original  proprietors  is  warranted  by  the 
principles  of  equity  and  the  spirit  of  the  Ordinance  relating  to  Captures  on 
Water.  All  that  Congress  can  do  in  the  case  will  be  to  remit  to  the  Original 
owners  the  prize  which  has  been  adjudged  to  the  U.  S.  But  some  general 
provision  for  future  cases  will  be  necessary  in  which  it  will  be  not  easy  to  define 
the  species  of  property  of  which  restitution  may  be  claimed.  To  extend  the 
rule  to  every  species  of  property  would  open  a  door  to  innumerable  disputes  and 
abuses.  I  observed  on  this  occasion  what  had  escaped  me  before,  that  if  Con 
gress  should  establish  a  Court  for  Captures  on  land,  such  cases  can  come  before 
it  on  appeal, 

"  Letters  from  Franklin  and  Jay  dated  late  in  [September]  shew  that  a  com 
mission  has  been  issued  to  Oswald  to  treat  with  Commissioners  of  the  Thirteen  U. 
States,  by  which  some  275  [key  not  discovered]  obstacles  were  surmounted ;  and 
that  Spain  meditates  an  immoderate  defalcation  of  our  Western  territory.  All 
this  intelligence  however  has  come  to  us  in  obscure  fragments.  I  commit  it  to  you 
as  to  a  member  of  Congress  on  whom  secrecy  is  enjoined  and  in  this  cypher  as 
certainly  unknown  to  all  but  official  persons. 

"  The  inclosed  Gazette  will  inform  you  of  the  good  fortune  of  Captain  Barry 
of  the  Alliance  frigate.  It  appears  from  various  letters  from  Europe  that  the 
Jamaica  fleet  has  suffered  severely  from  privateers  &  the  storm. 

"The  Court  at  Trenton  will  finish  their  business  this  week  it  is  said.  The 
Pennsylvanians  allege  that  the  cause  is  going  hollow  in  their  favor. 

' '  I  have  no  letter  from  you  by  this  post  which  I  impute  to  your  visit  to 
Williamsb?."— Mad.  MSS. 


294  THE   WRITINGS  OF  [1782 


TUESDAY,    24    DEC? 

The  letter  from  Mr.  Jay,  inclosing  a  copy  of  the  intercepted 
letter  from  Marbois,  was  laid  before  Congress.1  The  tenor  of  it 
with  the  comments  of  Mr.  Jay,  affected  deeply  the  sentiments  of 
Congress  with  regard  to  France.  The  policy  in  particular  mani 
fested  by  France,  of  keeping  us  tractable  by  leaving  the  British  in 
possession  of  posts  in  this  country  awakened  strong  jealousies, 
corroborated  the  charges  on  that  subject,  and  with  concomitant 
circumstances  may  engender  the  opposite  extreme  of  the  gratitude 
&  cordiality  now  felt  towards  France  ;  as  the  closest  friends  on  a 

1  "  PHILAD^  December  24th-  1782 

"  MY  DEAR  SIR, — Since  my  last  the  Danae  a  French  frigate  has  arrived  from 
France  with  money  for  the  French  army  and  public  despatches.  A  snow  storm 
drove  her  on  shore  in  this  Bay  where  she  was  in  danger  of  following  the  fate  of 
one  of  the  last  Frigates  from  France.  The  accident  as  it  turned  out  only  cost 
her  all  her  masts.  The  despatches  for  Congress  are  from  Mr.  Franklin,  Mr. 
Jay,  &  the  Marquis  de  la  Fayette,  and  come  down  to  the  14^  of  Octr-  They 
advise  that  the  1s.1  Commission  issued  to  Mr.  Oswald  empowered  him  to 
treat  with  certain  colonies  &c.,  which  being  objected,  another  issued  explicitly 
empowering  him  to  Treat  with  commisrs  from  the  thirteen  United  States,  The 
latter,  of  which  a  copy  was  inclosed,  and  which  will  be  transmitted  to  the 
Executives,  is  grounded  on  the  Act  of  Parliament,  but  is  to  continue  in  force 
no  longer  than  July  1783.  It  is  no  doubt  on  the  whole  a  source  of  very  sooth 
ing  expectations,  but  if  we  view  on  one  side  the  instability  &  insidiousness  of 
the  British  Cabinet,  and,  on  the  other  the  complication  of  interest  and  pretensions 
among  the  Allies,  prudence  calls  upon  us  to  temper  our  expectations  with  much 
distrust. 

"  Mr.  Adams  concluded  his  Treaty  of  Amity  &  Commerce  on  the  7th  of  Octr- 
and  had  in  hand  \\  million  of  florins  out  of  the  5  million  for  which  subscriptions 
had  been  opened.  As  this  however  was  the  sum  subscribed  in  June  last,  it  is  no 
certain  evidence  of  any  other  progress  than  that  of  the  payments. 

41  There  are  accounts  but  neither  official  nor  certain  that  Madras  had  been  taken 
by  the  combined  arms  of  France  &  Hyder  Ally,  f  of  Constantinople  had  been 
reduced  to  ashes  by  incendiaries,  inspired  with  the  desperate  purpose  by  the 
public  distresses  and  a  blind  revenge  agst  the  Vizier  who  was  regarded  as  the  cause 
of  them.  The  havoc  suffered  by  the  French  &  Spaniards  in  the  attempt  to 
storm  Gibraltar  before  its  relief  appears  to  have  been  dreadful  indeed.  The 
loss  on  the  English  side  which  amounted  to  about  500  is  a  proof  that  the  effort 
was  a  bloody  one. 

"  Mr.  Livingston  has  been  prevailed  on  to  hold  his  office  for  this  winter.     The 


1782]  JAMES  MADISON.  295 

rupture  are  apt  to  become  the  bitterest  foes.  Much  will  depend 
however  on  the  course  pursued  by  Britain.  The  liberal  one 
Oswald  seems  to  be  pursuing  will  much  promote  an  alienation  of 
temper  in  America  from  France.  It  is  not  improbable  that  the 
intercepted  letter  from  Marbois  came  thro'  Oswald's  hands.  If  G. 
B.,  therefore,  yields  the  fisheries  &  the  back  territory,  America 
will  feel  the  obligation  to  her  not  to  France,  who  appears  to  be 
illiberal  as  to  the  i-*  &  favorable  to  Spain  as  to  the  2?  object  ;  and, 
consequently  has  forfeited  the  confidence  of  the  States  interested 
in  either  of  them.  Candor  will  suggest  however  that  the  situation 
of  France  is  and  has  been  extremely  perplexing.  The  object  of 

election  of  a  successor  was  within  a  moment  of  being  made  when  the  practica 
bility  of  retaining  his  services  was  discovered.  The  gentlemen  in  nomination 
were  Gen1.  Schuyler  &  Mr.  Clymer.  Mr.  Read  had  been  nominated  but 
withdrawn. 

"  The  deputation  for  Rhode  Island  is  still  here.  A  report  that  Maryland  is 
receding  with  respect  to  the  object  of  their  mission,  and  information  conveyed 
in  a  letter  from  Mr.  Pendleton  to  me,  that  Virga  on  hearing  of  the  unanimous 
refusal  of  R.  I.,  had  repealed  her  accession,  by  disarming  them  of  their  most 
pointed  argument  had  produced  great  hesitation.  They  wait  at  present  only 
for  intelligence  with  respect  to  M<?  &  V*«  which  was  expected  by  yesterday's 
post.  But  the  post  is  not  even  yet  come.  The  inferences  which  R.  I.  will 
probably  draw  from  Oswald's  Commission  are  another  source  of  apprehension. 
If  justice  &  honor  however  preside  in  her  Councils  she  will  feel  as  much  the 
obligation  of  providing  for  the  discharge  of  past  engagements  as  for  contracting 
those  which  may  be  necessary  in  future.  Our  debts  at  this  moment  liquidated 
&  unliquidated,  cannot  I  conceive  be  less  than  forty  millions  Dollars.  The 
interest  therefore  alone  is  a  very  serious  object,  and  I  am  persuaded  that  unless 
it  be  raised  by  some  plan  which  will  operate  at  the  same  time  &  in  due  propor 
tion  throughout  the  Union,  neither  its  amount  nor  punctuality  can  be  confided 
in.  Besides  the  other  obvious  causes,  a  jealousy  is  already  perceived  among 
some  States  that  others  will  eventually  elude  their  share  of  the  burden.  The 
interest  on  the  sum  borrowed  by  Mr.  A.  is  now  running,  and  soon  will  if  a  part 
hath  not  already  become  due.  Nor  is  there  any  fund  in  contemplation  for  its 
payment  but  that  of  the  Impost. 

' '  Official  Cypher —  The  French  army  are  embarking  for  the  W.  Indies.  Count 
Rochambeau  says  that  in  case  the  war  should  be  renewed  against  us  they  -will  in 
stantly  return.  Great  efforts  will  I  fancy  be  made  on  that  theatre  unless  arrested 
by  peace.  I  need  not  give  other  intimations  of  secrecy  on  these  points  than  the 
nature  of  them,  &  the  use  of  the  Cypher."  ( Italics  for  cypher).  Madison  to 
Edmund  Randolph.—  Mad.  MSS. 


296  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1782 

her  blood  &  money  was  not  only  the  independence,  but  the  com 
merce  and  gratitude  of  America  ;  the  commerce  to  render  inde 
pendence  the  more  useful,  the  gratitude  to  render  that  commerce 
the  more  permanent.  It  was  necessary  therefore  she  supposed 
that  America  should  be  exposed  to  the  cruelties  of  her  Enemies, 
and  be  made  sensible  of  her  own  weakness  in  order  to  be  grate 
ful  to  the  hand  that  relieved  her.  This  policy  if  discovered 
tended  on  the  other  hand  to  spoil  the  whole.  Experience  shews 
that  her  truest  policy  would  have  been  to  relieve  America  by  the 
most  direct  &  generous  means,  &  to  have  mingled  with  them  no 
artifice  whatever.  With  respect  to  Spain  also  the  situation  of 
France  has  been  as  peculiarly  delicate.  The  claims  &  views  of 
Spain  &  America  interfere.  The  former  attempts  of  Britain  to 
seduce  Spain  to  a  separate  peace,  &  the  ties  of  France  with  the 
latter  whom  she  had  drawn  into  the  war,  required  her  to  favor 
Spain,  at  least  to  a  certain  degree,  at  the  expence  of  America.  Of 
this  G.  B.  is  taking  advantage.  If  France  adheres  to  Spain  G. 
B.  espouses  the  views  of  America,  &  endeavours  to  draw  her  off 
from  France.  If  France  adheres  to  America  in  her  claims  B. 
might  espouse  those  of  Spain,  &  produce  a  breach  between  her  & 
France  ;  and  in  either  case  Britain  wd  divide  her  enemies.  If 
France  acts  wisely,  she  will  in  this  dilemma  prefer  the  friendship 
of  America  to  that  of  Spain.  If  America  acts  wisely  she  will  see 
that  she  is  with  respect  to  her  great  interests,  more  in  danger  of 
being  seduced  by  Britain  than  sacrificed  by  France. 

The  deputation  to  R.  I.  had  set  out  on  the  22?  &  pro 
ceeded  -J-  day's  journey.  Mr.  Nash  casually  mentioned  a 
private  letter  from  Mr.  Pendleton  to  Mr.  Madison  l  informing 

1  "  PHiLADf-  Dec'  30th,  1782 
"  MY  DEAR  SIR 

"  Your  favor  of  the  I3l.h  instant  arrived  a  few  minutes  after  I  sealed  my  last. 
That  of  the  2Ot.h  came  duly  to  hand  yesterday.  The  sensations  excited  in  Mr. 
Jones  and  myself  by  the  Repeal  of  the  law  in  favor  of  the  Impost  were  such  as 
you  anticipated.  Previously  to  the  receipt  of  your  information  a  letter  from 
Mr.  Pendleton  to  me  had  suspended  the  progress  of  the  Deputies  to  Rhode 
Island.  Yours  put  an  entire  stop  to  the  mission,  until  the  plan  or  some  other 
can  be  extended  to  the  case  of  Virg*  The  letter  from  the  Govy,  of  the  same 
date  with  your  last,  gives  a  hope  that  our  representations  may  regain  her  support 


1782]  JAMES  MADISON.  297 

that  the  Legislature  of  Virg?  had  in  consequence  of  the  final  refusal 
of  R.  I.  repealed  her  law  for  the  impost.  As  this  circumstance  if 
true  destroyed  in  the  opinion  of  the  deputies  the  chief  arg*  to  be 
used  by  them,  viz  :  the  unanimity  of  the  other  States,  they  deter 
mined  to  return  &  wait  for  the  Southern  post,  to  know  the  truth 
of  it.  The  post  failing  to  arrive  on  the  23?,  the  usual  day  the  dep 
uties  on  this  day  came  into  Congress  &  stated  the  case.  Mr. 
Madison  read  to  Congress  the  paragraph  in  the  letter  from  Mr. 
Pendleton.  Congress  verbally  resolved,  that  the  departure  of 
the  Deputies  for  R.  I.  s?  be  suspended  until  the  further  order  of 
Congress  ;  Mr.  Madison  promising  to  give  any  information  he 
might  receive  by  the  post.  The  arrival  of  the  post  immediately  en 
sued.  A  letter  to  Mr.  Madison  from  Mr.  Randolph  confirmed 
the  fact,  &  was  communicated  to  Congress.  The  most  intelligent 
members  were  deeply  affected  &  prognosticated  a  failure  of  the 

to  the  impost  without  further  steps  from  Congress.  Your  doubt  as  to  her 
power  of  revoking  her  accession  would,  I  think  have  been  better  founded,  if  she 
had  not  been  virtually  absolved  by  the  definite  rejection  of  Rho  :  Island  ; 
altho'  that  rejection  ought  perhaps  have  been  previously  authenticated  to  her. 
I  beg  you  to  be  circumstantial  on  this  subject  especially  as  to  the  parties  and 
motives  which  led  to  the  repeal,  and  may  oppose  a  reconsideration. 

"  Mr.  Jefferson  arrived  here  on  friday  last,  and  is  industriously  arming  himself 
for  the  field  of  negotiation.  The  commission  issued  to  Mr.  Oswald  impresses 
him  with  a  hope  that  he  may  have  nothing  to  do  on  his  arrival  but  join  in  the 
celebrations  of  victory  &  peace.  Congress,  however,  anxiously  espouse  the  ex 
pediency  of  his  hastening  to  his  destination. 

"  General  McDougall,  Col.  Ogden  &  Colonel  Brooks  arrived  yesterday  on  a 
mission  from  the  army  to  Congress.  The  representations  with  which  they  are 
charged  have  not  yet  been  handed  in  but  I  am  told  they  breathe  a  proper  spirit 
and  are  full  of  good  sense.  I  presume  they  will  furnish  new  topics  in  favor  of 
the  Impost  which  alone  promises  a  chance  of  establishing  that  credit,  by  which 
the  inadequacy  of  taxation  can  be  supplied. 

The  French  fleet  and  army  sailed  a  few  days  ago  from  Boston  for  the  West 
Indies.  A  storm  happened  soon  after  their  departure  from  which  it  is  feared 
they  may  have  suffered. 

"  The  ship  South  Carolina  procured  in  Europe  for  the  State  after  wc.h  she 
was  called,  was  taken  by  three  British  ships  &  carried  into  N.  Y.  a  few  days 
ago.  Besides  the  loss  sustained  by  those  interested  immediately  in  her,  her  fit 
ness  for  annoying  our  trade  renders  the  capture  a  general  misfortune."  *  *  * 
Madison  to  Edmund  Randolph. — Mad.  MSS. 


298  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1782 

Impost  scheme,  &  the  most  pernicious  effects  to  the  character,  the 
duration  &  the  interests  of  the  Confederacy.  It  was  at  length 
notwithstanding  determined  to  persist  in  the  attempt  for  perma 
nent  revenue,  and  a  Committee  was  appointed  to  report  the  steps 
proper  to  be  taken. 

A  motion  was  made  by  Mr.  Rutledge  to  strike  out  the  salvage 
for  recaptures  on  land,  on  the  same  principle  as  he  did  the  words 
"  accruing  to  the  use  of  the  United  States."  As  the  latter  had 
been  retained  by  barely  7  States,  and  one  of  these  was  not  present 
the  motion  of  Mr.  Rutledge  succeeded.  Some  of  Those  who  were 
on  the  other  side,  in  consequence,  voted  ags.1  the  whole  resolution 
&  it  failed.  By  compromise  it  passed  as  reported  by  the 
Committee. 

The  Grand  Committee  reported  after  another  meeting  with  re 
spect  to  the  old  money,  that  it  should  be  rated  at  40  for  i.  The 
Chair  decided  on  a  question  raised,  that  according  to  rule  the 
blank  s<?  not  have  been  filled  up  by  the  Comittee  ;  so  the  rate  was 
expunged. 

From  Tuesday  24  of  Dec',  the  journals  suffice  untill 


MONDAY  30  DEC? 

A  motion  made  by  Mr.  Clarke,  seconded  by  Mr.  Rutledge,  to 
revise  the  instructions  relative  to  negotiations  for  peace,  with  a 
view  to  exempt  the  American  Plenipotentiaries  from  the  obligation 
to  conform  to  the  advice  of  France.  This  motion  was  the  effect 
of  impressions  left  by  Mr.  Jay's  letters,  &  the  intercepted  one 
from  Marbois.  This  evidence  of  separate  views  in  our  Ally,  and 
the  inconsistency  of  that  instruction  with  our  national  dignity, 
were  urged  in  support  of  the  motion.  In  opposing  the  motion, 
many  considerations  were  suggested,  and  the  original  expediency 
of  submitting  the  commission  for  peace  to  the  Councils  of  France 
descanted  upon.  The  reasons  assigned  for  this  expediency  were 
that  at  the  juncture  when  that  measure  took  place  the  American 
affairs  were  in  the  most  deplorable  situation,  the  Southern  States 
being  overrun  &  exhausted  by  the  enemy,  &  and  the  others  more 
inclined  to  repose  after  their  own  fatigues  than  to  exert  their  re- 


1782]  JAMES  MADISON.  299 

sources  for  the  relief  of  those  which  were  the  seat  of  the  war  ; 
that  the  old  paper  currency  had  failed,  &  with  it  public  credit  it 
self  to  such  a  degree  that  no  new  currency  could  be  substituted  ; 
&  that  there  was  then  no  prospect  of  introducing  specie  for  the 
purpose,  our  trade  being  in  the  most  ruinous  condition,  &  the  in 
tercourse  with  the  Havana  in  particular  unopened.  In  the  midst 
of  these  distresses  the  mediation  of  the  two  Imperial  Courts  was 
announced.  The  general  idea  was  that  the  two  most  respectable 
powers  of  Europe  would  not  interpose  without  a  serious  desire  of 
peace,  and  without  the  energy  requisite  to  effect  it.  The  hope 
of  peace  was  therefore  mingled  with  an  apprehension  that  consid 
erable  concessions  might  be  exacted  from  America  by  the  Media 
tors,  as  a  compensation  for  the  essential  one  which  Britain  was  to 
submit  to.  Congress  on  a  trial  found  it  impossible  from  the 
diversity  of  opinions  &  interests  to  define  any  other  claims  than 
those  of  independence  &  the  alliance.  A  discretionary  power 
therefore  was  to  be  delegated  with  regard  to  all  other  claims. 
Mr.  Adams  was  the  sole  minister  for  peace,  he  was  personally  at 
variance  with  the  French  Ministry  ;  his  judgment  had  not  the 
confidence  of  some,  nor  his  partiality  in  case  of  an  interference  of 
claims  espoused  by  different  quarters  of  the  U.  S.,  the  confidence 
of  others  ;  a  motion  to  associate  with  him  two  colleagues,  to  wit, 
Mr.  Franklin  &  Mr.  Jay,  had  been  disagreed  to  by  Congress  ;  the 
former  of  these  being  interested  as  one  of  the  Land  Companies  in 
territorial  claims  which  had  less  chance  of  being  made  good  in 
any  other  way  than  by  a  repossession  of  the  vacant  country  by 
the  British  Crown,  the  latter  belonging  to  a  State  interested  in 
such  arrangements  as  would  deprive  the  U.  S.  of  the  navigation 
of  the  Mississippi,  &  turn  the  western  trade  through  N.  Y.  ;  and 
neither  of  them  being  connected  with  the  So.  States.  The  idea  of 
having  five  ministers  taken  from  the  whole  Union  was  not  sug 
gested  until  the  measure  had  been  adopted,  and  communicated  to 
the  Chev*  de  Luzerne  to  be  forwarded  to  France,  when  it  was  too 
late  to  revoke  it.  It  was  supposed  also  that  Mr.  Laurens  then  in 
the  tower  would  not  be  out,  &  that  Mr.  Jefferson  w?  not  go  ; 
&  that  the  greater  n?  of  Ministers,  the  greater  the  danger  of  dis 
cords  &  indiscretions.  It  was  Added  that  as  it  was  expected  that 
nothing  would  be  yielded  by  G.  B.  which  was  not  extorted  by  the 


300  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1782 

address  of  France  in  managing  the  Mediators,  and  as  it  was  the 
intention  of  Congress  that  their  minister  should  not  oppose  a 
peace  recommended  by  them  &  approved  by  France,  it  was 
thought  good  policy  to  make  the  declaration  to  France,  &  by  such 
a  mark  of  confidence  to  render  her  friendship  the  more  responsi 
ble  for  the  issue.  At  the  worst  it  could  only  be  considered  as  a 
sacrifice  of  our  pride  to  our  interest. 

These  considerations  still  justified  the  original  measure  in  the 
view  of  the  members  who  were  present  &  voted  for  it.  All  the 
new  members  who  had  not  participated  in  the  impressions  which 
dictated  it  and  viewed  the  subject  only  under  circumstances  of  an 
opposite  nature,  disapproved  it.  In  general  however  the  latter 
joined  with  the  former  in  opposing  the  motion  of  Mr.  Clarke,  ar 
guing  with  them  that  supposing  the  instruction  to  be  wrong,  it  was 
less  dishonorable,  than  the  instability  that  w?  be  denoted  by  re 
scinding  it  ;  that  if  G.  B.  was  disposed  to  give  us  what  we  claimed 
France  could  not  prevent  it ;  that  if  G.  B.  struggled  ag"  those 
claims  our  only  chance  of  getting  them  was  thro'  the  aid  of 
France  ;  that  to  withdraw  our  confidence  would  lessen  the  chance 
&  degree  of  this  aid  ;  that  if  we  were  in  a  prosperous  or  safe  con 
dition  compared  with  that  in  which  we  adopted  the  expedient  in 
question,  this  change  had  been  effected  by  the  friendly  succors  of 
our  Ally,  &  that  to  take  advantage  of  it  to  loosen  the  tie,  would 
not  only  bring  on  us  the  reproach  of  ingratitude,  but  induce 
France  to  believe  that  she  had  no  hold  on  our  affections,  but  only 
in  our  necessities ;  that  in  all  possible  situations  we  s?  be  more 
in  danger  of  being  seduced  by  G.  B.,  than  of  being  sacrificed  by 
France  ;  the  interests  of  the  latter  in  the  main  necessarily  coin 
ciding  with  ours,  and  those  of  the  former  being  diametrically 
opposed  to  them,  that  as  to  the  intercepted  letter,  there  were 
many  reasons  which  indicated  that  it  came  through  the  hands  of 
the  Enemy  to  Mr.  Jay  that  it  ought  therefore  to  be  regarded  even 
if  genuine,  as  communicated  for  insidious  purposes  ;  but  that 
there  was  strong  reason  to  suspect  that  it  had  been  adulterated  if 
not  forged  ;  and  that  on  the  worst  supposition,  it  did  not  appear 
that  the  doctrines  maintained  or  the  measures  recommended  in  it 
had  been  adopted  by  the  French  Ministry  and  consequently  that 
they  ought  not  to  be  held  responsible  for  them. 


1782]  JAMES  MADISON.  301 

Upon  these  considerations  it  was  proposed  by  Mr.  Wolcott, 
2ded  by  Mr.  Hamilton  that  the  motion  of  Mr.  Clarke  should  be 
postponed,  which  took  place  without  a  vote. 

Mr.  Madison  moved  that  the  letter  of  Doc'  Franklin,  of  the  14 
Oct*,  1782  should  be  referred  to  a  Committee,  with  a  view  of 
bringing  into  consideration  the  preliminary  article  proposing  that 
British  subjects  &  American  Citizens  sd  reciprocally  have  in  mat 
ters  of  commerce  the  privilege  of  natives  of  the  other  party  ;  and 
giving  to  the  American  Ministers  the  instruction  which  ensued  on 
that  subject.  This  motion  succeeded,  and  the  committee  ap 
pointed  consisted  of  Mr.  Madison  Mr.  Rutledge,  Mr.  Clarke,  Mr. 
Hamilton  &  Mr.  Osgood. 

The  contract  of  Gen?  Wayne  l  was  confirmed  with  great  reluct 
ance  ;  being  considered  as  being  improper  with  respect  to  its 
being  made  with  individuals,  as  admitting  of  infinite  abuses,  as 
out  of  his  military  line,  and  as  founded  on  a  principle  that  a  pres 
ent  commerce  with  G.  B.  was  favorable  to  the  U.  S.  a  principle 
reprobated  by  Congress  &  all  the  States.  Congress  however 
supposed  that  these  considerations  ought  to  yield  to  the  necessity 
of  supporting  the  measures  which  a  valuable  officer  from  good 
motives,  had  taken  upon  himself. 


TUESDAY,  DECR  31,    1782 

The  report  of  the  Committee  made  in  consequence  of  Mr. 
Madison's  motion  yesterday  instructing  the  Ministers  plenipo  on 
the  article  of  commerce,  passed  unanimously  as  follows  :  "  Re- 
solvedy  That  the  Ministers  Plenipo  for  negotiating  peace  be 

1  Fitzsimmons,  Madison  and  Rutledge  were  the  committee  making  the  report. 
The  agreement  made  the  previous  August,  with  the  consent  of  the  governor 
and  executive  of  Georgia,  was  with  certain  Savannah  merchants,  "  subjects  of  the 
crown  of  Great  Britain,"  permitting  them  to  remain  unmolested  and  to  dispose 
of  their  effects  to  citizens  of  the  United  States,  and  "  to  export  produce  of  the 
state  of  Georgia  to  the  amount  of  the  goods  so  disposed  of  to  the  next  British 
post."  Congress  ordered  "  that  all  commanders  of  armed  vessels,  in  the  service  of 
the  United  States,  or  belonging  to  any  of  the  inhabitants  thereof,  do  pay  due  re 
gard  to  the  passports  which  have  or  shall  be  given  by  the  governor  of  the  state 
of  Georgia  for  the  purpose  aforesaid." — Journals  of  Congress,  iv.,  127. 


3o2  THE   WRITINGS  OF  [1783 

instructed  in  any  commercial  stipulations  with  G.  B.  which  may 
be  comprehended  in  a  Treaty  of  peace  to  endeavour  to  obtain  for 
the  Citizens  and  inhabitants  of  the  U.  S.  a  direct  commerce  to  all 
parts  of  the  British  Dominions  &  Possessions,  in  like  manner  as 
all  parts  of  the  U.  S.  may  be  opened  to  a  direct  Commerce  of 
British  subjects  ;  or  at  least  that  such  direct  Commerce  be  ex 
tended  to  all  parts  of  the  British  Dominions  &  possessions  in 
Europe  &  the  West  Indies  ;  and  the  said  Ministers  are  informed 
that  this  stipulation  will  be  particularly  expected  by  Congress,  in 
case  the  Citizens  &  subjects  of  each  party  are  to  be  admitted  to 
an  equality  in  matters  of  commerce  with  natives  of  the  other 
party.  

WEDNESDAY  JAN?   1ST,    1783 

The  decision  of  the  controversy  between  Con.  &  Penn?  was 
reported. 

The  communications  made  from  the  Minister  of  France,  con 
curred  with  other  circumstances  in  effacing  the  impressions  made 
by  Mr.  Jay's  letter  &  Marbois's  inclosed.  The  vote  of  thanks  to 
C*  Rochambeau  passed  with  unanimity  &  cordiality  &  afforded  a 
fresh  proof  that  the  resentment  against  France  had  greatly 
subsided.  

THURSDAY  JAN?  2? 
Nothing  requiring  notice. 


FRIDAY  3?  JANY. 

The  vote  of  thanks  to  the  Minister  of  France  which  passed 
yesterday  was  repealed  in  consequence  of  his  having  expressed  to 
the  President  a  desire  that  no  notice  might  be  taken  of  his  con 
duct  as  to  the  point  in  question  &  of  the  latter's  communicating 
the  same  to  Congress.  The  temper  of  Congress  here  again  man 
ifested  the  transient  nature  of  their  irritation  ags.1  France. 

The  motion  of  Mr.  Howel,  put  on  the  Secret  Journal  gave 
Congress  a  great  deal  of  vexation.  The  expedient  for  baffling  his 
scheme  of  raising  a  ferment  in  his  State  &  exposing  the  foreign 


1783]  JAMES  MADISON.  303 

transactions  was  adopted  only  in  the  last  resort  ;  it  being  ques 
tioned  by  some  whether  the  articles  of  Confederation  warranted  it. 

The  answer  to  the  note  of  the  French  Minister  passed  unani 
mously  &  was  a  further  testimony  of  the  Abatement  of  the  effects 
of  Mr.  Jay's  letter  &c. 

The  proceedings  of  the  Court  in  the  dispute  between  Con*  & 
P?  were  after  debates  as  to  the  meaning  of  the  Confederation  in 
directing  such  proceeding  to  be  lodged  among  the  acts  of  Congress 
entered  at  large  on  the  Journals.  It  was  remarked  that  the  Delegates 
from  Con'  particularly  Mr.  Dyer  were  more  captious  on  the  occasion 
than  was  consistent  with  a  perfect  acquiescence  in  the  decree. 


MONDAY,  JAN?  6TH. 

The  Memorial  from  the  Army  was  laid  before  Congress  and  re 
ferred  to  a  grand  Committee.  This  reference  was  intended  as  a 
mark  of  the  important  light  in  which  the  memorial  was  viewed.1 

Mr.  Berkley  having  represented  some  inconveniences  incident 
to  the  plan  of  a  Consular  Convention  between  France  &  U.  S., 
particularly  the  restriction  of  Consuls  from  trading  &  his  letter 
having  been  committed,  a  report  was  made  purposing  that  the 
Convention  should  for  the  present  be  suspended.  To  this  it  had 
been  objected  that  as  the  convention  might  already  be  concluded 
such  a  step  was  improper  ;  and  as  the  end  might  be  obtained  by 
authorizing  the  Minister  at  Versailles  to  propose  particular  altera- 

1  "  The  deputation  from  the  army,  which  arrived  here  a  few  days  ago,  have 
laid  their  grievances  before  Congress.  They  consist  of  sundry  articles,  the  cap 
ital  of  which  are,  a  defect  of  an  immediate  payment,  and  of  satisfactory  provis 
ion  for  completing  the  work  hereafter.  How  either  of  these  objects  can  be 
accomplished,  and  what  will  be  the  consequence  of  failure,  I  must  leave  to 
your  own  surmises.  I  wish  the  disquietude  excited  by  the  prospect,  was  the  ex 
clusive  portion  of  those  who  impede  the  measures  calculated  for  redressing  com 
plaints  against  the  justice  and  gratitude  of  the  public. 

"  The  Resolution  of  the  House  of  Delegates  against  restitution  of  confiscated 
effects  is  subject  to  the  remark  you  make.  The  preliminary  requisition  of  an 
acknowledgment  of  our  independence,  in  the  most  ample  manner,  seems  to  be 
still  more  incautious,  since  it  disaccords  with  the  Treaty  of  Alliance  which  ad 
mits  the  sufficiency  of  a  tacit  acknowledgment."  Madison  to  Edmund  Ran 
dolph,  Jany.  7,  1783.  From  the  Madison  Papers  (1840). 


3o4  THE  WAITINGS  OF  [1783 

tions  that  it  was  unnecessary.  By  Mr.  Madison  it  had  been 
moved  that  the  report  should  be  postponed  to  make  place  for  the 
consideration  of  an  instruction  &  authority  to  the  s?  Minister  for 
that  purpose  ;  and  this  motion  had  in  consequence  been  brought 
before  Congress.  On  this  day  the  business  revived.  The  senti 
ments  of  the  members  were  various,  some  wishing  to  suspend  such 
part  of  the  convention  only  as  excluded  Consuls  from  commerce  ; 
others  thought  this  exclusion  too  important  to  be  even  suspended  ; 
others  again  thought  the  whole  ought  to  be  suspended  during  the 
war  ;  &  others  lastly  contended  that  the  whole  ought  to  be  new 
modelled  ;  the  Consuls  having  too  many  privileges  in  some  re 
spects,  &  too  little  power  in  others.  It  was  observable  that  this 
diversity  of  opinions  prevailed  chiefly  among  the  members  who 
had  come  in  since  the  Convention  had  been  passed  in  Congress  ; 
the  members  originally  present  adhering  to  the  views  which  then 
governed  them.  The  subject  was  finally  postponed  ;  8  States 
only  being  represented,  &  9  being  requisite  for  such  a  question. 
Even  to  have  suspended  the  convention  after  it  had  been  pro 
posed  to  the  Court  of  France,  &  possibly  acceded  to  would  have 
been  indecent  and  dishonorable  ;  and  at  a  juncture  when  G.  B. 
was  courting  a  commercial  intimacy,  to  the  probable  uneasiness  of 
France,  of  very  mischievous  tendency.  But  experience  constantly 
teaches  that  new  members  of  a  public  body  do  not  feel  the  neces 
sary  respect  or  responsibility  for  the  acts  of  their  predecessors,  and 
that  a  change  of  members  &  of  circumstances  often  proves  fatal  to 
consistency  and  stability  of  public  measures.  Some  conversation 
in  private  by  the  old  members  with  the  most  judicious  of  the  new 
in  this  instance  has  abated  the  fondness  of  the  latter  for  innova 
tions,  and  it  is  even  problematical  whether  they  will  be  again  urged. 
In  the  evening  of  this  day  the  grand  Committee  met  and  agreed 
to  meet  again  the  succeeding  evening  for  the  purpose  of  a  confer 
ence  with  the  Superintend-  of  Finance. 


TUESDAY,  JAN?  7TH,   1783. 
See  the  Journals. 

In  the  evening  the  grand  Committee  had  the  assigned  confer 
ence  with  Mr.  Morris  who  informed  them  explicitly  that  it  was 


1783]  JAMES  MADISON.  305 

impossible  to  make  any  advance  of  pay  in  the  present  state  of  the 
finances  to  the  army  and  imprudent  to  give  any  assurances  with 
respect  to  future  pay  until  certain  funds  should  be  previously 
established.  He  observed  that  if  even  an  advance  could  be  made 
it  w*?  be  unhappy  that  it  s?  appear  to  be  the  effect  of  demands 
from  the  army  ;  as  this  precedent  could  not  fail  to  inspire  a  distrust 
of  the  spontaneous  justice  of  Congress  &  to  produce  repetitions 
of  the  expedient.  He  said  that  he  had  taken  some  measures  with 
a  view  to  a  payment  for  the  army  which  depended  on  events  not 
within  our  command,  that  he  had  communicated  these  measures 
to  Gen?  Washington  under  an  injunction  of  secrecy,  that  he  could 
not  yet  disclose  them  without  endangering  their  success  ;  that  the 
situation  of  our  affairs  within  his  department  was  so  alarming  that 
he  had  thoughts  of  asking  Congress  to  appoint  a  Confidential 
Committee  to  receive  communications  on  that  subject  and  to  sanc 
tify  by  their  advice  such  steps  as  ought  to  be  taken.  Much  loose 
conversation  passed  on  the  critical  state  of  things  the  defect  of  a 
permanent  revenue,  &  the  consequences  to  be  apprehended  from 
a  disappointment  of  the  mission  from  the  army  ;  which  ended  in 
the  appointment  of  friday  evening  next  for  an  audience  to  Gen 
eral  McDougall,  Col.  Brooks  &  Col.  Ogden,  the  Deputies  on  the 
subject  of  the  Memorial,  the  Superintend'  to  be  present. 


WEDNESDAY    JAN?     8,    THURSDAY    JAN?    QTH,    &    FRIDAY 

JAN?       10 

On  the  Report  1  for  valuing  the  land  conformably  to  the  rule 
laid  down  in  the  federal  articles,  the  Delegates  from  Connecticut 
contended  for  postponing  the  subject  during  the  war,  alledging 
the  impediments  arising  from  the  possession  of  N.  Y.,  &c.  by  the 
enemy  ;  but  apprehending  (as  was  supposed)  that  the  flourishing 
State  of  Connecticut  compared  with  the  Southern  States,  would 
render  a  valuation  at  the  crisis  unfavorable  to  the  former. 
Others,  particularly  Mr.  Hamilton  and  Mr.  Madison,  were  of 

1  This  proposed  to  require  the  States  to  value  the  land  and  return  the  valua 
tions  to  Congress.  The  above  to  be  a  marginal  note.  [Note  in  Madison's  hand.] 

VOL.  I.— 20. 


3o6  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1783 

opinion  that  the  rule  of  the  confederation  was  a  chimerical  one 
since  if  the  intervention  of  the  individual  States  were  employed 
their  interests  would  give  a  bias  to  their  judgments,  or  that  at 
least  suspicions  of  such  bias  w?  prevail  and  without  their  inter 
vention,  it  could  not  be  executed  but  at  an  expense,  delay  &  un 
certainty  which  were  inadmissible  ;  that  it  would  perhaps  be 
therefore  preferable  to  represent  these  difficulties  to  the  States 
&  recommend  an  exchange  of  this  rule  of  dividing  the  public 
burdens  for  one  more  simple  easy  &  equal.  The  Delegates  from 
S.  Carolina  generally  &  particularly  Mr.  Rutledge  advocated  the 
propriety  of  the  constitutional  rule  &  of  an  adherence  to  it,  and 
of  the  safety  of  the  mode  in  question  arising  from  the  honor  of 
the  States.  The  debates  on  the  subject  were  interrupted  by  a 
letter  from  the  Superintendent  of  Finance  ;  informing  Congress 
that  the  situation  of  his  department  required  that  a  committee 
s?  be  appointed  with  power  to  advise  him  on  the  steps  proper  to 
be  taken  ;  and  suggesting  an  appointment  of  one  consisting  of  a 
member  from  each  State,  with  authority  to  give  their  advice  on 
the  subject.  This  expedient  was  objected  to  as  improper,  since 
Congress  w?  thereby  delegate  an  incommunicable  power,  per 
haps,  and  would  at  any  rate  lend  a  sanction  to  a  measure  without 
even  knowing  what  it  was  ;  not  to  mention  the  distrust  which  it 
manifested  of  their  own  prudence  &  fidelity.  It  was  at  length 
proposed  &  agreed  to,  that  a  special  committee  consisting  of  Mr. 
Rutledge  Mr.  Osgood  &  Mr.  Madison,  should  confer  with  the 
Superintend-  of  Finance  on  the  subject  of  his  letter  and  make 
report  to  Congress.  After  the  adjournment  of  Congress  this 
Comittee  conferred  with  the  Superintend-  who  after  being  ap 
prized  of  the  difficulties  which  had  arisen  in  Congress,  stated  to 
them  that  the  last  account  of  our  money  affairs  in  Europe  shewed 
that  contrary  to  his  expectations  and  estimates  there  were  3^ 
Millions  of  livres  short  of  the  bills  actually  drawn  ;  that  further 
drafts  were  indispensable  to  prevent  a  stop  to  the  public  service  ; 
that  to  make  good  this  deficiency  there  was  only  the  further  suc 
cess  of  Mr.  Adams'  loan  and  the  friendship  of  France  to  depend 
on,  that  it  was  necessary  for  him  to  decide  on  the  expediency  of 
his  staking  the  public  credit  on  those  contingent  funds  by  further 
drafts,  and  that  in  making  this  decision  he  wished  for  the  sanction 


1783]  JAMES  MADISON.  307 

of  a  committee  of  Congress  ;  that  this  sanction  was  preferable 
to  that  of  Congress  itself  only  as  it  w?  confide  the  risk  attending 
bills  drawn  on  such  funds  to  a  smaller  number,  and  as  secrecy 
was  essential  in  the  operation  as  well  to  guard  our  affairs  in  gen 
eral  from  injury,  as  the  credit  of  the  bills  in  question  from  de 
basement.  It  was  supposed  both  by  the  Superintend-  &  the 
Comittee  that  there  was  in  fact  little  danger  of  bills  drawn  on 
France  on  the  credit  of  the  loan  of  4  Millions  of  dollars,  applied 
for,  being  dishonored  ;  since  if  the  negotiations  on  foot  were  to 
terminate  in  peace,  France  would  prefer  an  advance  in  our  favor 
to  exposing  us  to  the  necessity  of  resorting  to  G.  B.  for  it ;  and 
that  if  the  war  s?  continue  the  necessity  of  such  an  aid  to  its 
prosecution  would  prevail.  The  result  was  that  the  Committee 
should  make  such  report  as  would  bring  the  matter  before  Con 
gress  under  an  injunction  of  secrecy,  and  produce  a  resolution 
authorizing  the  Superintend-  to  draw  bills  as  the  public  service 
might  require  on  the  credit  of  applications  for  loans  in  Europe. 
The  report  of  the  Committee  to  this  effect  was  the  next  day  ac 
cordingly  made  &  adopted  unanimously.  Mr.  Dyer  alone  at  first 
opposed  it  as  an  unwarrantable  &  dishonorable  presumption  on 
the  ability  &  disposition  of  France  ;  being  answered  however 
that  without  such  a  step  or  some  other  exped-  which  neither  he 
nor  any  other  had  suggested,  our  credit  would  be  stabbed  abroad 
and  the  public  service  wrecked  at  home  ;  and  that  however  morti 
fying  it  might  be  to  commit  our  credit,  our  faith  &  our  honor  to 
the  mercy  of  a  foreign  nation,  it  was  a  mortification  w^h  c?  not  be 
avoided  without  endangering  our  very  existence  ;  he  acquiesced 
and  the  resolution  was  entered  unanimously.  The  circumstance 
of  unanimity  was  thought  of  consequence  as  it  w?  evince  the 
more  the  necessity  of  the  succour  and  induce  France  the  more 
readily  to  yield  it.  On  this  occasion  several  members  were  struck 
with  the  impropriety  of  the  late  attempt  to  withdraw  from  France 
the  trust  confided  to  her  over  the  terms  of  peace  when  we  were 
under  the  necessity  of  giving  so  decisive  a  proof  of  our  depen 
dence  upon  her.  It  was  also  adverted  to  in  private  conversation 
as  a  great  unhappiness  that  during  negotiations  for  peace,  when 
an  appearance  of  vigor  &  resource  were  so  desirable,  such  a  proof 
of  our  poverty  &  imbecility  could  not  be  avoided. 


3o8  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1783 

The  conduct  of  Mr.  Howel  &c.  had  led  several  &  particularly 
Mr.  Peters  into  an  opinion  that  some  further  rule  &  security 
ought  to  be  provided  for  concealing  matters  of  a  secret  nature. 
On  the  motion  of  Mr.  Peters  a  committee  composed  of  himself 
Mr.  Williamson  &c.  was  appointed  to  make  a  report  on  the  sub 
ject.  On  this  day  the  report  was  made.  It  proposed  that 
members  of  Congress  should  each  subscribe  an  instrument 
pledging  their  faith  &  honor  not  to  disclose  certain  enumerated 
matters. 

The  enumeration  being  very  indistinct  and  objectionable,  and 
a  written  engagement  being  held  insufficient  with  those  who  with 
out  it  w?  violate  prudence  or  honor,  as  well  as  marking  a  general 
distrust  of  the  prudence  &  honor  of  Congress,  the  report  was 
generally  disrelished  ;  and  after  some  debate  in  which  it  was 
faintly  supported  by  Mr.  Williamson,  the  Committee  asked  & 
obtained  leave  to  withdraw  it. 

A  discussion  of  the  report  on  the  mode  of  valuing  the  lands 
was  revived.  It  consisted  chiefly  of  a  repetition  of  the  former 
debates. 

In  the  evening  according  to  app*  on  tuesday  last,  the  grand 
Committee  met,  as  did  the  Superintend*  of  Finance.  The  chair 
man  Mr.  Wolcot  informed  the  committee  that  Cols  Ogden  & 
Brooks  two  of  the  deputies  from  the  army  had  given  him  notice 
that  Gen'  McDougal  the  first  of  the  deputation,  was  so  indisposed 
with  the  rheumatism  as  to  be  unable  to  attend,  and  expressed  a 
desire  that  the  Comittee  would  adjourn  to  his  lodging  at  the 
Indian  queen  tavern  the  deputies  being  very  anxious  to  finish 
their  business  among  other  reasons,  on  ace*  of  the  scarcity  of 
money  with  them.  At  first  the  Comittee  seemed  disposed  to 
comply  ;  but  it  being  suggested  that  such  an  adjournment  by  a 
Comittee  of  a  member  from  each  State  would  be  derogatory 
from  the  respect  due  to  themselves,  especially  as  the  Mission 
from  the  army  was  not  within  the  ordinary  course  of  duty,  the 
idea  was  dropped.  In  lieu  of  it  they  adjourned  to  Monday 
evening  next,  on  the  ostensible  reason  of  the  extreme  badness 
of  the  weather  which  had  prevented  the  attendance  of  several 
members. 


1783]  JAMES  MADISON.  309 


MONDAY    JAN-    13 

Report  on  the  valuation  of  land  was  referred  to  a  Grand 
Committee. 

A  motion  was  made  by  Mr.  Peters,  2d?d  by  Mr.  Madison, 
"  that  a  com11.6  be  appointed  to  consider  the  expediency  of  making 
further  applications  for  loans  in  Europe,  &  to  confer  with  the 
Superin'  of  Finance  on  the  subject."  In  support  of  this  motion 
Mr.  P.  observed  that  notwithstanding  the  uncertainty  of  success 
the  risk  of  appearing  unreasonable  in  our  demands  on  France, 
and  the  general  objections  ag5.*  indebting  the  U.  S.  to  foreign 
nations,  the  crisis  of  our  affairs  demanded  the  experiment ;  that 
money  must  if  possible  be  procured  for  the  army  and  there  was 
ground  to  expect  that  the  C  of  France  wd.  be  influenced  by  an 
apprehension  that  in  case  of  her  failure  &  of  a  pacification  G.  B. 
might  embrace  the  opportunity  of  substituting  her  favors.  Mr. 
Madison  added  that  it  was  expedient  to  make  the  trial  because 
if  it  failed,  our  situation  cd  not  be  made  worse,  that  it  would  be 
prudent  in  France  &  therefore  it  might  be  expected  of  her,  to 
afford  the  U.  S.  such  supplies  as  would  enable  them  to  disband 
their  army  ir  tranquillity,  lest  some  internal  convulsions  might 
follow  exterr  al  peace,  the  issue  of  which  ought  not  to  be  haz 
arded,  that  as  the  affections  &  gratitude  of  this  Country  as  well 
as  its  separation  from  G.  B.  were  her  objects  in  the  Revolution, 
it  would  also  be  incumbent  on  her  to  let  the  army  be  disbanded 
under  the  impression  of  deriving  their  rewards  through  her  friend 
ship  to  their  Country  ;  since  their  temper  on  their  dispersion 
through  the  several  States  and  being  mingled  in  the  public 
councils,  would  much  affect  the  general  temper  towards  France  ; 
and  that  if  the  pay  of  the  army  could  be  converted  into  a  con 
solidated  debt  bearing  interest,  the  requisitions  on  the  States  for 
the  principal  might  be  reduced  to  requisitions  for  the  interest, 
and  by  that  means  a  favorable  revolution  so  far  introduced  into 
our  finances. 

The  Motion  was  opposed  by  Mr.  Dyer  because  it  was  improper 
to  augment  our  foreign  debts,  &  would  appear  extravagant  to 
France.  Several  others  assented  to  it  with  reluctance,  and 
several  others  expressed  serious  scruples  as  honest  men  ag5*  levying 


3io  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1783 

contributions  on  the  friendship  or  fears  of  France  or  others, 
whilst  the  unwillingness  of  the  States  to  invest  Congress  with 
permanent  funds  rendered  a  repayment  so  precarious.  The 
motion  was  agreed  to,  and  the  Comittee  chosen — Mr.  Gorham,  Mr. 
Peters,  Mr.  Izard. 

In  the  evening  according  to  appointment  the  Grand  Com 
mittee  gave  an  audience  to  the  deputies  of  the  army,1  viz  : 
Gen!  McDougal  &  Col*  Ogden  &  Brooks.  The  first  introduced 
the  subject  by  acknowledging  the  attention  manifested  to  the 
representations  of  the  army  by  the  app*  of  so  large  a  Comittee  ; 
his  observations  turned  chiefly  on  the  3  chief  topics  of  the 
Memorial,  namely  an  immediate  advance  of  pay,  adequate  pro 
vision  for  the  residue,  and  half-pay. — On  the  first  he  insisted  on 
the  absolute  necessity  of  the  measure  to  soothe  the  discontents 
both  of  the  officers  &  soldiers,  painted  their  sufferings  &  services, 
their  successive  hopes  &  disappointments  throughout  the  whole 
war,  in  very  high-colored  expressions,  and  signified  that  if  a 
disappointment  were  now  repeated  the  most  serious  consequences 
were  to  be  apprehended  ;  that  nothing'  less  than  the  actual  dis 
tresses  of  the  army  would  have  induced  at  this  crisis  so  solemn 

1  "  PHILAD*  Jany  14,  1783 

"  The  deputies  from  the  army  are  still  here.  The  explanation;  which  they 
have  given  to  a  Committee  on  the  topics  of  the  memorial  are  of  the  most  serious 
nature.  I  wish  they  could  with  propriety  be  promulged  throughout  the  U.  S. 
They  would  I  am  sure  at  least  put  to  shame  all  those  who  have  laboured 
to  throw  a  fallacious  gloss  over  our  public  affairs,  and  counteracted  the  meas 
ures  necessary  to  y?  real  prosperity  of  them. 

"  The  deliberations  of  Congress  have  been  turned  pretty  much  of  late  on  the 
valuation  of  lands  prescribed  by  the  articles  of  confederation.  The  difficulties 
which  attend  that  rule  of  apportionment  seem  on  near  inspection  to  be  in  a 
manner  insuperable.  The  work  is  too  vast  to  be  executed  without  the  inter 
vention  of  the  several  states,  and  if  their  intervention  be  employed,  all  con 
fidence  in  an  impartial  execution  is  at  end. 


"  Mr.  Jefferson  has  not  yet  taken  his  departure.  We  hope  the  causes  which 
have  prevented  it  will  not  continue  many  days  longer." — Madison  to  Edmund 
Randolph,  Mad.  MSS. 


1783]  JAMES  MADISON.  3 1 1 

an  application  to  their  country  ;  but  y*  the  seeming  approach  of 
peace,  and  the  fear  of  being  still  more  neglected  when  the  neces 
sity  of  their  services  should  be  over,  strongly  urged  the  necessity 
of  it.  His  two  colleagues  followed  him  with  a  recital  of  various 
incidents  &  circumstances  tending  to  evince  the  actual  distresses 
of  the  army,  the  irritable  state  in  which  the  deputies  left  them, 
and  the  necessity  of  the  consoling  influence  of  an  immediate 
advance  of  pay.  Colonel  Ogden  said  he  wished  not  indeed,  to 
return  to  the  army  if  he  was  to  be  the  messenger  of  disappoint 
ment  to  them.  The  deputies  were  asked  Is-1  what  particular  steps 
they  supposed  would  be  taken  by  the  army  in  case  no  pay  cd  be 
immediately  advanced  ;  to  which  -they  answered  that  it  was  im 
possible  to  say  precisely  ;  that  although  the  Sergeants  &  some  of 
the  most  intelligent  privates  had  been  often  observed  in  sequestered 
consultations,  yet  it  was  not  known  that  any  premeditated  plan 
had  been  formed  ;  that  there  was  sufficient  reason  to  dread  that 
at  least  a  mutiny  would  ensue,  and  the  rather  as  the  temper  of 
the  officers  at  least  those  of  inferior  grades,  would  with  less  vigor 
than  heretofore  struggle  ag3.1  it.  They  remarked  on  this  occasion, 
that  the  situation  of  the  officers  was  rendered  extremely  delicate 
&  had  been  sorely  felt,  when  called  upon  to  punish  in  soldiers  a 
breach  of  engagements  to  the  public  which  had  been  preceded 
by  uniform  &  flagrant  breaches  by  the  latter  of  its  engagements 
to  the  former.  General  McDougal  said  that  the  army  were  verg 
ing  to  that  state  which  we  are  told  will  make  a  wise  man  mad,  and 
Col :  Brooks  said  that  his  apprehensions  were  drawn  from  the 
circumstance  that  the  temper  of  the  army  was  such  that  they  did 
not  reason  or  deliberate  cooly  on  consequences  &  therefore  a  dis 
appointment  might  throw  them  blindly  into  extremities.  They 
observed  that  the  irritations  of  the  army  had  resulted  in  part 
from  the  distinctions  made  between  the  Civil  &  military  lists  the 
former  regularly  receiving  their  salaries,  and  the  latter  as  regularly 
left  unpaid.  They  mentioned  in  particular  that  the  members  of 
the  Legislatures  would  never  agree  to  an  adjournment  with[out] 
paying  themselves  fully  for  their  services.  In  answer  to  this 
remark  it  was  observed  that  the  Civil  officers  on  the  average  did 
not  derive  from  their  appointments  more  than  the  means  of  their 
subsistence  ;  and  that  the  military  altho  not  furnished  with  their 


3i2  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1783 

pay  properly  so   called   were   in  fact  furnished    with   the  same 
necessaries. 

On  the  2?  point  to  wit  "adequate  provision  for  the  general 
arrears  due  to  them,"  the  deputies  animadverted  with  surprise, 
and  even  indignation  on  the  repugnance  of  the  States,  some  of  them 
at  least,  to  establish  a  federal  revenue  for  discharging  the  federal 
engagements.  They  supposed  that  the  ease  not  to  say  affluence 
with  w*  the  people  at  large  lived  sufficiently  indicated  resources 
far  beyond  the  actual  exertions,  and  that  if  a  proper  application 
of  these  resources  was  omitted  by  the  Country  &  the  army 
thereby  exposed  to  unnecessary  sufferings,  it  must  natural[ly]  be 
expected  that  the  patience  of  the  latter  wd  have  its  limits.  As 
the  deputies  were  sensible  that  the  general  disposition  of  Con 
gress  strongly  favored  this  object,  they  were  less  diffuse  on  it. 
Gen!  McDougal  made  a  remark  wc.h  may  deserve  the  greater  at 
tention  as  he  stepped  from  the  tenor  of  his  discourse  to  introduce 
it,  and  delivered  it  with  peculiar  emphasis.  He  said  that  the 
most  intelligent  &  considerate  part  of  the  army  were  deeply 
affected  at  the  debility  and  defects  in  the  federal  Gov*,  and  the 
unwillingness  of  the  States  to  cement  &  invigorate  it ;  as  in  case 
of  its  dissolution,  the  benefits  expected  from  the  Revolution  wd 
be  greatly  impaired,  and  as  in  particular,  the  contests  which  might 
ensue  am8:  the  States  would  be  sure  to  embroil  the  officers  which 
respectively  belong  to  them. 

On  the  3d  point  to  wit  "  half-pay  for  life,"  they  expressed  equal 
dissatisfaction  at  the  States  which  opposed  it  observing  that  it 
formed  a  part  of  the  wages  stipulated  to  them  by  Congress  &  was 
but  a  reasonable  provision  for  the  remnant  of  their  lives  which 
had  been  freely  exposed  in  the  defence  of  their  Country,  and 
would  be  incompatible  with  a  return  to  occupations  &  professions 
for  which  military  habits  of  7  years  standing  unfitted  them.  They 
complained  that  this  part  of  their  reward  had  been  industriously 
and  artfully  stigmatized  in  many  States  with  the  name  of  pension, 
altho'  it  was  as  reasonable  that  those  who  had  lent  their  blood 
and  services  to  the  public  sd  receive  an  annuity  thereon,  as  those 
who  had  lent  their  money  ;  and  that  the  officers  whom  new  ar 
rangements  had  from  time  to  time  excluded,  actually  labored  under 
the  opprobrium  of  pensioners,  with  the  additional  mortification  of 


i783l  JAMES  MADISON.  313 

not  receiving  a  shilling  of  the  emolum5.  They  referred  however 
to  their  Memorial  to  show  that  they  were  authorized  &  ready  to 
commute  their  half-pay  for  any  equivalent  &  less  exceptionable 
provision. 

After  the  departure  of  the  Deputies,  the  Grand  Committee  ap 
pointed  a  sub-committee,  consisting  of  Mr.  Hamilton,  Mr.  Madi 
son,  &  Mr.  Rutledge  to  report  arrangements,  in  concert  with  the 
Superintend-  of  Finance  for  their  consideration. 


TUESDAY    JANy    15th   [14*]     1783 

Congress  adjourned  for  the  meeting  of  The  Grand  Committee 
to  whom  was  referred  the  report  concerning  the  valuation  of  the 
lands  and  who  accordingly  met. 

The  Committee  were  in  general  strongly  impressed  with  the  ex 
treme  difficulty  &  inequality  if  not  impracticability  of  fulfilling 
the  article  of  the  Confederation  relative  to  this  point  ;  Mr.  Rut- 
ledge  however  excepted,  who  altho'  he  did  not  think  the  rule  so 
good  a  one  as  a  census  of  inhabitants,  thought  it  less  impractica 
ble  than  the  other  members.  And  if  the  valuation  of  land  had 
not  been  prescribed  by  y?  federal  articles,  the  Committee  wd  cer 
tainly  have  preferred  some  other  rule  of  appointment,  particularly 
that  of  numbers  under  certain  qualifications  as  to  Slaves.  As  the 
federal  Constitution  however  left  no  option,  &  a  few  *  only  were 
disposed  to  recommend  to  the  States  an  alteration  of  it,  it  was 
necessary  to  proceed  i5-1  to  settle  its  meaning — 2dly  to  settle  the 
least  objectionable  mode  of  valuation.  On  the  first  point,  it  was 
doubted  by  several  members  whe"  the  returns  which  the  report 
under  consideration  required  from  the  States  would  not  be  final 
and  whether  the  Art5  of  Conf?  wd  allow  Congress  to  alter  them 
after  they  had  fixed  on  this  mode  ;  on  this  point  no  vote  was 
taken.  A  2d  question  afterwards  raised  in  the  course  of  the  dis 
cussion  was  how  far  the  Art  required  a  specific  valuation,  and 

1  Mr.  Hamilton  was  most  strenuous  on  this  point.  Mr.  Wilson  also  favd.  the 
idea.  Mr.  M[adison]  also  but  restrained  in  some  measure,  by  the  declared  sense 
of  Vira  Mr.  Ghoram,  &  several  others  also,  but  wishing  previous  experience. 
[Note  in  MS.] 


314'  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1783 

how  far  it  gave  a  latitude  as  to  the  mode,  on  this  point  also  there 
was  a  diversity  of  opinions;  but  no  vote  taken. 

2dl.y  As  to  the  mode  itself  referred  to  the  Gd  Com?,  it  was  strongly 
objected  to  by  the  Delegate  from  Con*,  Mr.  Dyer — by  Mr.  Hamil 
ton, —  by  Mr.  Wilson  by  Mr.  Carol,  &  by  Mr.  Madison,  as  leaving 
the  States  too  much  to  the  bias  of  interest,  as  well  as  too  uncertain 
&  tedious  in  the  execution.  In  fav'  of  the  Rep1  was  Mr.  Rut- 
ledge  the  father  of  it,  who  thought  the  honor  of  the  States  &  their 
mutual  confidence  a  sufficient  security  ag5.1  frauds  &  the  suspicion 
of  them.  Mr.  Ghoram  favd  the  report  also,  as  the  least  impracti 
cable  mode,  and  as  it  was  necessary  to  attempt  at  least  some  com 
pliance  with  the  federal  rule  before  any  attempt  could  be  properly 
made  to  vary  it.  An  opinion  entertained  by  Massachusetts  that 
she  was  comparatively  in  advance  to  the  U.  S.  made  her  anxious 
for  a  speedy  settlement  of  the  mode  by  which  a  final  apportion 
ment  of  the  common  burden  cd  be  effected.  The  sentiments  of 
the  other  members  of  the  Committee  were  not  expressed. 

Mr.  Hamilton  proposed  in  lieu  of  a  reference  of  the  valuation 
to  the  States,  to  class  the  lands  throughout  the  States  under  dis 
tinctive  descriptions,  viz  :  arable,  pasture,  wood,  &c.  and  to  annex 
a  uniform  rate  to  the  several  classes  according  to  their  different 
comparative  value,  calling  on  the  States  only  for  a  return  of  the 
quantities  &  descriptions.  This  mode  would  have  been  accepta 
ble  to  the  more  compact  &  populous  States,  but  was  totally  inad 
missible  to  the  Southern  States. 

Mr.  Wilson  proposed  that  returns  of  the  quantity  of  land  &  of 
the  number  of  inhabitants  in  the  respective  States  sd  be  obtained, 
and  a  rule  deducted  from  the  combination  of  these  data.  This 
also  would  have  affected  the  States  in  a  similar  manner  with  the 
proposition  of  Mr.  Hamilton.  On  the  part  of  the  S.  States  it  was 
observed  that  besides  its  being  at  variance  with  the  text  of  the 
Confederation  it  would  work  great  injustice,  as  would  every  mode 
which  admitted  the  quantity  of  lands  within  the  States,  into  the 
measure  of  their  comparative  wealth  and  abilities. 

Lastly  it  was  proposed  by  Mr.  Madison,  that  a  valuation  shd 
be  attempted  by  Congress  without  the  intervention  of  the  States. 
He  observed  that  as  the  expense  attending  the  operation  would 
come  ultimately  from  the  same  pockets,  it  was  not  very  material 


1783]  JAMES  MADISON.  315 

whether  it  was  borne  in  the  first  instance  by  Congress  or  the 
States,  and  it  at  least  deserved  consideration  whether  this  mode 
was  not  preferable  to  y?  proposed  reference  to  the  States. 

The  conversation  ended  in  the  app*  of  a  sub-committee  con 
sisting  of  Mr.  Madison,  Mr.  Carol  &  Mr.  Wilson  who  were  desired 
to  consider  the  several  modes  proposed,  to  confer  with  the  Super 
intend-  of  Finance,  &  make  such  report  to  the  G?  Com?  as  they 
shd  judge  fit. 

WEDNESDAY,  JAN?   15 

A  letter  dated  the  19*  of  December  from  Gen!  Greene  was 
rec?  notifying  the  evacuation  of  Charleston.  It  was  in  the  first 
place  referred  to  the  Sec?"  of  Cong?  for  publication  ;  excepting 
the  passage  which  recited  the  exchange  of  prisoners,  which  being 
contrary  to  the  Resolution  of  the  16  of  Oc*  ags.1  partial  exchanges, 
was  deemed  improper  for  publication.  It  was  in  the  next  place 
referred  to  a  come,  in  order  that  some  complimentary  report 
might  be  made  in  favor  of  Gen?  Greene  &  the  South"  army. 
Docf  Ramsay  hav?  come  in  after  this  reference  and  being  unin 
formed  of  it,  moved  that  a  committee  might  be  appointed  to 
devise  a  proper  mode  of  expressing  to  Gen!  Greene  the  high 
sense  entertained  by  Congress  of  his  merits  &  services.  In  sup 
port  of  his  motion  he  went  into  lavish  praises  of  G!  Greene,  and 
threw  out  the  idea  of  making  him  a  Lieuten*  General.  His 
motion  being  opposed  as  somewhat  singular  and  unnecessary 
after  the  reference  of  Gen!  Greene's  letter,  he  withdrew  it. 

A  letter  was  re?  from  Gen!  Washington  inclosing  a  certificate 
from  Mr.  Chittenden  of  Vermont  acknowledging  the  receipt  of 
the  communication  which  G!  Washington  had  sent  him  of  the 
proceedings  of  Congress  on  the  [fifth]  of  [December.]1 

1  On  that  day  Congress  resolved,  that,  whereas  the  people  inhabiting  the 
west  side  of  the  Connecticut  River  commonly  known  as  the  New  Hampshire 
Grants  had  undertaken  to  exercise  jurisdiction  over  certain  persons  who  pro 
fessed  to  be  citizens  of  New  York,  such  proceedings  were  highly  derogatory  to 
the  authority  of  the  United  States  and  dangerous  to  the  confederacy.  It  was 
ordered  that  restitution  be  made  and  that  a  copy  of  the  resolutions  be  sent  to 
Thomas  Chittenden,  Esq.,  of  Bennington,  to  be  communicated  to  the  people. 
—Journals  of  Congress,  iv. ,  112. 


316  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1783 

THURSDAY  JAN?   1 6 

Mr.  Rutledge  informed  Congress  that  there  was  reason  to  ap 
prehend  that  the  train  of  negotiation  in  Europe  had  been  so 
misrepresented  in  the  State  of  S.  Carolina  as  to  make  it  probable 
that  an  attempt  might  be  made  in  the  Legislature  to  repeal  the 
confiscation  laws  of  that  State,  &  even  if  such  attempt  shd  fail,  the 
misrepresentations  cd  not  fail  to  injure  the  sale  of  property  con 
fiscated  in  that  State.  In  order  therefore  to  frustrate  these 
misrepresentations  he  moved  that  the  Delegates  of  S.  Carolina 
might  be  furnished  with  an  extract  from  the  letter  of  the  14*  of 
Oc*  from  Docf  Franklin,  so  far  as  it  informed  Congress  "  that 
something  had  been  mentioned  to  the  American  Plenipotentiaries 
relative  to  the  Refugees  &  to  English  debts,  but  not  insisted  on  ; 
it  being  answered  on  their  part  that  this  was  a  matter  belonging  to 
the  individual  States  and  on  which  Congress  cd  enter  into  no 
stipulations."  The  motion  was  2d?d  by  Mr.  Jarvais,  &  supported 
by  Mr.  Ramsay.  It  was  opposed  by  Mr.  Ellsworth  &  Mr.  Wol- 
cott  as  improper,  since  a  communication  of  this  intelligence 
might  encourage  the  States  to  extend  confiscations  to  British 
debts,  a  circumstance  which  wd  be  dishonorable  to  the  U.  S.,  & 
might  embarrass  a  treaty  of  peace.  Mr.  Fitzsimmons  expressed 
the  same  apprehensions,  so  did  Mr.  Ghoram.  His  Colleague 
Mr.  Osgood  was  in  fav'  of  the  motion.  By  Mr.  Madison  the 
motion  was  so  enlarged  and  varied  as  "  to  leave  all  the  delegates 
at  liberty  to  communicate  the  extract  to  their  consten.ts  in  such 
form  &  under  such  cautions  as  they  shd  judge  prudent."  The 
Motion  so  varied  was  adopted  by  Mr.  Rutledge,  &  substituted  in 
place  of  the  original  one.  It  was  however  still  opposed  by  the 
Opponents  of  the  original  motion.  Mr.  Madison  observed  that 
as  all  the  States  had  espoused  in  some  degree  the  doctrine 
of  confiscations,  &  as  some  of  them  had  given  instructions 
to  their  delegates  on  the  subject,  it  was  the  duty  of  Congress 
without  inquiring  into  the  expediency  of  Confiscations,  to  prevent 
as  far  as  they  cd  any  measures  which  might  impede  that  objec 
in  negotiations  for  peace,  by  inducing  an  opinion  that  the  U. 
were  not  firm  with  respect  to  it ;  that  in  this  view  it  was  of  con 
sequence  to  prevent  the  repeal  &  even  the  attempt  of  a  repeal 


1783]  JAMES  MADISON.  317 


the  confiscation  law  of  one  of  the  States  and  that  if  a  confidential 
communication  of  the  extract  in  question  would  answer  such  a 
purpose,  it  was  improper  for  Congress  to  oppose  it.  On  a  question 
the  motion  was  negatived,  Congress  being  much  divided  thereon. 
Several  of  those  who  were  in  the  negative,  were  willing  that  the 
Delegates  of  S.  Carolina  sh?  be  licensed  to  transmit  to  their 
State  what  related  to  the  Refugees,  omitting  what  related  to 
British  debts  and  invited  Mr.  Rutledge  to  renew  his  motion 
in  that  qualified  form.  Others  suggested  the  propriety  of  his 
contradicting  the  misrepresentations  in  general  without  referring 
to  any  official  information  rec?  by  Congress.  Mr.  R.  said  he  w? 
think  further  on  the  subject,  and  desired  that  it  might  lie  over. 


FRIDAY  JAN?   I  7TH. 

The  Com11.6  on  the  motion  of  Mr.  Peters  of  the  [thirteenth]  day 
of  [January]  relative  to  a  further  application  for  foreign  loans,  re 
ported  that  they  had  conferred  with  the  Superintend'  of  Finance, 
&  concurred  in  opinion  with  him,  that  the  applications  already  on 
foot  were  as  great  as  could  be  made  prudently,  until  proper  funds 
should  be  established.  The  latent  view  of  this  report  was  to 
strengthen  the  arg*  in  fav'  of  such  funds,  and  the  report  it  was 
agreed  should  lie  on  the  table  to  be  considered  along  with  the  re 
port  which  might  be  made  on  the  memorial  from  the  army,  &  which 
w?  involve  the  same  subject. 

The  report  thanking  Gen!  Greene  for  his  services  was  agreed  to 
without  opposition  or  observation.  Several  however  thought  it 
badly  composed,  and  that  some  notice  ought  to  have  been  taken 
of  Maj'  Burnet  Aid  to  G!  G.,  who  was  the  bearer  of  the  letter  an 
nouncing  the  evacuation  of  Charleston. 

Mr.  Webster  &  Mr.  Judd  agents  for  the  deranged  officers  of  the 
Massachusetts  &  Con*  lines  were  heard  by  the  G?  Committee  in 
fav'  of  their  Constituents.  The  sum  of  their  representations  was 
that  the  s?  officers  were  equally  distressed  for,  entitled  to,  &  in 
expectation  of  provision  for  fulfilling  the  rewards  stipulated  to 
them,  as  officers  retained  in  service. 


3i8  THE   WRITINGS  OF  [1783 

FROM  FRIDAY    17  TO  TUESDAY  2  I  ST. 

See  Journals. 

A  letter  from  Mr.  Adams,  of  the  8*  day  of  October  1782  con 
taining  prophetic  observations  relative  to  the  expedition  of  L? 
Howe  for  the  relief  of  Gibraltar  &  its  consequences  &c  &c., 
excited  &c  &c 

Another  letter  from  d°,  relative  to  y?  Treaty  of  Amity  &  Com 
merce  &  y?  Convention  with  the  States  Gen!  concerning  vessels  re 
captured,  copies  of  which  accompanied  the  letters.  These  papers 
were  committed  to  Mr.  Madison  Mr.  Hamilton  &  Mr.  Ellsworth. 

Wednesday  January  22  Congress  adjourned  to  give  the  Com? 
on  the  Treaty  &  Convention  time  to  prepare  a  report  thereon. 


THURSDAY  JANUARY  23 

The  Report  of  the  Com?  last  mentioned  consisting  of  a  state  of 
the  variations  in  the  Treaty  of  Amity  &  Commerce  with  the  States 
General  from  the  plan  proposed  by  Congress,  of  a  form  of  ratifi 
cation  of  the  s?  Treaty  &  of  the  Convention,  &  of  a  proclamation 
comprehending  both  was  accepted  &  passed  ;  the  variations  ex- 
cepted  wc.h  were  not  meant  to  be  entered  on  the  journals.  Both 
the  Committee  &  Congress  were  exceedingly  chagrined  at  the  ex 
treme  incorrectness  of  the  American  copies  of  these  national  acts, 
and  it  was  privately  talked  of  as  necessary  to  admonish  Mr. 
Adams  thereof,  &  direct  him  to  procure  with  the  concurrence  of 
the  other  party  a  more  correct  &  perspicuous  copy.  The  Report 
of  the  Com?  as  agreed  to  hav?  left  a  blank  in  the  act  of  ratification 
for  the  insertion  of  the  Treaty  &  Convention,  &  these  being  con 
tained  both  in  the  Dutch  &  American  languages  the  former  column 
signed  by  the  Dutch  Plenipo*  only  &  the  latter  by  Mr.  Adams 
only,  the  Sec?"  asked  the  direction  of  Congress  whether  both  col 
umns  or  the  American  only  ought  to  be  inserted.  On  this  point 
several  observations  were  made  &  different  opinions  expressed. 
In  general  the  members  seemed  to  disapprove  of  y?  mode  used  &  w? 
h?  preferred  y?  use  of  a  neutral  language.  As  to  the  request  of  the 
Sec^,  Mr.  Wilson  was  of  opinion  that  the  American  columns  only 
s?  be  inserted.  Several  others  concurred  in  this  opinion  ;  supposing 


1 783]  JAMES  MADISON.  3 1 9 

that  as  Mr.  Adams  had  only  signed  those  columns,  our  ratifi 
cations  ought  to  be  limited  to  them.  Those  who  were  of  a  differ 
ent  opinion,  considered  the  two  parts  as  inseparable  &  as  forming 
one  whole,  &  consequently  that  both  ought  to  be  inserted.  The  case 
being  a  new  one  to  Congress,  it  was  proposed  &  admitted  that  the 
insertion  might  be  suspended  till  the  next  day,  by  which  time 
some  authorities  might  be  consulted  on  the  subject. 

A  com6,  consisting  of  Mr.  Madison,  Mr.  Mifflin  &  Mr.  William 
son  reported  in  consequence  of  a  motion  of  Mr.  Bland,  a  list  of 
books  proper  for  the  use  of  Congress,  and  proposed  that  the  Sec?' 
should  be  instructed  to  procure  the  same.  In  favr  of  the  Rep-  it 
was  urged  as  indispensable  that  Congress  shd  have  at  all  times  at 
comand  such  authors  on  the  law  of  Nations,  treaties,  Negotiations 
&c  as  wd  render  their  proceedings  in  such  cases  conformable  to 
propriety  ;  and  it  was  observed  that  the  want  of  this  information 
was  manifest  in  several  important  acts  of  Congress.  It  was  fur 
ther  observed  that  no  time  ought  to  be  lost  in  collecting  every 
book  &  tract  which  related  to  American  antiquities  &  the  affairs 
of  the  U.  S.,  since  many  of  the  most  valuable  of  these  were 
every  day  becoming  extinct,  &  they  were  necessary  not  only 
as  materials  for  a  Hist :  of  the  U.  S.,  but  might  be  rendered  still 
more  so  by  future  pretensions  ags.1  their  rights  from  Spain  or  other 
powers  which  had  shared  in  the  discoveries  &  possessions  of  the 
New  World.  Ag5^  the  Report  were  urged  i5?  the  inconvenience 
of  advancing  even  a  few  hundred  pounds  at  this  crisis  ;  2d!y,  the 
difference  of  expence  between  procuring  the  books  during  the 
war  &  after  a  peace.  These  objections  prevailed,  by  a  consider 
able  majority.  A  motion  was  then  made  by  Mr.  Wilson,  2d6d  by 
Mr.  Madison,  to  confine  the  purchase  for  the  present  to  the  most 
essential  part  of  the  books.  This  also  was  negatived. 


FRIDAY    JANX 

Some  days  prior  to  this  sundry  papers  had  been  laid  before 
Congress  by  the  War  office,  shewing  that  a  Cargo  of  supplies 
which  had  arrived  at  Wilmington  for  the  British  &  German  Pris 
oners  of  War  under  a  passport  from  the  Comander  in  chief  and 
which  were  thence  proceeding  by  land  to  their  destination,  had 


320  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1783 

been  seized  by  sundry  persons  in  Chester  County  under  a  law  of 
Penns*,  which  required  in  such  cases  a  license  from  the  Executive 
authority,  which  exposed  to  confiscation  all  Articles  not  necessary 
for  the  prisoners,  &  refer?  the  question  of  necessity  to  the  judg 
ment  of  its  own  Magistrates.  Congress  unanimously  considered 
the  violation  of  the  passport  issued  under  yf  Authority  as  an 
encroachment  on  their  constitutional  &  essential  rights  ;  but  be 
ing  disposed  to  get  over  the  difficulty  as  gently  as  possible  ap 
pointed  a  Com?,  consisting  of  Mr.  Rutledge,  Mr.  Wolcot  &  Mr. 
Madison,  to  confer  with  the  Executive  of  P?  on  the  subject.  In 
the  first  conference  the  Executive  represented  to  the  Committee 
the  concern  they  felt  at  the  incident,  their  disposition  to  respect 
&  support  the  dignity  &  rights  of  the  federal  Sovereignty  ;  and 
the  embarrassments  in  which  they  were  involved  by  a  recent  & 
express  law  of  the  State  to  which  they  were  bound  to  conform. 
The  Com?  observed  to  them  that  the  power  of  granting  passports 
for  the  purpose  in  question  being  inseparable  from  the  general 
power  of  war  delegated,  to  Congress,  &  being  essential  for  con 
ducting  the  war,  it  could  not  be  expected  that  Congress  w?  acqui 
esce  in  any  infractions  upon  it  ;  that  as  P?  had  concurred  in  the 
alienation  of  this  power  to  Congress,  any  law  whatever  contra 
vening  it  was  necessarily  void,  and  c?  impose  no  obligation  on 
the  Executive.  The  latter  requested  further  time  for  a  consider 
ation  of  the  case  &  laid  it  before  the  Legislature  then  sitting  ;  in 
consequence  of  which  a  Com?  of  their  body  was  app?,  jointly  with 
the  Executive  to  confer  with  the  Committe  of  Congress.  In  this 
2?  conference  the  first  remarks  made  by  the  Com?  of  Congress 
were  repeated.  The  Com?  of  the  Legislature  expressed  an  un 
willingness  to  entrench  on  the  jurisdiction  of  Congress,  but  some 
of  them  seemed  not  to  be  fully  satisfied  that  the  law  of  the  State 
did  so.  Mr.  Montgomery  lately  a  member  of  Congress  observed 
that  altho'  the  general  power  of  war  was  given  to  Congress  yet 
that  the  mode  of  exercising  that  power  might  be  regulated  by  the 
States  in  any  manner  which  w?  not  frustrate  the  power,  &  which 
their  policy  might  require.  To  this  it  was  answered  that  if  Con 
gress  had  the  power  at  all,  it  could  not  either  by  the  Articles  of 
Confederation  or  the  reason  of  things  admit  of  such  a  controul- 
ing  power  in  each  of  the  States,  &  that  to  admit  such  a  construction 


1783]  JAMES  MADISON.  321 

wd  be  a  virtual  surrender  to  the  States  of  their  whole  federal 
power  relative  to  war,  the  most  essential  of  all  the  powers  dele 
gated  to  Congress.  The  Com?  of  the  Legisr.e  represented  as  the 
great  difficulty  with  them,  that  even  a  repeal  of  the  law  wd  not 
remedy  the  case  without  a  retrospective  law  which  their  Constitu 
tion  w?  not  admit  of,  &  expressed  an  earnest  desire  that  some 
accommodating  plan  might  be  hit  upon.  They  proposed  in  order 
to  induce  the  Seizors  to  waive  their  appeal  to  the  law  of  the 
State,  that  Congress  w.d  allow  them  to  app*  one  of  two  persons 
who  sd  have  authority  to  examine  into  the  supplies  &  decide 
whether  they  comprehended  any  articles  that  were  not  warranted 
by  the  passport.  The  Com?  of  Congress  answered  that  whatever 
obstacles  might  lie  in  the  way  of  redress  by  the  Legislature  if  no 
redress  proceeded  from  them,  equal  difficulties  w?  lie  on  the  other 
side,  since  Congress  in  case  of  a  confiscation  of  the  supplies 
under  the  law  which  the  omission  of  some  formalities  reqd  by  it 
wd  probably  produce,  would  be  obliged  by  honor  &  good  faith  to 
indemnify  the  Enemy  for  their  loss  out  of  the  common  treasury  ; 
that  the  other  States  wd  probably  demand  a  reimbursement  to  the 
U.  S.  from  Pf,  &  that  it  was  impossible  to  say  to  what  extremity 
the  affair  might  be  carried.  They  observed  to  the  Com?  of  the 
Legr-e  and  the  Executive,  that  altho'  Congress  was  disposed  to 
make  all  allowances,  and  particularly  in  the  case  of  a  law  passed 
for  a  purpose  recofhended  by  themselves,  yet  they  cd  not  conde 
scend  to  any  expedient  which  in  any  manner  departed  from  the 
respect  w^  they  owed  to  themselves  &  to  the  Articles  of  Union. 
The  Com?  of  Congress  however  suggested  that  as  the  only  expe 
dient  wc?  wd  get  rid  of  the  clashing  of  the  Power  of  Congress  & 
the  law  of  the  State,  wd  be  the  dissuading  the  Seizors  from  their 
appeal  to  the  latter,  it  was  probable  that  if  the  Seizors  wd  apply 
to  Congress  for  Redress  such  steps  wd  be  taken  as  wd  be  satisfac 
tory.  The  hint  was  embraced  &  both  the  Executive  &  the 
Com?  of  the  Legr.e  promised  to  use  their  influence  with  the  per 
sons  of  most  influence  among  the  Seizors  for  that  purpose.  In 
consequence  thereof  a  memorial  from  *  [see  Journal]  was  sent  in 

1  John  Ilannum,  Persifor  Frazer,  and  Joseph  Gardner. — Joiirnals  of  Con 
gress,  iv.,  151. 

VOL.   I.  — 21. 


322  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1783 

to  Congress,  comited  to  the  same  Com?  of  Congress,  &  their  re 
port  of  this  day  agreed  to  in  wc.h  the  Presid-  of  P?  is  requested  to 
app-  one  of  ye  referees.  It  is  proper  to  observe  that  this  business 
was  conducted  with  great  temper  &  harmony,  &  that  Presid* 
Dickinson,  in  particuir,  manifested  throughout  the  course  of  it  as 
great  a  desire  to  save  the  rights  &  dignity  of  Congress  as  those  of 
the  State  over  which  he  presided.  As  a  few  of  the  Seizors  only 
were  parties  to  ye  Memorial  to  Congress,  it  is  still  uncertain 
whe*  others  may  not  adhere  to  their  claims  under  the  law  in 
wc.h  case  all  the  embarrassments  will  be  revived. 

In  a  late  report  which  had  been  drawn  up  by  Mr.  Hamilton, 
and  made  to  Congress,  in  answr  to  a  Memorial  from  the  Legisla 
ture  of  P-a,  among  other  things  shewing  the  impossibility  Congress 
had  been  under  of  pay?  their  Creditors  it  was  observed  that  the 
aid  afforded  by  the  C  of  France  had  been  appropriated  by  that 
Court  at  the  time  to  the  immediate  use  of  the  army.  This  clause 
was  objected  to  as  unnecessary,  &  as  dishonorable  to  Congress. 
The  fact  also  was  controverted.  Mr.  Hamilton  &  Mr.  Fitz- 
simmons  justified  the  expediency  of  retain?  it,  in  order  to  justify 
Congress  the  more  completely  in  failing  in  their  engagements  to 
the  public  Creditors.  Mr.  Wilson  &  Mr.  Madison  proposed  to 
strike  out  the  words  appropriated  by  France,  &  substitute  the 
words  applied  by  Congress  to  the  immediate  &  necessary  support 
of  the  army.  This  proposition  w?  have  been  readily  approved 
had  it  not  appeared  on  examination  that  in  one  or  two  small  in 
stances,  &  particularly  in  the  paym*  of  the  balance  due  to  A. 
Lee,  Esq',  other  applications  had  been  made  of  the  aid  in  ques 
tion.  The  Report  was  finally  recommitted. 

A  letter  from  the  Super*  of  Finance  was  received  &  read,  ac 
quainting  Congress  that  as  the  danger  from  the  Enemy  which  led 
him  into  the  Dep-,  was  disappearing  &  that  he  saw  little  prospect 
of  provision  being  made  without  which  injustice  w?  take  place  of 
which  he  wo?  never  be  the  Minister,  he  proposed  not  to  serve 
longer  than  may  next,  unless  proper  provision  s?  be  made.  This 
letter  made  a  deep  &  solemn  impression  on  Congress.  It  was  con 
sidered  as  the  effect  of  despondence  in  Mr.  Morris  of  seeing  jus 
tice  done  to  the  public  Credr.s,  or  the  public  finances  placed  on  an 
honorable  establish* ;  as  a  source  of  fresh  hopes  to  the  enemy 


1783]  JAMES  MADISON.  323 

when  known  ;  as  ruinous  both  to  Domestic  &  foreign  Credit  ;  & 
as  producing  a  vacancy  which  none  knew  how  to  fill,  &  which  no 
fit  man  w?  venture  to  accept.  Mr.  Ghoram,  after  observing  that 
the  Administration  of  Mr.  Morris  had  inspired  great  confidence 
and  expectation  in  his  State,  &  expressing  his  extreme  regret  at  the 
event,  moved  that  the  letters?  be  comited.  This  was  opposed  as 
unnecessary  &  nugatory  by  Mr.  Wilson,  since  the  known  firmness 
of  Mr.  Morris,  after  deliberately  taking  a  step  w?  render  all  at 
tempts  to  dissuade  him  fruitless  ;  and  that  as  the  Memorial  from 
the  Army  had  brought  the  subject  of  funds  before  Congress,  there 
was  no  other  object  for  a  Com?  The  motion  to  commit  was  dis- 
ag?  to.  Mr.  Wilson  then  moved  that  a  day  might  be  assigned  for 
the  consideration  of  the  letter.  Ags.1  the  propriety  of  this  was  ob 
served,  by  Mr.  Madison,  that  the  same  reasons  which  opposed  a 
comitmt  opposed  y?  assignment  of  any  day.  Since  Congress  c? 
not  however  anxious  their  wishes  or  alarming  their  apprehensions 
might  be,  condescend  to  solicit  Mr.  Morris,  even  if  there  were  a 
chance  of  its  being  successful  ;  &  since  it  w?  be  equally  improper 
for  Congress  however  cogent  a  motive  it  might  add  in  yf  mind  of 
every  member  to  struggle  for  substantial  funds,  to  let  such  a  con 
sideration  appear  in  their  public  acts  on  that  subject.  The  motion 
of  Mr.  Wilson  was  not  passed.  Congress  supposing  that  a  know 
ledge  of  Mr.  Morris's  intentions  w?  anticipate  the  ills  likely 
to  attend  his  actual  resignation,  ordered  his  letter  to  be  kept 
secret. 

Nothing  being  said  to  day  as  to  the  mode  of  insertion  of  the 
Treaty  &  Convention  with  the  States  General  the  Sec?'  proceeded 
in  retaining  both  Columns.1 

In  consequence  of  the  report  to  the  Grand  Com?  on  the  me 
morial  from  the  army,  by  the  sub-corn6,  the  following  report  was 
made  by  the  former  to  Cong?,  and  came  under  consideration 
to-day. 

*  The  Grand  Come  having  considered  the  contents  of  the  Mem! 
presented  by  the  army,  find  that  they  comprehend  five  different 
articles. 

1  See  Madison's  letter  of  Jan.  28,  to  Edmund  Randolph,  p.  33  n. 

*  Drawn  by  Col.  Hamilton.     [Note  in  MS.] 


324  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1783 

1.  present  pay. 

2.  A  settlement  of  ace1?  of  the  arrearages  of  pay  and  security 
for  what  is  due. 

3.  A  commutation  of  the  half  pay  allowed  by  differ!  resolutions 
of  Congress  for  an  equivalent  in  gross. 

4.  A  settlem!  of  the  accl.s  of  deficiencies  of  rations  and  compen 
sation. 

5.  A  settlement  of  accounts  of  deficiencies  of  cloathing  &  com 
pensation. 

The  Com?  are  of  opinion  with  resp!  to  the  Is.*,  that  the  Superin 
tend*  of  finance  be  directed,  conformably  to  measures  already 
taken  for  that  purpose,  as  soon  as  the  State  of  the  public  finances 
will  permit,  to  make  such  pay!  &  in  such  manner  as  he  shall  think 
proper  till  the  further  order  of  Congress. 

With  respect  to  the  2?  Art.,  so  far  as  relates  to  the  settlement  of 
ace1-5,  that  the  several  States  be  called  upon  to  compleate  the  set- 
tlem!,  without  delay,  with  their  respective  lines  of  the  army  up  to 

the day  of  Aug  ;  1780  ;  that  the  Sup!  be  also  directed  to 

take  such  measures  as  shall  appear  to  him  most  proper  &  effectual 
for  accomplishing  the  object  in  the  most  equitable  &  satisfactory 
manner,  hav?  regard  to  former  resolutions  of  Cong5,  &  to  the  set 
tle13  made  in  consequence  thereof. — And  so  far  as  relates  to  the 
providing  of  security  for  what  shall  be  found  due  on  such  settlem!  : 
Resolved  that  the  troops  of  the  United  States  in  common  with  all 
the  Credit1".3  of  the  same,  have  an  undoubted  right  to  expect  such 
security — and  that  Congress  will  make  every  effort  in  their  power 
to  obtain  from  the  respective  States  general  &  substantial  funds 
adequate  to  the  object  of  funding  the  whole  debt  of  the  U.  S.  ; 
and  that  Cong3  ought  to  enter  upon  an  immediate  &  full  consid 
eration  of  the  nature  of  such  funds  &  the  most  likely  mode  of 
obtaining  them. 

With  respect  to  the  3?  Article,  the  Comm?  are  of  opinion  that  it 
will  be  expedient  for  Cong?  to  leave  it  to  the  option  of  all  officers 
entitled  to  half  pay,  either  to  preserve  their  claim  to  that  provision 
as  it  now  stands  by  the  several  resolutions  of  Cong3  upon  that  sub 
ject  or  to  accept years  full  pay  to  be  paid  to  them  in  one  year 

after  the  conclusion  of  the  war  in  money  or  placed  upon  good 
funded  security  bearing  an  annual  interest  of  6  P'  C,  provided 


1783]  JAMES  MADISON.  325 

that  the  allowance  to  widows  &  orphans  of  such  officers  as  have 
died  or  been  killed  or  may  die  or  be  killed  in  the  service  during 

the  war  shall  remain  as  established  by  the  resolution  of  the 

day  of . 

With  respect  to  the  4  &  5  Arts,  the  Com?  beg  leave  to  delay 
their  report  untill  they  have  obtained  more  precise  information  than 
they  now  possess  on  the  subject. 

The  i5.1  Clause  of  this  report  relative  to  immediate  pay  passed 
without  opposition.  The  Sup*  had  agreed  to  make  out  i  Month's 
pay.  Indeed,  long  before  the  arrival  of  the  deputies  from  the 
army  he  had  made  contingent  &  secret  provision  for  that  purpose  ; 
and  to  ensure  it  now  he  meant  if  necessary  to  draw  bills  on  the 
late  application  for  loans.  The  words  "  conformably  to  measures 
already  taken,"  referred  to  the  above  secret  provision  and  were 
meant  to  shew  that  the  payment  to  the  army  did  not  originate  in 
the  Memo',  but  in  an  antecedent  attention  to  the  wants  of  the 
army. 

In  the  discussion  of  the  2d.  clause,  the  epoch  of  Aug  -1780  was 
objected  to  by  the  Eastern  delegates.  Their  States  hav?  settled 
with  their  lines  down  to  later  periods,  they  wished  now  to  obtain 
the  sanction  of  Congress  to  them.  After  some  debate,  a  compro 
mise  was  proposed  by  Mr.  Hamilton  by  substituting  the  last  day 
of  Dec'  1780.  This  was  agreed  to  without  opposition  altho'  sev 
eral  members  disliked  it.  The  latter  part  of  the  clause  beginning 
with  the  word  Resolved,  &c.  was  considered  as  a  very  solemn 
point,  and  the  basis  of  the  plans  by  which  the  public  engagements 
were  to  be  fulfilled  &  the  Union  cemented.  A  motion  was  made 
by  Mr.  Bland  to  insert  after  the  words  "  in  their  power,"  the 
words  "  consistent  with  the  Articles  of  Confederation."  This 
amendment  as  he  explained  it  was  not  intended  to  contravene  the 
idea  of  funds  extraneous  to  y?  federal  articles,  but  to  leave  those 
funds  for  a  consideration  subsequent  to  providing  constitutional 
ones.  Mr.  Arnold  however  eagerly  2de.d  it.  No  question  however 
was  taken  on  it,  Congress  deeming  it  proper  to  postpone  the  mat 
ter  till  the  next  day,  as  of  the  most  solemn  nature  ;  and  to  have  as 
full  a  representation  as  possible.  With  this  view  &  to  get  rid  of 
Mr.  Eland's  motion  they  adjourned,  &  ordering  all  the  members 
not  present  &  in  town  to  be  summoned. 


326  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1783 


SATURDAY,  JANT  25 

The  Sec?'  of  Congress  hav?  suggested  to  a  member  that  the 
Contract  with  the  C-  of  France  specifying  sums  Due  from  the  U. 
S.,  altho'  extremely  generous  on  the  part  of  the  former  had  been 
ratified  without  any  such  acknowledgm1.5  by  the  latter,  that  this 
was  the  first  instance  in  which  such  acknowledging  had  been 
omitted,  &  that  the  omission  w?  be  singularly  improper  at  a  time 
when  we  were  Soliciting  further  aids  ;  the[se]  observations  being 
made  to  Congress,  the  ratification  [was]  reconsidered,  and  the 
words  "  impressed  with,"  &c.,  inserted. 

The  rep*  on  the  memorial  was  resumed.  By  Mr.  Hamilton  Mr. 
Fitzsimmons  &  one  or  two  others  who  had  conversed  with  Mr. 

Morris  on  the  change  of  the  last  day  of  Dec'  for  the day 

of  Aug5.1,  it  was  suggested  that  the  change  entirely  contravened  the 
measures  pursued  by  his  Department ;  and  moved  for  a  reconsid 
eration  of  it  in  order  to  inquire  into  the  subject.  Without  going 
into  Details  they  urged  this  a  reason  sufficient.  The  Eastern 
Delegates,  altho'  they  wished  for  unanimity  &  system  in  future 
proceedings  relative  to  our  funds  &  finances  were  very  stiff  in  re 
taining  the  vote  w0?1  coincided  with  the  steps  taken  by  their  Con 
stituents,  of  this  much  complaint  was  made.  Mr.  Rutledge  on 
this  occasion,  alledging  that  Congress  ought  not  to  be  led  by  gen 
eral  suggestions  derived  from  the  office  of  finance,  joined  by  Mr. 
Gervais,  voted  ags.1  the  reconsideration.  The  consequence  was,  y* 
S.  Carol?  was  divided,  &  six  votes  only  in  fav^  of  the  Reconsider 
ation.  Mr.  Hamilton  hav?  expressed  his  regret  at  the  negative  & 
explained  more  exactly  the  interference  of  the  change  of  the 
Epoch  with  the  measures  &  plans  of  the  Office  of  Finance,  wc.h 
had  limited  all  State  advances  &  settlem1.5  to  Aug  :  1780,  Mr.  Rut- 
ledge  acknowledged  the  sufficiency  of  the  reasons  &  at  his  in 
stance  the  latter  date  was  reinstated.  On  this  2?  question  Con' 
also  voted  for  Aug*V 

1  The day  of  August  being  reinstated  before  a  question  on  the  whole 

paragraph  was  taken,  Mr.  Ghoram  objected  to  the  word  "  general  "  before 
funds  as  ambiguous,  and  it  was  struck  out ;  not  however  as  improper  if  referring 
to  all  the  States,  &  not  to  all  objects  of  taxation.  Without  this  word  the  clause 
passed  unanimously,  even  Rhode  Island  concurring  in  it.  [Note  in  MS.] 


1783]  JAMES  MADISON.  327 

Congress  proceeded  to  the  3"d  Clause  relative  to  the  commuta 
tion  of  half  pay.  A  motion  was  made  by  Mr.  Hamilton,  to  fill 
the  blank  with  "  six  "  this  was  in  conformity  to  tables  of  Dr. 
Price,  estimating  the  officers  on  the  average  of  good  lives.  Lib 
erality  in  the  rate  was  urged  by  several  as  necessary  to  give  satis 
faction  &  prevent  a  refusal  of  the  offer.  For  this  motion  there 
were  6  ayes  5  noes  ;  the  Southern  States  &  New  York  being  in 
the  affirmative  the  Eastern  &  N.  J.  in  the  negative.  Col.  Bland 
proposed  6J  erroneously  supposing  the  negative  of  6  to  have  pro 
ceeded  from  its  being  too  low.  It  was  on  the  contrary  rather 
doubtful  whether  the  East  States  w?  concur  in  any  arrangem-  on 
this  head  ;  so  averse  were  they  to  what  they  call  pensions.  Sev 
eral  having  calculated  that  the  annual  amount  of  half-pay  was 
between  4  &  500,000  D"  and  the  interest  of  the  gross  sum  funded 
at  the  rate  of  6  years,  nearly  f  of  that  sum,  Congress  were 
struck  with  the  necessity  of  proceeding  with  more  caution  &  for 
that  purpose  committed  the  report  to  a  Committee  of  5 — Mr.  Os- 
good,  Mr.  Fitzsimmons,  Mr.  Gervais,  Mr.  Hamilton,  and  Mr. 
Wilson.1 


MONDAY,   27  JAN?    1783. 

A  letter  from  Gen-  Washington  was  rec?  notifying  the  death 
of  Lord  Stirling  &  inclosing  a  report  of  the  Officer  sent  to  ap 
prehend  Knowlton  and  Wells. 

The  following  is  an  extract  from  the  report  :  "  He  (one  Israel 
Smith)  further  s?  that  Knowlton  &  Wells  had  rec?  a  letter  from 
Jonathan  Arnold,  Esq.  at  Congress  part  of  which  was  made  pub 
lic,  which  informed  them  that  affairs  in  Congress  were  unfavor 
able  to  them  &  w?  have  them  to  look  out  for  themselves.  What 
other  information  this  letter  contained  he  c?  not  say.  I  found 
in  my  March  thro'  the  State  that  the  last  mentioned  Gentleman 
was  much  in  favor  with  all  the  principal  men  in  that  State  I  had 
any  conversation  with." 

1  On  the  motion  of  Mr.  Wilson  Monday  next  was  assigned  for  the  considera 
tion  of  the  Resolu  [tion]  on  the  2d  clause  of  the  Report  on  the  Memorial  from 
the  army.  He  observed  that  this  was  necessary  to  prevent  the  resolution]  from 
being  like  many  others, — vox  et preterea  nihil.  [Note  in  MS.] 


328  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1783 

Mr.  Arnold  being  present  at  the  reading  informed  Congress 
that  he  was  surprised  how  such  a  notion  should  have  prevailed 
with  respect  to  him  ;  that  he  had  never  held  any  correspondence 
with  either  Knowlton  or  Wells,  and  requested  that  he  might  be 
furnished  with  y-e  extract  above.  In  this  he  was  indulged  with 
out  opposition.  But  it  was  generally  considered  notwithstanding 
his  denial  of  the  correspondence,  that  he  had  at  least  at  second 
hand,  conveyed  y-  intelligence  to  Vermont. 

A  long  petition  was  read,  signed  as  alledged  by  near  two  thou 
sand  inhabitants  (but  all  in  the  same  handwriting)  of  the  territory 
lately  in  controversy  between  P*  &  V*,  complaining  of  the  griev 
ances  to  which  their  distance  from  public  authority  exposed 
them  &  particularly  of  a  late  law  of  Pen?  interdicting  even  con 
sultations  about  a  new  State  within  its  limits  ;  and  praying  that 
Congress  w?  give  a  sanction  to  their  independence  &  admit  them 
into  the  Union.  The  Petition  lay  on  the  table  without  a  single 
motion  or  remark  relative  to  it. 

The  order  of  the  day  was  called  for,  to  wit  the  Resolution  of 
Saturday  last  in  favor  of  adequate  &  substantial  funds. 

The  subject  was  introduced  by  Mr.  Wilson  with  some  judicious 
remarks  on  its  importance  &  the  necessity  of  a  thorough  & 
serious  discussion  of  it.  He  observed  that  the  U.  States  had  in 
the  course  of  the  revolution  displayed  both  an  unexampled  activity 
in  resisting  the  enemy,  and  an  unexampled  patience  under  the 
losses  &  calamities  occasioned  by  the  war.  In  one  point  only  he 
said  they  had  appeared  to  be  deficient  &  that  was  a  cheerful 
payment  of  taxes.  In  other  free  Gov'.5  it  had  been  seen  that 
taxation  had  been  carried  further  &  more  patiently  borne  than 
in  States  where  the  people  were  excluded  from  the  Gov'5.  The 
people  considering  themselves  as  the  sovereign  as  well  as  the 
subject  ;  &  as  receiving  with  one  hand  what  they  paid  with  the 
other.  The  peculiar  repugnance  of  the  people  of  the  U.  S.  to 
taxes  he  supposed  proceeded  first  from  the  odious  light  in  which 
they  have  been  under  the  old  Gov*,  in  the  habit  of  regarding 
them  ;  2d!y,  from  the  direct  manner  in  wc-h  taxes  in  this  country 
had  been  laid  ;  whereas  in  all  other  countries  taxes  were  paid  in 
a  way  that  was  little  felt  at  the  time.  That  it  could  not  proceed 
altogether  from  inability  he  said  must  be  obvious  :  Nay  that  the 


1783]  JAMES  MADISON.  329 

ability  of  the  U.  S.  was  equal  to  the  public  burden  might  be  de 
monstrated.  According  to  calculations  of  the  best  writers  the  in 
habitants  of  G.  B.  paid  before  the  present  war  at  the  annual  rate 
of  at  least  2$s  Sterl?  per  head.  According  to  like  calculations 
the  inhabitants  of  the  U.  S.  before  the  revolution  paid  indirectly 
&  insensibly  at  the  rate  of  at  least  los  Sterl?  per  head.  Ac 
cording  to  the  computed  depreciation  of  the  paper  emissions,  the 
burden  insensibly  borne  by  the  inhabitants  of  the  U.  S.  had 
amounted  during  the  first  three  or  four  years  of  the  war  to  not 
less  than  twenty  Millions  of  dollars  per  annum,  a  burden  too 
which  was  the  more  oppressive  as  it  fell  very  unequally  on  the 
people.  An  inability  therefore  could  not  be  urged  as  a  plea  for 
the  extreme  deficiency  of  the  revenue  contributed  by  the  States, 
which  did  not  amount  during  the  past  year,  to  J  a  Million  of  dol 
lars,  that  is  to  -J-  of  a  dollar  per  head.  Some  more  effectual  mode 
of  drawing  forth  the  resources  of  the  Country  was  necessary.  That 
in  particular  it  was  necessary  that  such  funds  should  be  established 
as  would  enable  Congress  to  fulfill  those  engagements  which  they 
had  been  enabled  to  enter  into.  It  was  essential  he  contended 
that  those  to  whom  was  delegated  the  power  of  making  war  & 
peace  should  in  some  way  or  other  have  the  means  of  effectuating 
these  objects  ;  that  as  Congress  had  been  under  the  necessity  of 
contracting  a  large  debt  justice  required  that  such  funds  should 
be  placed  in  their  hands  as  would  discharge  it ;  that  such  funds 
were  also  necessary  for  carrying  on  the  war  ;  and  as  Congress 
found  themselves  in  their  present  situation  destitute  both  of  the 
faculty  of  paying  debts  already  contracted,  and  of  providing 
for  future  exigencies,  it  was  their  duty  to  lay  that  situation 
before  their  constitutents  ;  and  at  least  to  come  to  an  eclairdsse- 
ment  on  the  subject,1  he  remarked  that  the  establish^  of  certain 

1  The  precarious  condition  of  affairs  prompted  Madison  at  this  time  to  make 
the  suggestion  of  starting  a  newspaper  in  Virginia  to  influence  public  opinion. 
The  project  was  not  a  new  one,  however,  for  Jaqueline  Ambler  wrote  to  him 
from  Richmond,  December  29,  1781  : 

"  Oh  Sir  we  want  some  Publications  that  will  rouse  our  citizens.  I  sincerely 
wish  you  could  spare  an  hour  now  and  then  to  this  salutary  Work.  I  will  take 
care,  if  you  will  transmit  the  pieces  to  me,  that  they  shall  be  safely  lodged  with 
the  printer,  and  none  made  acquainted  with  the  writer  but  those  you  may 


330  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1783 

funds  for  pay?  w?  set  afloat  the  public  paper  ;  adding  that  a  public 
debt  resting  on  general  funds  would  operate  as  a  cement  to  the 
confederacy,  and  might  contribute  to  prolong  its  existence,  after 
the  foreign  danger  ceased  to  counteract  its  tendency  to  dissolu 
tion.  He  concluded  with  moving  that  it  be  Resol?. 

"  That  it  is  the  opinion  of  Congress  that  complete  justice 
cannot  be  done  to  the  Creditors  of  the  United  States,  nor  the 
restoration  of  public  credit  be  effected,  nor  the  future  exigencies 
of  the  war  provided  for,  but  by  the  establishment  si  general  funds 
to  be  collected  by  Congress." 

This  motion  was  seconded  by  Mr.  Fitzsimmons.  Mr.  Bland 
desired  that  Congress  w?  before  the  discussion  proceeded  farther 
receive  a  communication  of  sundry  papers  transmitted  to  the  Virg? 

direct. — believe  me  they  will  render  us  most  essential  good  and  especially  on 
the  approach  of  a  new  election." 

Madison  wrote  Edmund  Randolph, — January  28,  1783  : 

"  The  revival  of  committees  would  be  a  ticklish  experiment,  and  I  conceive 
not  admissible  but  in  the  last  necessity.  Would  not  the  circulation  of  a  free 
&  well-informed  gazette  sufficiently  counteract  the  malignant  rumours  wc.h 
require  some  antidote?  The  preparation  &  circulation  of  such  a  paper  w?  be 
a  much  more  easy  &  economical  task,  than  the  services  which  the  other  expe 
dient  would  impose  if  extended  throughout  the  country,  besides  that  it  would 
produce  other  useful  effects  &  be  liable  to  no  objections.  The  state  of  dark 
ness  in  which  the  people  are  left  in  V?  by  the  want  of  a  diffusion  of  intelli 
gence  is  I  find  a  subject  of  complaint. 

"  Yesterday  was  imployed  in  agitating  the  expediency  of  a  proposition  de 
claring  it  to  be  the  '  opinion  of  Congress  that  the  establishment  of  Gen1,  funds 
is  essential  for  doing  complete  justice  to  the  creditors  of  the  U.  S.  for  restoring 
public  credit,  &  for  providing  for  the  exigencies  of  the  war.'  The  subject  was 
brought  on  by  the  memorial  from  the  army.  Such  of  the  Virg?  Delegates  as 
concur  in  this  opinion  are  put  in  a  delicate  situation  by  the  preamble  to  the 
late  repeal  of  the  impost.  Persuaded  as  I  am  however  of  the  truth  of  the  pro 
position,  &  believing  as  I  do  that  with  the  same  knowledge  of  facts  which  my 
station  commands,  my  constituents  would  never  have  passed  that  act,  and  would 
now  rescind  it,  my  assent  will  be  hazarded.  For  many  reasons  which  I  have 
not  time  to  explain  in  cipher  it  is  my  decided  opinion  that  unless  such  funds 
be  established,  the  foundations  of  our  Independence  will  be  laid  in  injustice  & 
dishonor,  and  that  the  advantages  of  the  Revolution  dependent  on  the  fcederal 
compact  will  be  of  short  duration. 

"  We  yesterday  laid  before  Congress  sundry  papers  transmitted  by  the  Gov* 
The  light  in  which  the  protest  of  inability  to  pay  the  annual  registration, 


1783]  JAMES  MADISON.  331 

Delegates  by  the  Executive  of  that  State  ;  two  of  which  had  rela 
tion  to  the  question  before  Congress.  These  were  i5-4,  a  Resolu 
tion  of  the  Gen!  Assembly  declaring  its  inability  to  pay  more  than 
^£50.000  V?  currency  towards  complying  with  the  demands  of 
Congress.  2d!y  the  Act  repealing  the  Act  granting  the  impost  of  5 
Per  C-  These  papers  were  received  and  read. 

Mr.  Wolcot  expressed  some  astonishment  at  the  inconsistency 
of  these  two  acts  of  V? ;  supposed  that  they  had  an  unfavorable 
aspect  on  the  business  before  Congress  ;  &  proposed  that  the 
latter  s?  be  postponed  for  the  present.  He  was  not  seconded. 

Mr.  Ghoram  favored  the  general  idea  of  the  motidn,  animad 
verting  on  the  refusal  of  Virg?  to  contribute  the  necessary  sums  & 

compared  with  the  repeal  of  the  impost  law  placed  Virg?  did  not  you  may  be 
sure  escape  observation. 

"  Penn*  continues  to  be  visited  by  the  consequences  of  her  patronage  of 
Vermont.  A  Petition  from  the  inhabitants  of  territory  lately  in  dispute  be 
tween  her  &  Virg*  was  yesterday  read  in  Cong?  complaining  among  other  griev- 
ences  of  the  interdict  ag?1  even  consultations  on  the  subject  of  a  new  state 
within  the  limits  of  the  former  ;  and  praying  for  the  sanction  of  Congress  to 
their  independence,  &  for  an  admission  into  the  Union. 

"  The  only  despatches  rec?  since  my  last  from  abroad  are  those  from  M* 
Adams  containing  copies  of  the  Treaty  of  amity  &  commerce  with  the  U. 
Provinces  £  a  convention  relative  to  recaptures.  They  are  engrossed  in  two 
columns  one  Dutch  &  the  other  American,  the  former  signed  by  the  Dutch 
Plenipo?  &  the  latter  by  M?  Adams.  The  language  of  the  American  column 
is  obscure  abounding  in  foreign  idioms  &  new  coined  words,  with  bad  grammar 
&  mispellings.  They  have  been  ratified  &  will  as  soon  as  possible  be  pro 
claimed.  It  became  a  question  in  Congress  on  which  intelligent  members  were 
divided  whether  both  columns  or  the  American  only  ought  to  be  inserted  in 
the  act  of  ratification.  The  former  mode  will  be  pursued.  If  y*  Library  or 
your  recollection  can  decide  the  point,  favor  me  with  the  information." — Mad. 
MSB. 

The  preamble  to  the  Virginia  act  of  repeal  of  the  impost  announced  opposi 
tion  to  the  power  of  congress  to  collect  any  general  revenue. 

It  recited — "  Whereas,  the  permitting  any  power,  other  than  the  General 
Assembly  of  this  Commonwealth,  to  levy  duties  or  taxes  upon  the  citizens  of 
this  State  within  the  same,  is  injurious  to  its  sovereignty,  may  prove  destruc 
tive  of  the  rights  and  liberties  of  the  people,  and,  so  far  as  Congress  might 
exercise  the  same,  is  contravening  the  spirit  of  the  confederation  in  the  eighth 
article  thereof:  II  Beit  therefore,"  etc. — Hennings  Stat.,  xi.,  171. 


332  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1783 

at  the  same  moment  repealing  her  concurrence  in  the  only 
scheme  that  promised  to  supply  a  deficiency  of  contributions.  He 
thought  the  motion  however  inaccurately  expressed,  since  the 
word  "  general  "  might  be  understood  to  refer  to  every  possible 
object  of  taxation  as  well  as  to  the  operation  of  a  particular  tax 
through  [out]  the  States.  He  observed  that  the  non-payment  of 
the  1.200.000  Dr.s  demanded  by  Congress  for  paying  the  interest  of 

the  debts  for  the  year demonstrated  that  the  constitutional 

mode  of  annual  requisitions  was  defective  ;  he  intimated  that 
lands  were  already  sufficiently  taxed  [&]  that  polls  &  commerce 
were  the  most  proper  objects.  At  his  instance  the  latter  part  of 
the  motion  was  so  amended  as  to  run  "  establishment  of  permanent 
&  adequate  funds  to  operate  generally  throughout  the  U.  States." 

Mr.  Hamilton  went  extensively  into  the  subject  ;  the  sum  of  it 
was  as  follows  he  observed  that  funds  considered  as  permanent 
sources  of  revenue  were  of  two  kinds  i5.'  Such  as  would  extend 
generally  &  uniformly  throughout  the  U.  S.,  &  wd  be  collected 
under  the  authority  of  Cong?  2d.ly,  such  as  might  be  established 
separately  within  each  State,  &  might  consist  of  any  objects  which 
were  chosen  by  the  States,  and  might  be  collected  either  under 
the  authority  of  the  States  or  of  Cong5!  Funds  of  the  is.1  kind  he 
contended  were  preferable  ;  as  being  is.1,  more  simple,  the  diffi 
culties  attending  the  mode  of  fixing  the  quotas  laid  down  in  the 
Confederation  rendering  it  extremely  complicated  &  in  a  manner 
insuperable  ;  2d!y,  as  being  more  certain:  since  the  States  accord 
ing  to  the  secd  plan  wd  probably  retain  the  collection  of  the  reve 
nue,  and  a  vicious  system  of  collection  prevailed  generally 
throughout  the  U.  S.  a  system  by  which  the  collectors  were  chosen 
by  the  people  &  made  their  offices  more  subservient  to  their  pop 
ularity  than  to  the  public  revenue  ;  3d,  as  being  more  economical 
Since  the  collection  would  be  effected  with  fewer  officers  under 
the  management  of  Congress  than  under  that  of  the  States. 

Mr.  Ghoram  observed  that  Mr.  Hamilton  was  mistaken  in  the 
representation  he  had  given  of  the  collection  of  taxes  in  several 
of  the  States  ;  particularly  in  that  of  Massachusetts  ;  where  the 
collection  was  on  a  footing  which  rendered  it  sufficiently  certain. 
Mr.  Wilson  having  risen  to  explain  some  things  which  had  fallen 
from  him  ;  threw  out  the  suggestion  that  several  branches  of  the 


1783]  JAMES  MADISON.  333 

Revenue  if  yielded  by  all  the  States,  would  perhaps  be  more  just 
&  satisfactory  than  any  single  one  ;  for  example  An  impost  on 
trade  combined  with  a  land  tax. 

Mr.  Dyer  expressed  a  strong  dislike  to  a  Collection  by  officers 
appointed  under  Congress  &  supposed  the  States  would  never  \Jt 
brought  to  consent  to  it. 

Mr.  Ramsay  was  decidedly  in  favor  of  the  proposition.  Justice 
he  said  entitled  those  who  had  lent  their  money  &  services  to  the 
U.  S.  to  look  to  them  for  payment ;  that  if  general  &  certain  rev 
enues  were  not  provided,  the  consequence  w.d  be  that  the  army  & 
public  Creditors  would  have  soon  to  look  to  their  respective 
States  only  for  satisfaction  ;  that  the  burden  in  this  case  w^  fall  un 
equally  on  the  States  ;  that  rivalships  relative  to  trade  w?  impede 
a  regular  impost  &  would  produce  confusion  am?  the  States  ;  that 
some  of  the  States  would  never  make  of  themselves  provision  for 
half  pay  and  that  the  army  w?  be  so  far  defrauded  of  the  rewards 
stipulated  to  them  by  Congress  ;  that  altho  it  might  be  uncertain 
whether  the  States  w?  accede  to  plans  founded  on  y?  proposition 
before  the  house,  yet  as  Congress  was  convinced  of  its  truth  & 
importance  it  was  their  duty  to  make  the  experiment. 

Mr.  Bland  thought  that  the  ideas  of  the  States  on  the  subject 
were  so  averse  to  a  general  revenue  in  the  hands  of  Cong?  that  if 
such  a  revenue  were  proper  it  was  unattainable  ;  that  as  the  de 
ficiency  of  the  contributions  from  the  States  proceeded,  not  from 
their  complaints  of  their  inability  *  but  of  the  inequality  of  the  ap 
portionments,  it  would  be  a  wiser  course  to  pursue  the  rule  of  the 
Confederation,  to-wit  to  ground  the  requisition  on  an  actual  val 
uation  of  lands  ;  that  Congress  w?  then  stand  on  firm  ground  & 
try  a  practicable  mode. 


TUESDAY,  JAN?  28TH,    1783 

The  subject  yesterday  under  discussion  was  resumed.  A  div 
ision  of  the  question  was  called  for  by  Mr.  Wolcott  so  as  to  leave 
a  distinct  question  on  the  words  "  to  be  collected  by  Congress," 
wc?  he  did  not  like. 

1  The  paper  just  read  from  Virg*  complained  of  her  inability  without  men 
tioning  an  inequality.  This  was  deemed  a  strange  assertion.  [Note  in  MS,] 


334  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1783 

. 

Mr.  Wilson  considered  this  mode  of  collection  as  essential  to 

the  idea  of  a  general  revenue.     Since  without  it  the  proceeds  of 

\     the  revenue  wd  depend  entirely  on  the  punctuality  energy   & 

>Ainanimity  of  the  States,  the  want  of  which  led  to  the  present 

onsideration. 

Mr.  Hamilton  was  strenuously  of  the  same  opinion.  Mr.  Fitz- 
simmons  informed  Congress  that  the  Legislature  of  Pennf  had,  at 
their  last  meeting  l?een  dissuaded  from  appropriating  their  revenue 
to  the  payment  of  their  own  Citizens  Creditors  of  the  U.  S.,  in 
stead  of  remitting  it  to  y?  Continental  treasury  ;  merely  by  the  ur 
gent  representations  of  a  Committee  of  Congress  &  by  the  hope 
that  some  general  system  in  fav*  of  all  the  public  creditors  would 
be  adopted  ;  th/at  the  Legislature  were  now  again  assembled  ;  and 
altho  sensible  of  the  tendency  of  such  an  example,  thought  it  their 
duty  &  meant  4n  case  the  prospect  of  such  a  system  vanished  to 
proceed  immediately  to  the  separate  appropriations  formerly  in 
contemplation. 

On  the  motion  of  Mr.  Madison,  the  whole  proposition  was  new- 
modelled,  as  follows  : 

"  That  it  is  the  opinion  of  Congress  that  the  establishment  of 
permanent  &  adequate  funds  to  operate  generally  throughout  the 
U.  States  is  indispensably  necessary  for  doing  complete  justice  to 
the  Creditors  of  the  U.  S.,  for  restoring  public  credit  and  for  pro 
viding  for  the  future  exigencies  of  the  war."  The  words  "  to  be 
collected  under  the  authority  of  Congress  "  were  as  a  separate 
question  left  to  be  added  afterwards. 

Mr.  Rutledge  objected  to  the  term  "  generally  "  as  implying  a 
degree  of  uniformity  in  the  tax  which  would  render  it  unequal. 
He  had  in  view  particularly  a  land  tax  according  to  quanty  as  had 
been  proposed  by  the  office  of  finance.  He  thought  the  preju 
dices  of  the  people  opposed  the  idea  of  a  general  tax  ;  &  seemed 
on  the  whole  to  be  disinclined  to  it  himself,  at  least  if  extended 
beyond  an  impost  on  trade  ;  urging  the  necessity  of  pursuing  a 
valuation  of  land,  and  requisitions  grounded  thereon.  Mr.  Lee 
2de.d  the  opposition  to  the  term  "  general,"  he  contended  that  the 
States  wd  never  consent  to  a  uniform  tax  because  it  wd  be  un 
equal  ;  that  it  was  moreover  repugnant  to  the  articles  of  confed 
eration  ;  and  by  placing  the  purse  in  the  same  hands  with  the 


1783]  JAMES  MADISON.  335 

sword,  was  subversive  of  the  fundamental  principles  of  liberty. 
He  mentioned  the  repeal  of  the  impost  by  Virg?,  himself  alone  op 
posing  it  &  that  too  on  the  inexpediency  in  point  of  time  —  as 
proof  of  the  aversion  to  a  general  revenue.  He  reasoned  upon  the 
subject  finally  as  if  it  was  proposed  that  Congress  sd-  assume  &  ex 
ercise  a  power  immediately  &  without  the  sanction  of  the  States, 
of  levying  money  on  them  in  consequence. 

Mr.  Wilson  rose  &  explained  the  import  of  the  motion  to  be 
that  Congress  should  recommend  to  the  States  the  investing  them 
with  power.  He  observed  that  the  Confederation  was  so  far 
from  precluding,  that  it  expressly  provided  for  future  alterations  ; 
that  the  power  given  to  Congress  by  that  Act  was  too  little  not  too 
formidable,  that  there  was  more  of  a  centrifugal  than  centripetal 
force  in  yf  States  &  that  y?  funding  of  a  common  debt  in  the  man 
ner  proposed  would  produce  a  salutary  invigoration  and  cement  to 
the  Union. 

Mr.  Elseworth  acknowledged  himself  to  be  undecided  in  his 
opinion  ;  that  on  one  side  he  felt  the  necessity  of  continental 
funds  for  making  good  the  continental  engagements,  but  on  the 
other  desponded  of  a  unanimous  concurrence  of  the  States  in 
such  an  establishment.  He  observed  that  it  was  a  question  of  great 
importance,  how  far  the  federal  Gov'  can  or  ought  to  exert  coer 
cion  against  delinquent  members  of  the  confederacy  ;  &  that 
without  such  coercion  no  certainty  could  attend  the  constitutional 
mode  which  referred  every  thing  to  the  unanimous  punctuality  of 
thirteen  different  councils.  Considering  therefore  a  continental 
revenue  as  unattainable,  and  periodical  requisitions  from  Con 
gress  as  inadequate,  he  was  inclined  to  make  trial  of  the  middle 
mode  of  permanent  State  funds,  to  be  provided  at  the  recom 
mendation  of  Cong5?,  and  appropriated  to  the  discharge  of  the 
common  debt. 

Mr.  Hamilton,  in  reply  to  Mr.  Elseworth,  dwelt  long  on  the  in- 
efficacy  of  State  funds.  He  supposed  too  that  greater  obstacles 
would  arise  to  the  execution  of  the  plan  than  to  that  of  a  general 
revenue.  As  an  additional  reason  for  the  latter  to  be  collected  by 
officers  under  the  appointment  of  Congress,  he  signified  that  as 
the  energy  of  the  federal  Gov'  was  evidently  short  of  the  degree 
necessary  for  pervading  &  uniting  the  States  it  was  expedient  to 


336  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1783 

introduce  the  influence  of  officers  deriving  their  emoluments  from 
&  consequently  interested  in  supporting  the  power  of,  Congress.1 

Mr.  Williamson  was  of  opinion  that  continental  funds  altho' 
desirable,  were  unattainable  at  least  to  the  full  amount  of  the 
public  exigencies.  He  thought  if  they  could  be  obtained  for  the 
fereign  debt,  it  would  be  as  much  as  could  be  expected,  and  that 
they  would  also  be  less  essential  for  the  domestic  debt. 

Mr.  Madison  observed  that  it  was  needless  to  go  into  proofs  of 
the  necessity  of  pay?  the  public  debts  ;  that  the  idea  of  erecting 
our  national  independence  on  the  ruins  of  public  faith  and  na 
tional  honor  must  be  horrid  to  every  mind  which  retained  either 
honesty  or  pride  ;  that  the  motion  before  Congress  contained  a 
simple  proposition  with  respect  to  the  truth  of  which  every  mem 
ber  was  called  upon  to  give  his  opinion.  That  this  opinion  must 
necessarily  be  in  the  affirmative,  unless  the  several  objects  :  of  do 
ing  justice  to  the  public  creditors,  &c  &c.  could  be  compassed 
by  some  other  plan  than  the  one  proposed,  that  the  2  last  objects 
depended  essentially  on  the  first  ;  since  the  doing  justice  to  the 
Creditors  alone  w*  restore  public  credit,  &  the  restoration  of  this 
alone  could  provide  for  y?  future  exigencies  of  the  war.  Is  then 
a  continental  revenue  indispensably  necessary  for  doing  complete 
justice  &c  ?  This  is  the  question.  To  answer  it  the  other 
plans  proposed  must  first  be  reviewed. 

In  order  to  do  complete  justice  to  the  public  creditors,  either 
the  principal  must  be  paid  off,  or  the  interest  paid  punctually. 
The  i?t  is  admitted  to  be  impossible  on  any  plan.  The  only 
plans  opposed  to  the  contin-  one  for  the  latter  purpose  are  i. 
periodical  requisitions  according  to  the  federal  articles  ;  2dly 
permanent  funds  established  by  each  State  within  itself  &  the 
proceeds  consigned  to  the  discharge  of  public  debts. 

Will  y?  i"  be  adequate  to  the  object  ?     The  contrary  seems  to 

1  This  remark  was  imprudent  &  injurious  to  the  cause  w?h  it  was  meant  to 
serve.  This  influence  was  the  very  source  of  jealousy  which  rendered  the  States 
averse  to  a  revenue  under  collection  as  well  as  appropriation  of  Congress.  All 
the  members  of  Congress  who  concurred,  in  any  degree  with  the  States  in  this 
jealousy  smiled  at  the  disclosure.  Mr.  B[land]  &  still  more  Mr.  L[eeJ,  who 
were  of  this  number  took  notice  in  private  conversation,  that  Mr.  Hamilton  had 
let  out  the  secret.  [Note  in  MS.] 


1783]  JAMES  MADISON.  337 

be  maintained  by  no  one.  If  reason  did  not  sufficiently  premon- 
ish  experience  has  sufficiently  demonstrated  that  a  punctual  & 
unfailing  compliance  by  13  separate  &  independent  Govl.s  with 
periodical  demands  of  money  from  Congress,  can  never  be  reck 
oned  upon  with  the  certainty  requisite  to  Satisfy  our  present 
creditors,  or  to  tempt  others  to  become  our  creditors  in  future. 

2d!y  Will  funds  separately  established  within  each  State  &  the 
amount  submitted  to  the  appropriation  of  Congress  be  adequate 
to  the  object  ?  The  only  advantage  which  is  thought  to  recom 
mend  this  plan  is  that  the  States  will  be  with  less  difficulty  pre 
vailed  upon  to  adopt  it.  Its  imperfections  are  i5*  that  it  must  be 
preceded  by  a  final  and  satisfactory  adjustment  of  all  ace1.5  be 
tween  the  U.  S.  and  individual  States  ;  and  by  an  apportionment 
founded  on  a  valuation  of  all  the  lands  throughout  each  of  the 
States  in  pursuance  of  the  law  of  the  confederation  ;  for  al 
though  the  States  do  not  as  yet  insist  on  these  pre-requisites  in 
y?  case  of  annual  demands  on  them,  with  wc.h  they  very  little 
comply  &  that  only  in  the  way  of  an  open  ace*,  yet  these  condi 
tions  wd  certainly  be  exacted  in  case  of  a  permanent  cession  of 
revenue  ;  and  the  difficulties  &  delays  to  say  the  least  incident 
to  these  conditions  can  escape  no  one.  2d!y  the  produce  of  the 
funds  being  always  in  the  first  instance  in  the  hands  &  under  the 
control  of  the  States  separately,  might  at  any  time  &  on  various 
pretences,  be  diverted  to  State  objects.  3d?y,  that  jealousy  which 
is  as  natural  to  the  States  as  to  individuals  &  of  which  so  many 
proofs  have  appeared,  that  others  will  not  fulfil  their  respective 
portions  of  the  common  obligations,  will  be  continually  &  mutu 
ally  suspending  remittances  to  the  common  treasury,  until  it 
finally  stops  them  altogether.  These  imperfections  are  too  radical 
to  be  admitted  into  any  plan  intended  for  the  purposes  in  question. 

It  remains  to  examine  the  merits  of  a  plan  of  a  general  reve 
nue  operating  throughout  y?  U.  S.  under  the  superindence  of 
Congress. 

One  obvious  advantage  is  suggested  by  the  last  objection  to 
separate  revenues  in  the  different  States  ;  that  is,  it  will  exclude 
all  jealousy  among  them  on  that  head,  since  each  will  know  whilst 
it  is  submitting  to  the  tax,  that  all  the  others  are  necessarily  at 
the  same  instant  bearing  their  respective  portions  of  the  burden. 


VOL.    I. — 22. 


338  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [I783 

Again,  it  will  take  from  the  States  the  opportunity  as  well  as  the 
temptation  to  divert  their  incomes  from  the  general  to  internal 
purposes  since  these  incomes  will  pass  directly  into  the  treasury  of 
the  U.  S. 

Another  advantage  attending  a  general  revenue  is  that  in  case 
of  the  concurrence  of  the  States  in  establishing  it,  it  would  be 
come  soonest  productive;  and  would  consequently  soonest  obtain 
the  objects  in  view.  Nay  so  assured  a  prospect  would  give  in 
stantaneous  confidence  and  content  to  the  public  creditors  at 
home  &  abroad,  and  place  our  affairs  in  a  most  happy  train. 

The  consequences  with  respect  to  the  Union,  of  omitting  such 
a  provision  for  the  debts  of  the  Union  also  claims  particular  at 
tention.  The  tenor  of  the  memorial  from  Penn*,  and  of  the  in 
formation  just  given  on  the  floor  by  one  of  its  Delegates,  (Mr. 
Fitzsimmons,)  renders  it  extremely  probable  that  that  State  would 
as  soon  as  it  s^  be  known  that  Congress  had  declined  such  pro 
vision  or  the  States  rejected  it,  appropriate  the  revenue  required 
by  Congress  to  the  payment  of  its  own  Citizens  &  troops,  credit 
ors  of  the  U.  S.  The  irregular  conduct  of  other  States  on  this 
subject  enforced  by  such  an  example  could  not  fail  to  spread  the 
evil  throughout  the  whole  continent.  What  then  w?  become  of 
the  confederation  ?  What  w?  be  the  authority  of  Congress  ? 
w*  the  tie  by  which  the  States  c?  be  held  together  ?  what  the 
source  by  which  the  army  could  be  subsisted  &  clothed  ?  What 
the  mode  of  dividing  &  discharging  our  foreign  debts  ?  What 
the  rule  of  settling  the  internal  ace1-3  ?  What  the  tribunal  by 
which  controversies  am?  the  States  could  be  adjudicated  ? 

It  ought  to  be  carefully  remembered  that  this  subject  was 
brought  before  Congress  by  a  very  solemn  appeal  from  the  army 
to  the  justice  &  gratitude  of  their  Country.  Besides  immediate 
pay,  they  ask  for  permanent  Security  for  arrears.  Is  not  this  re 
quest  a  reasonable  one  ?  Will  it  be  just  or  politic  to  pass  over 
the  only  adequate  security  that  can  be  devised,  &  instead  of  ful 
filling  the  stipulations  of  the  U.  S.  to  them,  to  leave  them  to  seek 
their  rewards  separately  from  the  States  to  which  they  respec 
tively  belong  ?  The  patience  of  the  army  has  been  equal  to  their 
bravery,  but  that  patience  must  have  its  limits  ;  and  the  result  of 
despair  cannot  be  foreseen,  nor  ought  to  be  risked. 


1783]  JAMES  MADISON.  339 

It  has  been  objected  ag5'  a  general  revenue  that  it  contravenes 
the  articles  of  confederation.  These  Articles  as  has  been  ob 
served  have  presupposed  the  necessity  of  alterations  in  the  fed 
eral  system,  &  have  left  a  door  open  for  them.  They  moreover 
authorize  Congress  to  borrow  money.  Now  in  order  to  borrow 
money  permanent  £  certain  provision  is  necessary,  &  if  this  pro 
vision  cannot  be  made  in  any  other  way  as  has  been  shewn,  a 
general  revenue  is  within  the  spirit  of  the  Confederation. 

It  has  been  objected  that  such  a  revenue  is  subversive  of  the 
sovereignty  &  liberty  of  the  States.  If  it  were  to  be  assumed 
without  the  free  gift  of  the  States  this  objection  might  be  of  force, 
but  no  assumption  is  proposed.  In  fact  Congress  are  already 
invested  by  the  States  with  the  constitutional  authority  over  the 
purse  as  well  as  the  sword.  A  general  revenue  would  only  give 
this  authority  a  more  certain  &  equal  efficacy.  They  have  a  right 
to  fix  the  quantum  of  money  necessary  for  the  common  purposes. 
The  right  of  the  States  is  limited  to  the  mode  of  supply.  A 
requisition  of  Congress  on  the  States  for  money  is  as  much  a  law 
to  them  ;  as  their  revenue  Acts  when  passed  are  laws  to  their 
respective  Citizens.  If  for  want  of  the  faculty  or  means  of  en 
forcing  a  requisition,  the  law  of  Congress  proves  inefficient ; 
does  it  not  follow  that  in  order  to  fulfil  the  views  of  the  federal 
constitution,  such  a  change  s?  be  made  as  will  render  it  efficient  ? 
Without  such  efficiency  the  end  of  this  Constitution,  which  is  to 
preserve  order  &  justice  among  the  members  of  the  Union,  must 
fail ;  as  without  a  like  efficiency  would  the  end  of  State  Constitu 
tions  wc.h  is  to  preserve  like  order  &  justice  among  their  respective 
members. 

It  has  been  objected  that  the  States  have  manifested  such 
aversion  to  the  impost  on  trade  as  renders  any  recommendations 
of  a  general  revenue  hopeless  &  imprudent.  It  must  be  admitted 
that  the  conduct  of  the  States  on  that  subject  is  less  encouraging 
than  were  to  be  wished.  A  review  of  it  however  does  not  excite 
despondence.  The  impost  was  adopted  immediately  &  in  its  ut 
most  latitude  by  several  of  the  States.  Several  also  which  com 
plied  partially  with  it  at  first,  have  since  complied  more  liberally. 
One  of  them  after  long  refusal  has  complied  substantially.  Two 
States  only  have  failed  altogether  &  as  to~  one  of  them  it  is  not 


340  THE   WRITINGS  OF  [1783 

known  that  its  failure  has  proceeded  from  a  decided  opposition 
to  it.  On  the  whole  it  appears  that  the  necessity  &  reasonable 
ness  of  the  scheme  have  been  gaining  ground  among  the  States. 
He  was  aware  that  one  exception  ought  to  be  made  to  this  infer 
ence  ;  an  exception  too  wc.h  it  peculiarly  concerned  him  to  advert 
to.  The  State  of  Virg^  as  appears  by  an  Act  yesterday  laid  be 
fore  Congress  has  withdrawn  its  assent  once  given  to  the  scheme. 
This  circumstance  c?  not  but  produce  some  embarrassment  in  a 
representative  of  that  State  advocating  the  Scheme,  one  too 
whose  principles  were  extremely  unfavorable  to  a  disreg?  of  the 
sense  of  Constituents.  But  it  ought  not  to  deter  him  from  listen 
ing  to  considerations  which  in  the  present  case  ought  to  prevail 
over  it.  One  of  these  considerations  was  that  altho'  the  dele 
gates  who  compose  Congress,  more  immediately  represented  & 
were  amenable  to  the  States  from  which  they  respectively  come, 
yet  in  another  view  they  owed  a  fidelity  to  the  collective  interests 
of  the  whole.  2d!y,  Although  not  only  the  express  instructions, 
but  even  the  declared  sense  of  constituents  as  in  the  present  case, 
were  to  be  a  law  in  general  to  their  representatives,  still  there 
were  occasions  on  which  the  latter  ought  to  hazard  personal  con 
sequences  from  a  respect  to  what  his  clear  conviction  determines 
to  be  the  true  interest  of  the  former  ;  and  the  present  he  con 
ceived  to  fall  under  this  exception.  Lastly  the  part  he  took  on 
the  present  occasion  was  the  more  fully  justified  to  his  own  mind, 
by  his  thorough  persuasion  that  with  the  same  knowledge  of 
public  affairs  which  his  station  commanded  the  Legislature  of 
V?  would  not  have  repealed  the  law  in  favor  of  the  impost  & 
would  even  now  rescind  the  repeal. 

The  result  of  these  observations  was  that  it  was  the  duty  of 
Congress  under  whose  authoiy  the  public  debts  had  been  con 
tracted  to  aim  at  a  general  revenue  as  the  only  means  of  dis 
charging  them  ;  &  that  this  dictate  of  justice  &  gratitude  was 
enforced  by  a  regard  to  the  preservation  of  the  confederacy,  to 
our  reputation  abroad  &  to  our  internal  tranquillity. 

Mr.  Rutledge  complained  that  those  who  so  strenuously  urged 
the  necessity  &  competency  of  a  general  revenue 1  operating 

1  He  was  apprehensive  that  a  tax  on  land  according  to  its  quantity  not  value 
as  had  been  recom?  by  Mr.  Morris,  was  in  contemplation.  [Note  in  MS.] 


1783]  JAMES  MADISON.  341 

throughout  all  the  States  at  the  same  time,  declined  specifying 
any  general  objects  from  which  such  a  revenue  could  be  drawn. 
He  was  thought  to  insinuate  that  these  objects  were  kept  back 
intentionally  untill  the  general  principle  cd  be  irrevocably  fixed 
when  Cong?  would  be  bound  at  all  events  to  go  on  with  the  pro 
ject  ;  whereupon  Mr.  Fitzsimmons  expressed  some  concern  at 
the  turn  wc.h  the  discussion  seemed  to  be  taking.  He  said,  that 
unless  mutual  confidence  prevailed  no  progress  could  be  made 
towards  the  attainment  of  those  ends  wc.h  all  in  some  way  or  other 
aimed  at.  It  was  a  mistake  to  suppose  that  any  specific  plan  had 
been  preconcerted  among  the  patrons  of  a  general  revenue. 

Mr.  Wilson  with  whom  the  motion  originated  gave  his  assur 
ances  that  it  was  neither  the  effect  of  preconcert  with  others, 
nor  of  any  determinate  plan  matured  by  himself,  that  he  had 
been  led  into  it,  by  the  declaration  on  Saturday  last  by  Cong- 
that  substantial  funds  ought  to  be  provided,  by  the  memorial  of 
the  army  from  which  that  declaration  had  resulted  by  the  me 
morial  from  the  State  of  P*,  holding  out  the  idea  of  separate 
appropriations  of  her  revenue  unless  provision  were  made  for 
the  public  creditors,  by  the  deplorable  &  dishonorable  situation 
of  public  affairs  which  had  compelled  Congress  to  draw  bills  on 
the  unpromised  &  contingent  bounty  of  their  Ally,  and  which 
was  likely  to  banish  the  Superint-  of  Finance  whose  place  cd  not 
be  Supplied,  from  his  department.  He  observed  that  he  had  not 
introduced  detail  [s]  into  the  debate  because  he  thought  them  pre 
mature,  until  a  general  principle  should  be  fixed  ;  and  that  as 
soon  as  the  principle  sd  be  fixed  he  would  altho  not  furnished 
with  any  digested  plan,  contribute  all  in  his  power  to  the  forming 
such  a  one. 

Mr.  Rutledge  moved  that  the  proposition  might  be  committed 
in  order  that  some  practicable  plan  might  be  reported,  before 
Congress  sd  declare  that  it  ought  to  be  adopted. 

Mr.  Izard  2d*d  the  motion,  from  a  conciliatory  view. 

Mr.  Madison  thought  the  commitment  unnecessary  ;  and  would 
have  the  appearance  of  delay  ;  that  too  much  delay  had  already 
taken  place,  that  the  deputation  of  the  army  had  a  right  to  ex 
pect  an  answer  to  their  memorial  as  soon  as  it  could  be  decided 
by  Congress.  He  differed  from  Mr.  Wilson  in  thinking  that  a 


342  THE   WRITINGS  OF  [1783 

specification  of  the  objects  of  a  general  revenue  would  be  im 
proper,  and  thought  that  those  who  doubted  its  practicabiR  had 
a  right  to  expect  proof  of  it  from  details  before  they  cd  be  ex 
pected  to  assent  to  the  general  principle  ;  but  he  differed  also 
from  Mr.  Rutledge,  who  thought  a  commitment  necessary  for  the 
purpose  ;  since  his  views  would  be  answered  by  leaving  the 
motion  before  the  house  and  giving  the  debate  a  greater  latitude. 
He  suggested  as  practicable  objects  of  a  general  revenue,  if*  an 
impost  on  trade  2d!y  a  poll  tax  under  certain  qualifications  3d!y  a 
land-tax  under  do.1 

Mr.  Hamilton  suggested  a  house  &  window-tax  he  was  in 
favor  of  the  mode  of  conducting  the  business  urged  by  Mr. 
Madison. 

On  the  motion  for  the  comm*  ,  6  States  were  in  favor  of  it,  & 
5  ag^  it,  so  it  was  lost,  in  this  vote  the  merits  of  the  main  propo 
sition  very  little  entered. 

Mr.  Lee  said  that  it  was  a  waste  of  time  to  be  forming  resolu 
tions  &  settling  principles  on  this  subject.  He  asked  whether 
these  wd  ever  bring  any  money  into  the  public  treasury.  His 
opinion  was  that  Congress  ought  in  order  to  guard  ag-*  the  incon 
venience  of  meetings  of  the  different  Legislatures  at  different  & 
even  distant  periods,  to  call  upon  the  Executives  to  convoke 
them  all  at  one  period,  &  to  lay  before  them  a  full  state  of  our 
public  affairs.  He  said  the  States  would  never  agree  to  those 
plans  which  tended  to  aggrandize  Congress  ;  that  they  were 
jealous  of  the  power  of  Congress,  &  that  he  acknowledged  him 
self  to  be  one  of  those  who  thought  this  jealousy  not  an  unreason 
able  one  ;  that  no  one  who  had  ever  opened  a  page  or  read  a  line 
on  the  subject  of  liberty,  could  be  insensible  to  the  danger  of 
surrendering  the  purse  into  the  same  hands  which  held  the  sword. 

The  debate  was  suspended  by  an  adjournment. 

1  A  poll  tax  to  be  qualified  by  rating  blacks  somewhat  lower  than  whites  —  a 
land-tax  by  considering  the  value  of  land  in  each  State  to  be  in  an  inverse  pro 
portion  of  its  quantity  to  the  n?  of  people  ;  and  apportioning  on  the  aggregate 
quantity  in  each  State  accordingly,  leaving  the  State  at  liberty  to  make  a  dis 
tributive  apportionment  on  its  several  districts,  on  a  like  or  any  other  equaliz 
ing  principle.  [Note  in  MS.] 


1783]  JAMES  MADISON.  343 

WEDNESDAY,  JAN^  2QTH.    1783 

Mr.  Fitzsimmons  reminded  Congress  of  the  numerous  inac 
curacies  &  errors  in  the  American  column  of  the  Treaty  with 
Holland  and  proposed  that  a  revision  of  it  as  ratified  should  take 
place  in  order  that  some  steps  might  be  taken  for  redressing  this 
evil,  he  added  that  an  accurate  comparison  of  it  with  the  treaty 
with  France  ought  also  to  be  made  for  the  purpose  of  seeing 
whether  it  consisted  in  all  its  parts  with  the  latter.1  He  desired 
the  Committe  who  had  prepared  the  ratification  to  give  some 
explanation  on  the  subject  to  Congress. 

Mr.  Madison,  as  first  on  that  Committee  informed  Congress, 
that  the  inaccuracies  &  errors  consisting  of  mis-spelling,  foreign 
idioms,  &  foreign  words,  obscurity  of  the  sense  &c  were  attended 
to  by  the  Committee  &  verbally  noted  to  Congress  when  their 
report  was  under  consideration  ;  that  the  Committee  did  not 
report  in  writing,  as  the  task  was  disagreeable,  and  the  faults  were 
not  conceived  to  be  of  sufficient  weight  to  affect  the  ratification. 
He  thought  it  w*  be  improper  to  reconsider  the  act  as  had  been 
suggested,  for  the  purpose  of  suspending  it  on  that  or  any  other 
ace*,  but  had  no  objection  if  Congress  were  disposed,  to  instruct 
Mr.  Adams  to  substitute  with  the  consent  of  the  other  party  a 
more  correct  counterpart  in  the  American  language.  The  subject 
was  dropped,  nobody  seeming  inclined  to  urge  it. 

On  the  motion  of  Mr.  Rutledge  &  for  the  purpose  of  extending 
the  discussion  to  particular  objects  of  General  Revenue  Congress 
resolved  itself  into  a  Committee  of  the  whole  to  consider  of  the 
most  effectual  means  of  restoring  public  credit  ;  and  the  propo 
sition  relative  to  general  revenue  was  referred  to  the  Committee. 
Mr.  Carroll  was  elected  into  the  chair,  &  the  proposition  taken  up.2 

1  Mr.  Hamilton  told  Mr.  Madison  privately  that  M.  de  Marbois  speaking  of 
the  treaty  asked  him  emphatically  whether  there  were  not  some  articles  which 
required  animadversion.  Mr.  H.  did  not  at  the  time  know  what  was  alluded  to. 
He  now  supposed  the  allusion  to  be  to  some  article  supposed  to  be  inconsistent 
with  the  Treaty  with  France  ;  particularly  the  article  referring  to  the  select 
articles  of  the  latter  instead  of  the  whole  ;  which  art.  Mr.  Adams  informed  Con 
gress  had  been  satisfactory  to  the  D.  de  Vauguyon.  [Note  in  MS.] 

2"  The  subject  which  my  last  left  under  the  consideration  of  Congress  has 
employed  the  chief  part  of  the  week.  The  generality  of  the  members  are 


344  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1783 

Mr.  Bland  proposed  to  alter  the  words  of  the  proposition  so  as 
to  make  it  read  establish*  of  funds  "  on  taxes  or  duties,  to  operate 
generally  &c."  This  was  agreed  to  as  a  more  correct  phraseology. 
Mr.  Hamilton  objected  to  it  at  first,  supposing  thro'  mistake  that 
it  might  exclude  the  back  lands  which  was  a  fund  in  contempla 
tion  of  some  gentlemen. 

Mr.  Madison,  having  adverted  to  the  jealousy  of  Mr.  Rutledge 
of  a  latent  scheme  to  fix  a  tax  on  land  according  to  its  quantity, 
moved  that  between  the  words  "generally"  &  "  to  operate" 
might  be  inserted  the  words  "and  in  just  proportion." 

Mr.  Wilson  said  he  had  no  objection  to  this  amendm*,  but  that 
it  might  be  referred  to  the  taxes  individually,  &  unnecessarily 
fetter  Congress  ;  since  if  the  taxes  collectively  should  operate  in 
just  proportion,  it  w<?  be  sufficient.  He  instanced  a  land-tax  & 
an  impost  on  trade,  the  former  of  which  might  press  hardest  on 
the  South",  &  the  latter  on  the  East",  but  both  together  might 

convinced  of  the  necessity  of  a  continental  revenue  for  an  honorable  discharge 
of  the  continental  engagements  and  for  making  future  provision  for  the  war.  The 
extent  of  the  plan  however  compared  with  the  prepossessions  of  their  con 
stituents  produces  despondence  &  timidity.  It  appears  that  the  annual  revenue 
which  prudence  calls  for  for  the  objects  above  mentioned,  amounts  to  the 
enormous  sum  of  three  millions  of  dollars.  You  will  ask  perhaps  from  what 
sources  this  revenue  could  be  drawn  if  the  States  were  willing  to  establish  it  ? 
Congress  have  done  nothing  as  yet  from  which  the  answer  they  w?  dictate  can 
be  informed.  By  individuals  on  the  floor,  the  imposts,  a  land  [or]  poll  tax,  a  tax 
on  salt  a  &c  have  been  suggested,  and  some  computation  of  their  productiveness 
has  made  them  competent  to  the  object.  The  valuation  of  the  land  accord?  to 
the  Articles  of  confederation  is  also  before  Congress  &  by  some  considered  as 
a  great  step  towards  obtaining  the  necessary  revenue.  If  you  ask  by  what 
operation  ?  I  shall  be  more  incapable  of  answering  it  than  the  preceeding 
question. 

"  The  repeal  of  the  impost  by  Virg?  is  still  unriddled.  Dr.  Lee  says  that  he 
was  the  only  man  who  opposed  the  torrent  from  which  it  is  the  more  suspected 
that  there  has  been  some  mancevring  in  the  transaction.  Mr.  Jones  quotes  the 
instance  of  your  last  election  to  Congress. 

"  I  find  a  great  check  to  secret  communications  from  the  defects  of  your  cypher. 
It  in  the  first  place  is  so  scanty  as  to  be  extremely  tedious  and  in  the  next  both 
the  letters  &  figures  are  in  so  ambiguous  a  character  that  great  caution  is  neces 
sary  to  avoid  errors.  I  wish  we  could  some  how  or  other  substitute  a  more  con 
venient  one." — Madison  to  Edmund  Randolph,  February  4,  1783.  (Italics  for 
cypher.)  Mad.  MSS. 


1783]  JAMES  MADISON.  345 

distribute  the  burden  pretty  uniformly.  From  this  consideration 
he  moved  that  the  words  "  on  the  whole  "  might  be  prefixed  to 
the  words  "  in  just  proportion."  This  amend*  to  the  amendment 
of  Mr.  Madison  was  2de.d  by  Mr.  Boudinot  &  agreed  to  without 
opposition  as  was  afterwards  the  whole  amendm* . 

Mr.  Wilson  in  order  to  leave  the  scheme  open  for  the  back 
lands  as  a  fund  for  paying  the  public  debts,  moved  that  the  pro 
position  might  be  further  altered  so  as  to  read  "  indispensably 
necessary  towards  doing  complete  justice  &c." — The  motion  was 
2de.d  by  Mr.  Boudinot,  &  passed  without  opposition. 

The  main  proposition  by  Mr.  Wilson  as  thus  amended  then 
passed  without  opposition  ;  in  the  words  following  :  "That  it  is 
the  opinion  of  Congress  that  the  establishment  of  permanent  & 
adequate  funds  on  taxes  or  duties  which  shall  operate  generally  & 
on  the  whole  in  just  proportion  throughout  the  U.  S.,  are  indis 
pensably  necessary  towards  doing  complete  justice  to  the  public 
Creditors,  for  restoring  public  Credit,  &  for  providing  for  the 
future  exigencies  of  the  War." 

Mr.  Bland  proposed  as  the  only  expedient  that  cd  produce  im 
mediate  relief  to  the  public  Creditors,  that,  Congress  s?by  a  fixed 
resolution  appropriate  to  the  payment  of  interest  all  the  monies 
which  should  arise  from  the  requisitions  on  the  States.  He 
thought  this  would  not  only  give  immediate  relief  to  the  public 
Creditors,  but  by  throwing  into  circulation  the  stagnant  securities, 
enliven  the  whole  business  of  taxation.  This  proposition  was  not 

2ded 

Mr.  Wilson  proceeded  to  detail  to  Congress  his  ideas  on  the 
subject  of  a  continental  revenue.  He  stated  the  internal  debt 
liquidated  &  unliquidated  at  21  Million  of  Dollr.s  the  foreign  debt 
at  8  Million,  the  actual  deficiency  of  1782  at  4  Million,  the 
probable  deficiency  of  '83  at  4  Million.  Making,  in  the  whole  37 
Million  ;  which  in  round  numbers  &  probably  without  exceed 
ing  the  reality  may  be  called  40  Million.  The  interest  of  this 
debt  at  6  Per  Ct.,  is  2,400,000  Dr.s,  to  which  it  will  be  prudent  to 
add  600,000,  which  if  the  war  continues  will  be  needed,  and  in 
case  of  peace  may  be  applied  to  a  navy.  An  annual  revenue  of  3 
Million  of  Dr.s  then  is  the  sum  to  be  aimed  at,  and  which  ought  to 
be  under  the  management  of  Cong?  One  of  the  objects  already 


346  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1783 

mentioned  from  wf1  this  revenue  was  to  be  sought,  was  a  poll  tax. 
This  he  thought  was  a  very  proper  one,  but  unfortunately  the 
Constitution  of  Maryland  which  forbids  this  tax  is  an  insuperable 
obstacle.  Salt  he  thought  a  fit  article  to  be  taxed,  as  it  is  con 
sumed  in  a  small  degree  by  all  and  in  great  quantities  by  none. 
It  had  been  found  so  convenient  a  subject  of  taxation,  that  among 
all  nations  which  have  a  system  of  revenue,  it  is  made  a  material 
branch.  In  England  a  considerable  sum  is  raised  from  it.  In 
France  it  is  swelled  to  the  sum  of  54,000,000  of  Livres.  He 
thought  it  would  be  improper  to  levy  this  tax  during  the  war 
whilst  the  price  w?  continue  so  high,  but  the  necessary  fall  of 
price  at  the  conclusion  of  it  w?  render  the  tax  less  sensible  to  the 
people.  The  suspension  of  this  particular  tax  during  the  war 
would  not  be  inconvenient  as  it  might  be  set  apart  for  the  debt 
due  to  France  on  which  the  interest  would  not  be  called  for  dur 
ing  the  war.  He  computed  the  quantity  of  salt  imported  into  the 
U.  S.  annually  at  3  Million  of  Bushels,  &  proposed  a  duty  of  \  of 
a  Dollar  per  bushel  which  w?  yield  100,000  Dr.s  This  duty  he  ob 
served  w?  press  hardest  on  the  Eastern  States,  on  ace-  of  the  ex 
traordinary  consumption  in  the  fisheries. 

The  next  tax  which  he  suggested  was  on  land,  i  Dollar  on 
every  100  Acres  according  to  the  computation  of  the  Superintend- 
of  finance  would  produce  500,000  Dollr.s  This  computation  he 
was  persuaded  might  be  doubled.  Since  there  could  not  be  less 
than  TOO  Millions  of  Acres  comprehended  within  the  titles  of  in 
dividuals  which  at  i  Dr.  per  100  Acres  yields  1,000,000  of  Dollars. 
This  tax  could  not  be  deemed  too  high,  &  would  bear  heaviest 
not  on  the  industrious  farmer,  but  on  the  great  land-holder.  As 
the  tax  on  Salt  would  fall  with  most  weight  on  the  Eastern  States, 
the  equilibrium  would  be  restored  by  this  which  would  be  most 
felt  by  the  Middle  and  Southern  States. 

The  impost  on  trade  was  another  source  of  revenue  which  altho' 
it  might  be  proper  to  vary  it  somewhat  in  order  to  remove  partic 
ular  objections,  ought  to  be  again  &  again  urged  upon  the  States 
by  Congress.  The  office  of  Finance  has  rated  this  at  500,000 
Dollars.  He  thought  a  peace  would  double  it  in  which  case  the 
sum  of  3,000,000  Dr.s  would  be  made  up.  If  these  computations 
however  should  be  found  to  be  too  high  there  will  still  be  other 


1783]  JAMES  MADISON.  347 

objects  which  would  bear  taxation.  An  Excise  he  said  had  been 
mentioned.  In  general  this  species  of  taxation  was  tyrannical  & 
justly  obnoxious,  but  in  certain  forms  had  been  found  consistent 
with  the  policy  of  y-  freest  States.  In  Massachusetts  a  State  re 
markably  jealous  of  its  liberty,  an  Excise  was  not  only  admitted 
before  but  continued  since  the  revolution.  The  same  was  the 
case  with  Pennf,  also  remarkable  for  its  freedom.  An  Excise  if  so 
modified  as  not  to  offend  the  spirit  of  liberty  may  be  considered 
as  an  object  of  easy  &  equal  revenue.  Wine  &  imported  spirits 
had  borne  a  heavy  Excise  in  other  Countries,  and  might  be 
adopted  in  ours.  Coffee  is  another  object  which  might  be  in 
cluded.  The  amount  of  these  three  objects  is  uncertain  but 
materials  for  a  satisfactory  computation  might  be  procured. 
These  hints  &  remarks  he  acknowledged  to  be  extremely  imper 
fect  &  that  he  had  been  led  to  make  them  solely  by  a  desire  to 
contribute  his  mite  towards  such  a  system  as  would  place  the 
finances  of  the  U.  S.  on  an  honorable  and  prosperous  footing. 

Mr.  Ghoram  observed  that  the  proposition  of  Mr.  Bland,  how 
ever  salutary  its  tendency  might  be  in  the  respects  suggested, 
could  never  be  admitted  because  it  would  leave  our  army  to 
starve,  and  all  our  affairs  to  stagnate  during  its  immediate  opera 
tion.  He  objected  to  a  duty  on  salt  as  not  only  bearing  too 
heavily  on  the  East"  States,  but  as  giving  a  dangerous  advantage 
to  Rivals  in  the  fisheries.  Salt  he  s?  exported  from  England  for 
the  fisheries  is  exempted  particularly  from  duties.  He  thought 
it  would  be  best  to  confine  our  attention  for  the  present  to  the 
impost  on  trade  which  had  been  carried  so  far  towards  an  ac 
complishment,  and  to  remove  the  objections  which  had  retarded 
it,  by  limiting  the  term  of  its  continuance,  leaving  to  the  States 
the  nomination  of  the  collectors,  and  by  making  the  appropriation 
of  it  more  specific. 

Mr.  Rutledge  was  also  for  confining  our  attention  to  the  Im 
post,  &  to  get  that  before  any  further  attempts  were  made.  In 
order  to  succeed  in  getting  it  however  he  thought  it  ought  to  be 
asked  in  a  new  form.  Few  of  the  States  had  complied  [with] 
the  recommendation  of  Cong- ,  literally.  Georgia  had  [not]  yet 
complied.  Rhode  Island  had  absolutely  refused  to  comply  at 
all.  Virga,  which  at  first  complied  but  partially  has  since 


348  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1783 

rescinded  even  that  partial  compliance.  After  enumerating  the 
several  objections  urged  by  the  States  ag5.1  the  scheme,  he  pro 
posed  in  order  to  remove  them  the  following  resolution  ;  viz  : 

"  that  it  be  earnestly  recommended  to  the  several  States  to 
impose  &  levy  a  duty  of  5  Per  C-  ad  valorem,  at  the  time  &  place 
of  importation,  on  all  goods,  wares  &  merchandizes  of  foreign 
growth  &  manufacture  w0!1  may  be  imported  into  the  said  States 
respectively,  except  goods  of  the  U.  S.  or  any  of  them,  and  a  like 
duty  on  all  prizes  &  prize  goods  condemned  in  the  Court  of 
admiralty  of  said  States  ;  that  the  money  arising  from  such 
duties  be  paid  into  the  continental  Treasury,  to  be  appropriated 
&  applied  to  the  payment  of  the  interest  and  to  sink  the  principal 
of  the  money  which  the  U.  S.  have  borrowed  in  Europe  &  of 
what  they  may  borrow,  for  discharging  the  arrears  due  to  the 
army  &  for  the  future  support  of  the  war  &  to  no  other  use  or 
purpose  whatsoever  ;  that  the  said  duties  be  continued  for  25 
years  unless  the  debts  above  m?  be  discharged  in  the  mean  time, 
in  which  case  they  shall  cease  &  determine  ;  that  the  money 
arising  from  the  said  duties  &  paid  by  any  State,  be  passed  to 
the  credit  of  such  State  on  account  of  its  quota  of  the  debt  of 
the  U.  States."  The  motion  was  seconded  by  Mr.  Lee. 

Mr.  Woolcot  opposed  the  motion  as  unjust  towards  those 
States  which  having  few  or  no  ports  receive  their  merchandize 
through  the  ports  of  others  ;  repeating  the  observation  that  it  is 
the  consumer  &  not  the  importer  who  pays  the  duty.  He  again 
animadverted  on  the  conduct  of  Virg*  in  first  giving  &  after 
wards  withdrawing  her  assent  to  the  Impost  recommended  by 
Congress. 

Mr.  Elseworth  thought  it  wrong  to  couple  any  other  objects 
with  the  Impost ;  that  the  States  would  give  this  if  any  thing  ; 
and  that  if  a  land  tax  or  an  excise  were  combined  with  it,  the 
whole  scheme  would  fail.  He  thought  however  that  some  modi 
fication  of  the  plan  recommended  by  Cong*  would  be  necessary. 
He  supposed  when  the  benefits  of  this  contin!  revenue  should  be 
experienced  it  would  incline  the  States  to  concur  in  making  ad 
ditions  to  it.  He  abetted  the  opposition  of  Mr.  Woolcot  to  the 
motion  of  Mr.  Rutledge  which  proposed  that  each  State  should 
be  credited  for  the  duties  collected  within  its  ports  ;  dwelt  on 


1783]  JAMES  MADISON.  349 

the  injustice  of  it,  said  that  Connecticut,  before  the  revolution 
did  not  import  -g^,  perhaps  not  y-^,  part  of  the  merchandize 
consumed  within  it,  and  pronounced  that  such  a  plan  w?  never  be 
agreed  to.  He  concurred  in  the  expediency  of  new-modelling 
the  scheme  of  the  impost  by  defining  the  period  of  its  continu 
ance  ;  by  leaving  to  the  State  the  nomination,  &  to  Congress  the 
appointment  of  Collectors  or  vice  versa  ;  and  by  a  more  de 
terminate  appropriation  of  the  revenue.  The  first  object  to 
which  it  ought  to  be  applied  was  he  thought,  the  foreign  debt. 
This  object  claimed  a  preference  as  well  from  the  hope  of  facili 
tating  further  aids  from  that  quarter,  as  from  the  disputes  into 
wc.h  a  failure  may  embroil  the  U.  S.  The  prejudices  ag^  making 
a  provision  for  foreign  debts  which  s?  not  include  the  domestic 
ones  was  he  thought  unjust  &  might  be  satisfied  by  immediately 
requiring  a  tax  in  discharge  of  which  loan-office  certificates  should 
be  receivable.  State  funds  for  the  domestic  debts  would  be 
proper  for  subsequent  consideration.  He  added,  as  a  further 
objection  against  crediting  the  States  for  the  duties  on  trade 
respectively  collected  by  them,  that  a  mutual  jealousy  of  injur 
ing  their  trade  by  being  foremost  in  imposing  such  a  duty  would 
prevent  any  from  making  a  beginning. 

Mr.  Williamson  said,  that  Mr.  Rutledge's  motion  at  the  same 
time  that  it  removed  some  objections,  introduced  such  as  would 
be  much  more  fatal  to  the  measure.  He  was  sensible  of  the 
necessity  of  some  alterations,  particularly  in  its  duration  &  the 
appointment  of  the  Collectors.  But  the  crediting  the  States 
severally  for  the  amount  of  their  collections  was  so  palpably  un 
just  &  injurious  that  he  thought  candor  required  that  it  should 
not  be  persisted  in.  He  was  of  opinion  that  the  interest  of  the 
States,  which  trade  for  others,  also  required  it,  since  such  an 
abuse  of  the  advantage  possessed  by  them  would  compel  the 
States  for  which  they  trade  to  overcome  the  obstacles  of  nature 
&  provide  supplies  for  themselves.  N.  Carolina  he  said  would 
probably  be  supplied  pretty  much  thro  Virg*,  if  the  latter  for 
bore  to  levy  a  tax  on  the  former,  but  in  case  she  did  not  forbear, 
the  ports  of  N.  C.,  which  are  nearly  as  deep  as  those  of  Hol 
land,  might  &  probably  w^  be  substituted.  The  profits  drawn 
by  the  more  commercial  States  from  the  business  they  carry  on 


350  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1783 

for  the  others,  were  of  themselves  sufficient  &  ought  to  satisfy 
them. 

Mr.  Ramsay  differed  entirely  from  his  colleague  (Mr.  Rutledge). 
He  thought  that  as  the  consumer  pays  the  tax,  the  crediting  the 
States  collecting  the  impost,  unjust.  N.  Carolina,  Maryland,  N. 
Jersey  &  Connecticut  would  suffer  by  such  a  regulation  and 
would  never  agree  to  it. 

Mr.  Bland  was  equally  ag5'  the  regulation.  He  thought  it  re 
plete  with  injustice  &  repugnant  to  every  idea  of  finance.  He 
observed  that  this  point  had  been  fully  canvassed  at  the  time 
when  the  impost  was  originally  recommended  by  Congress,  & 
finally  exploded.  He  was  indeed  he  said  opposed  to  the  whole 
motion  (of  Mr.  Rutledge).  Nothing  would  be  a  secure  pledge  to 
Creditors  that  was  not  placed  out  of  the  Countrol  of  the  grant 
ors.  As  long  as  it  was  in  the  power  of  the  States  to  repeal  their 
grants  in  this  respect,  suspicions  would  prevail,  &  w'?  prevent 
loans.  Money  ought  to  be  approbated  by  the  States  as  it  is  by 
the  Parliament  of  G.  B.  He  proposed  that  the  revenue  to  be 
Solicited  from  the  States  should  be  irrevocable  by  them  without 
the  consent  of  Congress,  or  of  nine  of  the  States.  He  disap 
proved  of  any  determinate  limitation  to  the  continuance  of  the 
revenue,  because  the  continuance  of  the  debt  could  not  be  fixed 
and  that  was  the  only  rule  that  could  be  proper  or  satisfactory. 
He  said  he  should  adhere  to  these  ideas  in  the  face  of  the  Act  of 
Virg*  repealing  her  assent  to  the  impost ;  that  it  was  trifling  with 
Cong?  to  enable  them  to  contract  debts,  &  to  withhold  from  them 
the  means  of  fulfilling  their  contracts. 

Mr.  Lee  said  he  seconded  the  motion  of  Mr.  Rutledge,  because 
he  thought  it  most  likely  to  succeed  ;  that  he  was  persuaded  the 
States  would  not  concur  in  the  impost  on  trade  without  a  limita 
tion  of  time  affixed  to  it.  With  such  a  limitation  and  the  right  of 
collection,  he  thought  Virg*,  R.  Island  &  the  other  States  proba 
bly  w^  concur.  The  objection  of  his  Colleague,  (Mr.  Bland)  he 
conceived  to  be  unfounded  :  No  Act  of  the  States  could  be 
irrevocable,  because  if  so  called  it  might  notwithstanding  be  re 
pealed.  But  he  thought  there  w^  be  no  danger  of  a  repeal,  obj 
serving  that  the  national  faith  was  all  the  security  that  was  given 
in  other  countries,  or  that  could  be  given.  He  was  sensible  that 


1783]  JAMES  MADISON.  351 

something  was  of  necessity  to  be  done  in  the  present  alarming 
crisis  ;  and  was  willing  to  strike  out  the  clause  crediting  the  States 
for  their  respective  collections  of  the  revenue  on  trade,  as  it  was 
supposed  that  it  w^  impede  the  measure. 

Mr.  Hamilton  disliked  every  plan  that  made  but  partial  pro 
vision  for  the  public  debts  ;  as  an  inconsistent  &  dishonorable  de 
parture  from  the  declaration  made  by  Cong*  on  that  subject.  He 
said  the  domestic  Creditors  would  take  the  alarm  at  any  distinc 
tions  unfavorable  to  their  claims  ;  that  they  would  withhold  their 
influence  from  any  such  measures  recommended  by  Congress  ; 
and  that  it  must  be  principally  from  their  influence  on  their  re 
spective  legislatures  that  success  could  be  expected  to  any  appli 
cation  from  Cong5  for  a  general  revenue. 


THURSDAY,    30   JAN? 

The  answer  to  the  Memorials  from  the  Legislature  of  Penn* 
was  agreed  to  as  it  stands  on  the  Journal,  N.  Jersey  alone 
dissenting.1 

In  the  course  of  its  discussion  several  expressions  were  struck 
out  which  seemed  to  reprehend  the  States  for  the  deficiency  of 
their  contributions.  In  favor  of  these  expressions  it  was  urged 
that  they  were  true  and  ought  to  be  held  forth  as  the  cause  of  the 
public  difficulties  in  justification  of  Congress.  On  the  other  side 

1  The  answer  entered  at  length  into  the  existing  condition  of  the  continental 
finances,  stating  that  no  State  had  taken  separate  measures  for  satisfying  its 
own  citizens,  as  Pennsylvania  threatened  to  do,  and  that,  as  the  various  certifi 
cates  had  passed  from  one  person  to  another  a  provision  by  a  State  for  their 
redemption  must  exclude  the  demands  of  many  of  its  own  citizens  or  admit  the 
demands  of  all  ;  that  it  would  be  impossible  to  pay  past  debts  and  run  the 
government,  wherefore  provision  should  be  made  for  the  interest  only.  It 
called  attention  to  the  fact  that  the  five  per  cent,  impost  was  recommended 
February  3,  1781,  but  after  a  delay  of  two  years  Congress  had  the  mortification 
to  find  that  one  State  [Rhode  Island]  entirely  refused  to  agree  to  it,  and  that 
another  [Virginia]  had  withdrawn  its  assent,  and  a  third  [Georgia]  had  taken 
no  action  ;  that  Congress  had  teen  unable  to  fulfill  its  engagements  with  the 
public  creditors,  because  of  the  defective  compliances  by  the  States  at  every 
stage  of  the  war.  For  the  year  1782,  it  said,  Congress  had  asked  $8,000,000 
and  had  been  supplied  by  the  States  with  only  $430,031.  The  King  of  France 


352  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1783 

it  was  urged  y*  Congress  had  in  many  respects  been  faulty  as  well 
as  the  States,  particularly  in  letting  their  finances  become  so  dis 
ordered  before  they  began  to  apply  any  remedy  ;  and  that  if  this 
were  not  the  case,  it  would  be  more  prudent  to  address  to  the 
States  a  picture  of  the  public  distresses  &  danger,  than  a  satire 
on  their  faults  ;  since  the  latter  would  only  irritate  them  ;  whereas 
the  former  w?  tend  to  lead  them  into  the  measures  supposed  by 
Congress  to  be  essential  to  the  public  interest. 

The  propriety  of  mentioning  to  the  Legislature  of  Penn?  the 
exped*  into  which  Congress  had  been  driven  of  drawing  bills  on 
Spain  &  Holland  without  previous  warrant ;  the  disapp*  attend 
ing  it,  and  the  deductions  ultimately  ensuing  from  the  aids  des 
tined  to  the  U.  S.  by  the  C*  of  France,  was  also  a  subject  of 
discussion.  On  one  side  it  was  represented  as  a  fact  which  being 
dishonorable  to  Congress  ought  not  to  be  proclaimed  by  them, 
&  that  in  the  present  case  it  c?  answer  no  purpose.  On  the  other 
side  it  was  contended  that  it  was  already  known  to  all  the  world, 
that  as  a  glaring  proof  of  the  public  embarrassm1-3  it  would  im 
press  the  Legislature  with  the  danger  of  making  those  separate 
appropriations  which  w?  increase  the  embarrassments  ;  and  par 
ticularly  would  explain  in  some  degree  the  cause  of  the  discon 
tinuance  of  the  French  interest  due  on  the  loan  office  certificates. 

Mr.  Rutledge  &  some  other  members  having  expressed  less 
solicitude  about  satisfying  or  soothing  the  Creditors  within  P? 
through  the  legislature  than  others  thought  ought  to  be  felt  by 
every  one,  Mr.  Wilson,  adverting  to  it  with  some  warmth,  declared 

had  lent  the  United  States  6,000,000  livres  and  John  Adams  had  opened  a  loan 
in  Holland  and  obtained  only  3,000,000  livres,  making  in  all  9,000,000  livres, 
which  after  deducting  anticipations  left  but  5,000,000  livres,  which  at  the  exist 
ing  rate  of  exchange  amounted  to  $833, 333.  At  the  beginning  of  the  year  1782 
there  was  $292,453  in  the  Treasury,  so  that  the  whole  amount  for  carrying  on 
the  government  during  1782  amounted  to  $1,545,812.  The  cost  of  the  army 
alone  amounted  to  $5,713,610,  for  feeding,  clothing,  and  pay,  excluding 
horses,  tents,  forage,  etc.  Therefore,  in  spite  of  discouraging  obstacles,  Con 
gress  conceived  it  to  be  its  duty  to  persevere  in  the  endeavor  to  procure  reve 
nues  equal  to  the  purpose  of  funding  all  the  debts,  and  the  subject  was  then 
under  solemn  deliberation.  Finally  they  called  attention  to  their  recommenda 
tion  of  September  6,  1780,  for  a  cession  of  part  of  the  Western  territory  claimed 
by  particular  states. — Journals  of  Congress,  iv.,  153,  et  seq. 


1783]  JAMES  MADISON.  353 

that  if  such  indifference  should  prevail,  he  was  little  anxious 
what  became  of  the  answer  to  the  Memorials.  Pena,  he  was  per 
suaded  would  take  her  own  measures  without  regard  to  those  of 
Congress,  and  that  she  ought  to  do  so.  She  was  willing  he  said 
to  sink  or  swim  according  to  the  common  fate,  but  that  she 
would  not  suffer  herself,  with  a  mill-stone  of  6,000,000  J  of  the 
Contin!  debt  about  her  neck  to  go  to  the  bottom  alone. 


FRIDAY,    JANf    31. 

The  instruction  to  the  V*  delegates  from  that  State  relative  to 
tob?  exported  to  N.  Y.,  under  passport  from  the  Sec?'  of  Congress 
was  referred  to  a  Committee.  Mr.  Fitzsimmons  moved  that  the 
information  received  from  s?  State  of  its  inability  to  contribute 

more  than towards  the  requisitions  of  Congress,  s?  be 

also  committed.  Mr.  Bland  saw  no  reason  forrsuch  commitment. 
Mr.  Ghoram  was  in  fav*  of  it.  He  thought  such  a  resolution 
from  Va  was  of  the  most  serious  import ;  especially  if  compared 
with  her  withdrawal  of  her  assent  to  the  Impost.  He  said  with 
much  earnestness,  that  if  one  State  should  be  connived  at  in  such 
defaults  others  would  think  themselves  entitled  to  a  like  indul 
gence.  Mass1.5,  he  was  sure  had  a  better  title  to  it  than  Va.  He 
said  the  former  had  expended  immense  sums  in  recruiting  her 
line,  which  composed  almost  the  whole  North"  Army  ;  that 
1,200,000  £  (dollar  at  6s)  had  been  laid  out ;  &  that  without  this 
sum  the  army  would  have  been  disbanded. 

Mr.  Fitzsimmons  abetting  the  animadversions  on  Virga,  took 

notice  that  of Dollars  req?  by  Congress  from  her  for  the 

year  1782,  she  had  paid  the  paltry  sum  only  of  35,000  Dr.s  and  was 
notwithstanding  endeavouring  to  play  off  from  further  contribu 
tions. — The  comitment  took  place  without  opposition. 

The  sub-committee,  consisting  of  Mr.  Madison,  Mr.  Carroll  & 
Mr.  Wilson  had  this  morning  a  conference  with  the  Superintend' 
of  Finance  on  the  best  mode  of  estimating  the  value  of  land 
through  the  U.  S.  The  Superintend'  was  no  less  puzzled  on  the 
subject  than  the  Committee  had  been.  He  thought  some  essay 

1  He  supposed  that  sum  due  by  the  U.  S.  to  Citizens  of  Perm? ,  for  loans. 
[Note  in  MS.] 

VOL.    I. — 23 


354  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1783 

ought  to  be  made  for  executing  the  Confederation,  if  it  s?  be 
practicable,  &  if  not  to  let  the  impracticability  appear  to  the  States. 
He  concurred  with  the  sub  committee  also  in  opinion  that  it  would 
be  improper  to  refer  the  valuation  to  the  States,  as  mutual  sus 
picions  of  partiality,  if  not  a  real  partiality,  would  render  the  re 
sult  a  source  of  discontent ;  and  that  even  if  Cong*  should  expressly 
reserve  to  themselves  a  right  of  revising  &  rejecting  it,  such  a 
right  could  not  be  exercised  without  giving  extreme  offence  to 
the  suspected  party.  To  guard  ag-1  these  difficulties  it  was  finally 
agreed,  &  the  Sub  committee  accordingly  reported  to  the  G  Com- 
ittee, 

"  That  it  is  expedient  to  require  of  the  Several  States  a  return 
of  all  surveyed  &  granted  land  within  each  of  them  ;  and  that  in 
such  return  the  land  be  distinguished  into  occupied  &  unoc 
cupied. 

"  That  it  also  was  expedient  to  appoint  one  Commiss'  for  each 
State  who  should  be  empowered  to  proceed  without  loss  of  time 
into  the  several  States  ;  &  to  estimate  the  value  of  the  lands 
therein  according  to  the  returns  above  mentioned,  &  to  such  in 
structions  as  should  from  time  to  time  be  given  him  for  that 
purpose." 

This  report  was  hurried  in  to  the  Grand  Corhitee  for  two  rea 
sons  ;  Is-1,  it  was  found  that  Mr.  Rutledge,  Mr.  Bland,  &  several 
others  relied  so  much  on  a  valuation  on  land,  and  connected  it  so 
essentially  with  measures  for  restoring  public  credit  that  an  ex 
treme  backwardness  on  their  part  affected  all  these  measures, 
whilst  the  valuation  of  land  was  left  out.  A  2?  reason  was  that  the 
Sub-Committee  were  afraid  that  suspicions  might  arise  of  inten 
tional  delay,  in  order  to  confine  the  attention  of  Cong?  to  general 
funds  as  affording  the  only  prospect  of  relief. 

The  Grand  Committee  for  like  reasons  were  equally  impatient 
to  make  a  report  to  Congress  ;  and  accordingly  after  a  short  con 
sultation  the  question  was  taken  whether  the  above  report  of  the 
Sub-corn.6,  or  the  report  referred  to  them  s?  be  preferred.  In 
favor  of  the  i?*  were  Mr.  Wilson,  Mr.  Carrol,  Mr.  Madison,  Mr. 
Elmore,  Mr.  Hamilton.  In  favor  of  the  2d-  were  Mr.  Arnold, 
Mr.  Dyer,  Mr.  Hawkins,  Mr.  Ghoram,  Mr.  Rutledge  &  Mr.  Gil- 
man.  So  the  latter  was  immediately  handed  in  to  Congress,  & 


1783]  JAMES  MADISON.  355 

referred  to  a  committee  of  the  whole  into  which  they  immediately 
resolved  themselves. 

A  motion  was  made  by  Mr.  Bland,  2dfd  by  Mr.  Madison,  that 
this  report  sd  be  taken  up  in  preference  to  the  subject  of  General 
funds.  Mr.  Wilson  opposed  it  as  irregular  &  inconvenient  to 
break  in  on  an  unfinished  subject ;  and  supposed  that  as  some 
further  experiment  must  be  intended  than  merely  a  discussion  of 
the  subject  in  Congress,  before  the  subject  of  Gen!  funds  would  be 
seriously  resumed,  he  thought  it  unadvisable  to  interrupt  the  latter. 

Mr.  Madison  answered  that  the  object  was  not  to  retard  the 
latter  business  but  to  remove  an  obstacle  to  it,  that  as  the  two 
subjects  were  in  some  degree  connected  as  means  of  restoring 
public  credit,  &  inseparably  connected  in  the  minds  of  many 
members,  it  was  but  reasonable  to  admit  one  as  well  as  the  other 
to  a  share  of  attention  ;  that  if  a  valuation  of  land  sd  be  found  on 
mature  deliberation  to  be  as  efficacious  a  remedy  as  was  by  some 
supposed,  it  wd  be  proper  at  least  to  combine  it  with  the  other 
expedient,  or  perhaps  to  substitute  it  altogether  ;  if  the  contrary 
should  become  apparent,  its  patrons  wd  join  the  more  cordially 
in  the  object  of  a  general  revenue. 

Mr.  Hamilton  concurred  in  these  ideas  &  wished  the  valuation 
to  be  taken  up  in  order  that  its  impracticability  &  futility  might 
become  manifest.  The  motion  passed  in  the  Affirmative,  &  the 
report  was  taken  up. 

The  phraseology  was  made  more  correct  in  several  instances. 

A  motion  was  made  by  Mr.  Boudinot  2d<:d  by  Mr.  Elseworth  to 
strike  out  the  clause  requiring  a  return  of  "the  names  of  the 
owners"  as  well  as  the  quantity  of  land.  Mr.  Elseworth  also 
contended  for  a  less  specific  return  of  the  parcels  of  land.  The 
objection  ags.1  the  clause  were  that  it  would  be  extremely  trouble 
some  &  equally  useless.  Mr.  Bland  thought  these  specific  returns 
wd  be  a  check  on  frauds  &  the  suspicion  of  them.  Mr.  William 
son  was  of  the  same  opinion,  as  were  also  Mr.  Lee,  Mr.  Ghoram, 
&  Mr.  Ramsay.1  The  motion  was  withdrawn  by  Mr.  Boudinot. 


SATURDAY    &  MONDAY.       No  Congress. 


1  Mr.  Dyer  ludicrously  proposed  as  a  proviso  to  the  scheme  of  referring  the 
valuation  to  the  States,  "that  each  of  the  States  should  cheat  equally."  [Note 
in  MS.] 


356  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1783 


TUESDAY,    FEB.   4. 

An  indecent  &  tart  remonstrance  was  re?  from  Vermont  ag5-1 
the  interposition  of  Cong-  in  favor  of  the  persons  who  had  been 
banished  &  whose  effects  had  been  confiscated.  A  motion  was 
made  by  Mr.  Hamilton  2d:d  by  Mr.  Dyer  to  commit  it.  Mr. 
Wolcot  who  had  always  patronized  the  case  of  Vermont  wished 
to  know  the  views  of  a  committment.  Mr.  Hamilton  said  his 
view  was  to  fulfill  the  resolution  of  Congress  wc-h  bound  them  to 
enforce  the  measure.  Mr.  Dyer  sd  his  was  that  so  dishonorable 
a  menace  might  be  as  quickly  as  possible  renounced.  He  said 
Gen!  Washington  was  in  favour  of  Vermont,  that  the  principal 
people  of  N.  England  were  all  supporters  of  them,  and  that  Con 
gress  ought  to  rectify  the  error  into  which  they  had  been  led, 
without  longer  exposing  themselves  to  reproach  on  this  subject. 
It  was  committed  without  dissent. 

Mr.  Wilson  informed  Congress  that  the  Legislature  of  Pen? 
having  found  the  Ordinance  of  Cong*  erecting  a  Court  for 
piracies  so  obscure  in  some  points  that  they  were  at  a  loss  to 
adapt  y*  laws  to  it,  had  appointed  a  Com?  to  confer  with  a  Com6- 
of  Congress.  He  accordingly  moved  in  behalf  of  the  P*  delega 
tion  that  a  Com?  might  be  appd  for  that  purpose.  After  some 
objections  by  Mr.  Madison  ag^  the  impropriety  of  holding  a  com 
munication  with  P*  through  committees  when  the  purpose  might 
be  as  well  answered  by  a  Memorial  or  an  instruction  to  its  Dele 
gates,  a  Com?  wasappd,  consisting  of  Mr.  Rutledge,  Mr.  Madison 
&  Mr.  Wilson. 

The  Report  proposing  a  commutation  for  the  half-pay  due  to 
the  army,  was  taken  up.  On  a  motion  to  allow  5^  years  whole 
pay  in  gross  to  be  funded  &  bear  interest,  this  being  the  rate 
taken  from  Dr.  Price's  calculation  of  annuities,  N.  H.  was  no, 
R.  I.  no,  Con!  no,  N.  J.,  no,  Virginia  ay  (Mr.  Lee  no)  other 
States  ay.  So  the  question  was  lost. — 5  years  was  then  proposed, 
on  which  N.  H.  was  no,  R.  I.  no,  C  no,  N.  J.  no.  So  there 
were  but  6  ays,  &  the  proposition  was  lost.  Mr.  Williamson  pro 
posed  5J  &  called  for  the  yeas  &  nays.  Messrs.  Wolcot  &  Dyer 
observed,  y*  they  were  bound  by  instructions  on  this  subject. 
Mr.  Arnold  said  the  case  was  the  same  with  him.  They  also 


1783]  JAMES  MADISON.  357 

queried  the  validity  of  the  Act  of  Cong?  which  had  stipulated 
half  pay  to  the  army,  as  it  had  passed  before  the  Confederation, 
and  by  a  vote  of  less  than  seven  States.  Mr.  Madison  s?  that  he 
wished  if  the  yeas  &  nays  were  called  it  might  be  on  the  true 
calculation,  and  not  on  an  arbitrary  principle  of  compromise,  as 
the  latter  standing  singly  on  the  Journal  w?  not  express  the  true 
ideas  of  the  yeas,  and  might  even  subject  them  to  contrary  inter 
pretations.  He  s?  that  the  act  was  valid  because  it  was  decided 
according  to  the  rule  then  in  force,  &  that  as  the  officers  had 
served  under  the  faith  of  it,  justice  fully  corroborated  it  ;  &  that 
he  was  astonished  to  hear  these  principles  controverted.  He  was 
also  astonished  to  hear  objections  ag?*  a  commutation  come  from 
States  in  compliance  with  whose  objections  ag?1  the  half  pay  itself 
this  exped'  had  been  substituted.  Mr.  Wilson  expressed  his  sur 
prise  also  that  instructions  s^  be  given  which  militated  ag?1  the 
most  peremptory  &  lawful  engagements  of  Cong? ,  and  said  that 
if  such  a  doctrine  prevailed  the  authority  of  the  Confederacy  was 
at  an  end.  Mr.  Arnold  said  that  he  wished  the  report  might  not 
be  decided  on  at  this  time,  that  the  Assembly  of  R.  I.  was  in 
session  &  he  hoped  to  receive  their  further  advice.  Mr.  Bland 
enforced  the  ideas  of  Mr.  Madison  &  Mr.  Wilson. — Mr.  Gilman 
thought  it  w?  be  best  to  refer  the  subject  of  \  pay  to  the  several 
States  to  be  settled  between  them  &  their  respective  lines.  By 
general  consent  the  Report  lay  over. 

Mr.  Lee  communicated  to  Congress  a  letter  he  had  received 
from  Mr.  Samuel  Adams  dated  Boston  Dec"  22,  1782,  introducing 
Mr. from  Canada,  as  a  person  capable  of  giving  intelli 
gence  relative  to  affairs  in  Canada  &  the  practicability  of  uniting 
that  Province  with  the  confederated  States.  The  letter  was 
committed. 

In  Com?  of  the  whole  on  the  Report  concerning  a  valuation  of 
the  lands  of  the  U.  States  — 

A  motion  was  made  by  Mr.  Rutledge  w^  took  the  sense  of 
Cong?  on  this  question  whether  the  rule  of  apportionment  to  be 
grounded  on  the  proposed  valuation  s?  continue  in  force  until 
revoked  by  Cong? ,  or  a  period  be  now  fixed  beyond  which  it 
s?  not  continue  in  force.  The  importance  of  the  distinction  lay 
in  the  necessity  of  having  seven  votes  on  every  act  of  Cong? . 


358  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1783 

The  Eastern  States  were  generally  for  the  latter,  supposing  that 
the  Southern  States  being  impoverished  by  the  recent  havoc  of 
the  enemy  would  be  underrated  in  the  first  valuation.  The 
Southern  States  were  for  the  same  reason  interested  in  favor  of 
the  former.  On  the  question  there  were  6  ays  only,  which  pro 
duced  a  dispute  whether  in  a  Committee  of  the  whole  a  majority 
w^  decide,  or  whether  7  votes  were  necessary. 

In  favor  of  the  first  rule  it  was  contended  by  Mr.  Ghoram  & 
others,  that  in  Committees  of  Congress  the  rule  always  is  that  a 
majority  decides. 

In  fav-  of  the  latter  it  was  contended  that  if  the  rule  of  other 
committees  applies  to  a  com?  of  the  whole,  the  vote  s?  be  indi 
vidual  per  capita,  as  well  as  by  a  majority,  that  in  other  delibera 
tive  assemblies,  the  rules  of  voting  were  not  varied  in  Comme.s  of 
the  whole,  &  that  it  w?  be  inconvenient  in  practice  to  report  to 
Cong*  as  the  sense  of  the  body,  a  measure  approved  by  4  or  5 
States,  since  there  could  be  no  reason  to  hope  that  in  the  same 
body  in  a  different  form  7  States  w?  approve  it,  and  consequently 
a  waste  of  time  would  be  the  result. 

Com?  rose  &  Con*  Adjourned. 


WEDNESDAY    FEBR?  5    &  THURSDAY,  FEE?    6. 

In  order  to  decide  the  rule  of  voting  in  a  Com?  of  the  whole, 
before  Congr.s  should  go  into  the  said  Com?,  Mr.  Bland  moved 
that  the  rule  s?  be  to  vote  by  States,  &  the  majority  of  States  in 
Com'  to  decide.  Mr.  Wilson  moved  to  postpone  Mr.  B*  motion 
in  order  to  resolve  that  the  rule  be  to  vote  by  States  and  accord 
ing  to  the  same  rules  which  govern  Congress  ;  as  this  gen!  ques 
tion  was  connected  in  the  minds  of  members  with  the  particular 
question  to  which  it  was  to  be  immediately  applied.  The  motion 
for  postponing  was  negatived,  Chiefly  by  the  Eastern  States.  A 
division  of  the  question  on  Mr.  Eland's  motion  was  then  called 
for  &  the  first  part  was  agreed  to  as  on  the  Journal.  The  latter 
clause,  to  wit,  a  majority  to  decide,  was  negatived  ;  so  nothing 
as  to  the  main  point  was  determined.  In  this  uncertainty  Mr. 
Osgood  proposed  that  Congr.s  should  resolve  itself  into  a  Com?  of 
the  whole.  Mr.  Carroll  as  chairman  observed  that  as  the  same 


1783]  JAMES  MADISON.  359 

difficulty  would  occur,  he  wished  Cong?  would  previously  direct 
him  how  to  proceed.  Mr.  Hamilton  proposed  that  the  latter  clause 
of  Mr.  Eland's  motion  shd  be  reconsidered  and  agreed  to  wrong  as 
it  was,  rather  than  have  no  rule  at  all.  In  opposition  to  which  it 
was  sd  that  there  was  no  more  reason  why  one  &  that  not  the 
minor  side  sd  wholly  yield  to  the  inflexibility  of  the  other  y?  vice 
versa  ;  and  that  if  they  sd  be  willing  to  yield  on  the  present  occa 
sion,  it  wd  be  better  to  do  it  tacitly,  than  to  saddle  themselves 
with  an  express  &  perpetual  rule  which  they  judged  improper. 
This  expedient  was  assented  to  and  Congress  accordingly  went 
into  a  Committee  of  the  Whole. 

The  points  arising  on  the  several  amendm1?  proposed  were  is- 
the  period  beyond  wc.h  the  rule  of  the  first  valuation  sd  not  be  in 
force,  on  this  point  Mr.  Collins  proposed  5  years,  Mr.  Bland 
10  years,  Mr.  Boudinot  7  years,  N.  Jersey  hav?  instructed  her 
Delegates  thereon.  The  Con*  delegates  proposed  3  years.  On 
the  question  for  3  years,  N.  H.  no,  Mas.  no,  R.  I.  ay,  Con'  ay, 
all  the  other  States  no.  On  the  question  for  5  years,  all  the 
States  ay  except  Con? 

The  2d  point  was  whether  &  how  far  the  rule  sd  be  retrospec 
tive.  On  this  point  the  same  views  operated  as  on  the  preceding. 
Some  were  ag"  any  retrospection,  others  for  extending  it  to  the 
whole  debt,  and  others  for  extend?  it  so  far  as  was  necessary  for 
liquidating  and  closing  the  accounts  between  the  United  States 
and  each  individual  State. 

The  several  motions  expressive  of  these  different  ideas  were  at 
length  withdrawn,  with  a  view  that  the  point  might  be  better  di 
gested,  &  more  accurately  brought  before  Congress.  So  the  rep* 
was  agreed  to  in  the  Com*  &  made  to  Congress.  When  the  ques 
tion  was  about  to  be  put  Mr.  Madison  observed  that  the  report 
lay  in  a  great  degree  of  confusion,  that  several  points  had  been 
decided  in  a  way  too  vague  &  indirect  to  ascertain  the  real  sense 
of  Cong!,  that  other  points  involved  in  the  subject  had  not  recd 
any  decision  ;  and  proposed  the  sense  of  Cong5.  shod  be  distinctly 
&  successively  taken  on  all  of  them  &  the  result  referred  to  a 
special  Com*:  to  be  digested  &c.  The  question  was  however  put 
&  negatived  the  votes  being  as  they  appear  on  the  Journal.  The 
reasons  on  which  Mr.  Hamilton's  motion  was  grounded  appear 
from  its  preamble. 


360  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1783 

FRIDAY,    FEBY     7. 

On  motion  of  Mr.  Lee  who  had  been  absent  when  the  Report 
was  yesterday  negatived,  the  matter  was  reconsidered.  The 
plan  of  taking  the  sense  of  Cong*  on  the  several  points  as  yes 
terday  proposed  by  Mr.  Madison,  was  generally  admitted  as 
proper. 

The  first  question  prop0!  in  Com*  of  the  whole  by  Mr.  Madison, 
was  :  Q  :  Shall  a  valuation  of  land  within  the  U.  S.  as  directed  by 
the  Articles  of  confederation  be  immediately  attempted?  —  8  ays 
N.  Y.  only  no.  The  States  present  were  N.  H.,  Mas.  Con*  N.  Y. 
N.  J.  Pt  V?  N.  C.  S.  C.  R.  I.  i  member,  Mar*  i  d.° 

By  Mr.  Wilson, 

Q.  Shall  each  State  be  called  on  to  return  to  the  U.  S.  in 
Congs.  ass^  the  n°  of  acres  granted  to  or  surveyed  for  any  per 
son,  and  also  the  n°  of  buildings  within  it  ?  8  ayes — N.  C.  no — 
supposing  this  not  to  accord  with  the  plan  of  referring  the  valua 
tion  to  the  States,  which  was  patronized  by  that  Delegation.  A 
supplement  to  this  question  was  suggested  as  follows. 

Q.  Shall  the  male  inhabitants  be  also  returned,  the  blacks  & 
whites  being  therein  distinguished  ?  ay,  N.  C.  no  for  the  same 
reason  as  above.  Con'  divided. 

By  Mr.  Madison, 

Q.  Shall  the  States  be  called  on  to  return  to  Cong5  an  estimate 
of  the  value  of  its  lands  with  the  buildings  &  improvements 
within  each  respectively  ?  After  some  discussion  on  this  point  in 
wh0?5  the  inequalities  which  wd  result  from  such  estimates  were  set 
forth  at  large;  and  effects  of  such  an  experiment  in  Virg*  had 
been  described  by  Mr.  Mercer,  and  a  comparison  of  an  Average 
valuation  in  P*  &  Va  which  amounted  in  the  latter  to  50  PC  more 
than  in  the  former,  altho'  the  real  value  of  land  in  the  former 
was  confessedly  thrice  that  of  the  latter  had  been  quoted  by  Mr. 
Madison,  the  apprehensions  from  a  reference  of  any  thing  more 
to  the  States  than  a  report  of  simple  facts  increased,  and  on  the 
vote  the  States  were  as  follows  :  N.  H.  Mas  N.  J.  Pa  V*  no  Mr. 
Bland  ay  Mr.  Lee  silent  Con1  :  N.  C.  S.  C.  ay,  N.  Y.  div?  :  so  it 
passed  in  the  negative. 

By  Mr.  Madison, 


1783]  JAMES  MADISON.  361 

Q.  Shall  a  period  be  now  fixed  beyond  which  the  rule  to  be 
eventually  estab^  by  Cong*  shall  not  be  in  force  ?  ay,  unanimously. 

By  Mr.  Madison, 

Q.  What  shall  that  period  be  ?  Con*  was  again  for  3  years, 
which  being  rej^  5  yr.s  passed  unanimously. 

By  Mr.  Madison, 

Q.  Shall  the  rule  so  to  be  estabd  have  retrospective  operation 
so  far  as  may  be  necessary  for  liquidating  &  closing  the  acct*  be 
tween  the  U.  S.  &  each  particular  State  ?  Ay  —  Con*  no.  Mr. 
Dyer  &  Mr.  Mercer  understood  this  as  making  the  am'  of  the 
several  requisitions  of  Cong*,  and  not  of  the  paym4?  by  y*  States, 
the  standard  by  which  the  accl.s  were  to  be  liquidated  and  thought 
the  latter  the  just  quantum  for  retrospective  appointment.  Their 
reasoning  however  was  not  fully  comprehended. 


SATURDAY,    FEE?     8. 
Com6  of  the  Whole. 

Mr.  Mercer  revived  the  subject  of  retrospective  operation  ;  and 
after  it  had  been  much  discussed  &  the  difference  elucidated 
wch  might  happen  between  apportion?,  according  to  the  first 
valuation  which  sd.  be  made,  merely  the  sums  paid  on  the  requisi 
tions  of  Cong5-,  &  apportion^  the  whole  Requisitions,  consisting 
of  the  sums  paid  &  the  deficiencies,  which  might  not  be  p^  until 
some  distant  day,  when  a  different  rule  formed  under  different 
circumstances  of  the  States  s^  be  in  force,  the  assent  to  the  last 
question  put  yesterday  was  reversed,  &  there  was  added  to  the 
preceding  question,  after  "  5  years," — "  and  shall  operate  as  a 
rule  for  apportioning  the  sums  necessary  to  be  raised  for  support 
ing  the  public  credit  &  other  contingent  expenses  &  for  adjusting 
all  accounts  between  the  U.  States  &  each  particular  State  for 
monies  paid  or  articles  furnished  by  them  &  for  no  other  purpose 
whatsoever.''  On  this  question  there  were  6  ays — so  it  became  a 
vote  of  the  Com*  of  the  whole 


362  THE   WRITINGS  OF  [1783 


MONDAY,     FEE?      IO 

For  The  Report  of  the  Committee  on  the  Resolutions  of  V% 
concerning  the  contract  Under  which  Tob°  was  to  be  exported 
to  N.  Y.  '  and  the  admission  of  circumstantial  proof   of   ace1.5 
ag5*  the  U.  S.,  where  legal  vouchers  had  been  destroyed  by  the 
enemy,  see  the  Journal  of  this  date. 

Mr.  Mercer  informed  Congress  that  this  matter  had  made  much 
noise  in  V*  ;  that  she  had  assented  to  the  export  of  the  first 
quantity,  merely  out  of  respect  to  Cong5?,  and  under  an  idea  that 
her  rights  of  Sovereignty  had  been  encroached  upon  ;  and  that, 
as  a  further  quantity  had  been  exported  without  the  license  of  the 
State,  the  question  was  unavoidable,  whether  the  authority  of 
Cong5  extended  to  the  act.  He  wished  therefore  that  Congress 
w^  proceed  to  decide  the  question. 

Mr.  Fitzsimmons  in  behalf  of  the  Committee,  observed  that 
they  went  no  further  than  to  examine  whether  the  proceedings  of 
the  officers  of  Cong?  were  conformable  to  the  Resol?  of  Cong5.  & 
not  whether  the  latter  were  within  the  power  of  Cong5- 

Mr.  Lee  s^  the  Rep*  did  not  touch  the  point  that,  the  additional 
quantity  had  been  exported  without  application  to  the  State, 
altho'  the  first  quantity  was  licensed  by  the  State  with  great  re 
luctance,  in  consequence  of  the  request  of  Cong5,  and  of  assur 
ances  ag5*  a  repetition,  and  that  the  Superintend*  &  Sec?'  of 
Cong5?  ought  at  any  rate  to  have  made  application  to  the  Execu 
tive  before  they  proceeded  to  further  exportations. 

Mr.  Rutledge  s^  the  Rep*  went  to  the  very  point,  that  V.  sus 
pected  the  Resold  of  Cong5!  had  been  abused  by  the  officers  of 
Cong5,  and  the  Rep*  shewed  that  no  such  abuse  had  taken  place  ; 
that  if  this  information  was  not  satisfactory,  and  the  State  sd-  con 
test  the  right  of  Cong5  in  the  case,  it  w^  then  be  proper  to  answer 
it  on  that  point,  but  not  before.  He  s^,  if  the  gentleman  (Mr. 

Lee)  meant  that  the  Com":  authorized  by  Cong5,  on  the day 

of  • to  make  explanations  on  the  subject  to  the  Legislature  of 

V?  had  given  the  assurances  he  mentioned,  he  must  be  mistaken; 

1  It  found  that  the  Superintendent  of  Finance  in  arranging  for  the  tobacco 
and  the  Secretary  of  Congress  in  granting  it  a  passport  had  both  acted  in  con 
formity  with  the  authority  of  Congress. — Journals  of  Congress,  iv.,  159,  160. 


1783]  JAMES  MADISON.  363 

for  none  such  had  been  given.  He  had  he  sd.  formed  notes  of 
his  remarks  to  the  Leg*  but  accord^  to  his  practice  had  destroyed 
them  after  the  occasion  was  over,  and  therefore  cd.  only  assert  this 
from  Memory  ;  that  nevertheless  his  memory  enabled  him  to  do 
it  with  certainty. 

Mr.  Lee,  in  explanation  s^  he  did  not  mean  the  Com*: ;  that  the 
abuse  complained  of  was  not  that  the  Resolun.s  of  Cong!  had  been 
exceeded,  but  that  the  export  had  been  undertaken  without  the 
Sanction  of  the  State.  If  the  acts  were  repeated,  he  said,  great 
offence  w^  be  given  to  V? 

The  Report  was  ag?  to  as  far  as  the  Tob°  was  concerned  with 
out  a  dissenting  voice,  Mr.  Lee  uttering  a  no^  but  not  loud  enough 
to  be  heard  by  Congress  or  the  chair.  The  Part  relating  to  the 
loss  of  Vouchers  was  unanimously  ag^  to. 

Com6,  of  the   Whole. 

The  Rep4  for  the  valuation  of  land  was  amended  by  the  inser 
tion  of  "distinguishing  dwelling  houses  from  others." 
The  Com*  adjourned  &  the  report  was  made  to  Cong5: 
Mr.  Lee  &  Mr.  Jervais  moved  that  the  Report  might  be  post 
poned  to  adopt  another  plan  to  wit  "  to  call  on  the  States  to  re 
turn  a  valuation  ;  and  to  provide  that  in  case  any  return  s^  not  be 
satisfactory  to  all  parties,  persons  s^  be  app^  by  Cong5.  &  others 
by  the  States  respectively  to  adjust  the  case  finally." — On  this 
question  N.  H.  was  div'J  ;  Mas,  no,  R.  I.,  ay  :  Con*,  no,  N.  Y. 
divl,  N.  J.,  no,  Pa,  no,  V?,  no,  Mr.  Madison  &  Mr.  Jones,  no  ;— Mr. 
Lee  &  Mr.  Bland,  ay,  N.  C.  ay,  S.  C.  ay,  so  the  motion  failed. 


TUESDAY,    FEE?    II. 

The  Rep*  made  by  the  Com?  of  the  whole  havg.  decided  that 
y*  mode  to  be  grounded  on  the  return  of  facts  called  for  from  y* 
States  ought  now  to  be  ascertained. 

Mr.  Rutledge  proposed  2d  by  Mr.  Oilman,  that  ye  States  s*  be 
required  to  name  Comr.s,  each  of  them  one,  who  or  any  nine  of 
them  s^  be  app?  &  empower'?  by  Cong?  to  settle  the  valuation. 
Mr.  Ghoram  was  ag5.1  it  as  parting  with  a  power  which  might  be 
turned  by  the  States  ag5.1  Cong?.  Mr.  Wolcot  ags.1  it ;  declares  his 


364  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1783 

opinion  that  the  Confederation  ought  to  be  amended  by  sub 
stituting  numbers  of  inhabitants  as  the  rule  ;  admits  the  differ 
ence  between  freemen  &  blacks  ;  and  suggests  a  compromise  by 
including  in  the  numeration  such  blacks  only  as  were  within  16 
&  60  years  of  age.  Mr.  Wilson  was  ag5.*  relinquishing  such  a 
power  to  the  States,  proposes  that  the  commissioners  be  appd 
by  Cong!,  and  their  proceedings  subject  to  the  ratification  of 
Cong?.  Mr.  Mercer  was  for  submitting  them  to  the  revision  of 
Cong?,  &  this  amendment  was  recd.  Mr.  Peters  ags.*  the  whole 
scheme  of  valuation,  as  holding  out  false  lights  &  hopes  to  the 
public.  Mr.  Rutledge  thinks  Comr.s  appd  by  the  States  may  be 
trusted  as  well  as  Comr.s  appd  by  Cong* ,  or  as  Cong-  themselves. 
Mr.  Wilson  observes,  that  if  appd  by  the  States  they  will  bring 
with  them  the  spirit  of  agents  for  their  respective  States  —  if 
appd  by  Cong5;  they  will  consider  themselves  as  servants  of  the  U. 
S.  at  large  &  be  more  impartial. 

Mr.  Ghoram,  2d?d  by  Mr.  Wilson,  proposes  to  postpone  in  order 
to  require  the  States  to  app!  Comr.s,  to  give  Cong?  information 
for  a  basis  for  a  valuation. — On  the  question  N.  H.  no,  Mas  :  ay, 
R.  I.  ay,  Con!  ay,  N.  Y.  ay,  N.  J.  ay,  P*  ay,  V*  no,  N.  C.  no,  S.  C. 
no,  so  it  was  decided  in  the  negative. 

To  make  the  resolution  more  clear,  after  the  words  "  or  any 
nine  of  them,"  the  words  "  concurring  therein  "  were  added.  Mr. 
Rutledge  says  that  subjecting  the  acts  of  the  Comr.s  to  the  revision 
of  Cong*  had  so  varied  his  plan  that  he  sd  be  ag5.*  it. — On  the 
main  question  N.  H.  ay,  Mas  :  ay,  R.  I.  ay,  Con!  ay,  N.  Y.  no, 
N.  J.  no,  P*  ay,  V*  ay  (Mr.  Madison  no),  N.  C.  ay,  S.  C.  ay,  so  it 
was  agreed  to  &  the  resolution  declaring  that  a  mode  sd  now  be 
fixed  struck  out  as  executed.  The  whole  report  was  then  com 
mitted  to  a  special  Com*:  consisting  of  Mr.  Rutledge  Mr.  Ghoram 
&  Mr.  Gilman  to  be  formed  into  a  proper  act.1 

1  "  The  valuation  of  the  lands  of  the  U.  S.  as  directed  by  the  articles  of 
Union  has  employed  &  puzzled  Congress  for  the  past  week  ;  and  after  all  the 
projects  &  discussions  which  have  taken  place,  we  seem  only  to  have  gone  round 
in  a  circle  to  the  point  at  which  we  set  out.  The  only  point  on  which  Con 
gress  are  generally  agreed  is  that  something  ought  to  be  attempted  ;  but  what 
that  something  ought  to  be,  is  a  theorem  not  solved  alike  by  scarcely  any 
two  members  ;  and  yet  a  solution  of  it  seems  to  be  made  an  indispensable 


1783]  JAMES  MADISON.  365 


The  declaration  of  Cong?  as  to  Gen!  Funds,  Passed  of  Jany. 
the  29,  as  appears  on  the  Journals  ;  '  &  Congress  resolved  itself 
into  a  Com6  of  the  whole  in  order  to  consider  the  funds  to  be 
adopted  and  recommended  to  the  States.  On  motion  of  Mr. 
Mifflin  the  impost  of  5  Per  C-  was  taken  into  consideration.  As 
it  seemed  to  be  the  general  opinion  that  some  variations  from  the 
form  in  which  it  had  been  first  recomended  w^  be  necessary  for 
reconciling  the  objecting  States  to  it,  it  was  proposed  that  the 
sense  of  the  Com6  should  be  taken  on  that  head.  The  following 
questions  were  accordingly  propounded  : 

Que  i.  Is  it  expedient  to  alter  the  impost  as  recommended  on 
the day  of ,  1781  ? 

Mr.  Lee  said  the  States  particularly  Virg*  w^  never  concur  in 
the  measure  unless  the  term  of  years  were  limited,  the  collection 
left  to  the  States,  &  the  appropriation  annually  laid  before  y? 

preliminary  to  other  essays  for  the  public  relief.  The  Deputation  from  the 
army  is  waiting  the  upshot  of  all  these  delays  &  dilemmas. 

"When  I  mentioned  to  you  the  subject  of  your  conversation  with  Dr. 
McClurg,  I  ought  to  have  added  that  one  reason  which  influenced  the  resig  — 
of  Mr.  Livingston  was  an  expence  experienced  of  three  thousand  dollars  beyond 
the  salary,  I  wish  this  circumstance  not  to  be  withheld  as  it  must  be  material 
in  the  case,  and  it  would  be  a  real  affliction  to  me  to  be  accessory  to  a  disap 
pointment.  For  the  same  reason  it  is  incumbent  on  me  to  observe  that  I  hold 
it  to  be  very  uncertain  whether  [the]  place  in  question  will  be  within  the  option 
of  our  friend,  as  I  hold,  indeed,  the  continuance  of  the  place  itself  to  be  a  little 
precarious. 

"  Mr.  J.  is  detained  at  Baltimore  by  the  danger  wcl?  besets  the  capes.  The 
situation  he  writes  me  is  far  from  being  a  pleasant  one  and  yet  I  fear  the  avidity 
£  vigilance  of  the  enemy  will  prevent  his  being  quickly  relieved  from  it.  Mr. 
Mercer  filled  up  the  remaining  blank  in  the  Delegation  on  Wednesday  last. 

"  This  city  is  full  of  reports  concerning  peace,  but  they  all  come  by  the  way 
of  the  W.  I.,  and  are  the  more  uncertain  as  they  come  too  thro'  mercantile 
channels.  The  fall  of  goods  which  is  taking  place  augurs  well,  however." — 
Madison  to  Edmund  Randolph,  February  n,  1783.  Mad.  MSS. 

1  Resolved,  That  Congress  be  resolved  into  a  committee  of  the  whole,  to 
consider  of  the  most  effectual  means  of  restoring  and  supporting  public  credit ; 
and  that  the  motion  before  the  house  be  referred  to  that  committee." — Journals 
of  Congress,  iv. ,  153. 


366  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1783 

Mr.  Wolcot  thought  the  revenue  ought  to  be  commensurate  in 
point  of  time  as  well  as  amount  to  the  debt  ;  that  there  was  no 
danger  in  trusting  Cong5.,  considering  the  responsible  mode  of  its 
app'  and  that  to  alter  the  plan  w^  be  a  mere  condescension  to  the 
prejudices  of  the  States. 

Mr.  Ghoram  favored  the  alteration  for  the  same  reason  as  Mr. 
Lee.  He  said  private  letters  informed  him  that  the  opposition  to 
the  impost  law  was  gaining  ground  in  Mass*.5,  and  the  repeal  of 
Virg*  would  be  very  likely  to  give  that  opposition  the  ascendance. 
He  said  our  measures  must  be  accommodated  to  the  sentiments 
of  the  States  whether  just  or  unreasonable. 

Mr.  Hamilton  dksented  from  the  particular  alterations  sug 
gested,  but  did  not  mean  to  negative  the  question. 

Mr.  Bland  was  for  conforming  to  the  ideas  of  the  States  as  far 
as  w^  in  any  manner  consist  with  the  object. 

On  the  Question  the  affirmative  was  unanimous  excepting  the 
voice  of  Mr.  Wolcot. 

Que  2d.      Shall  the  term  of  duration  be  limited  to  25  years  ? 

Mr.  Mercer  professed  a  decided  opposition  to  the  principle  of 
general  revenue,  observed  that  the  liberties  of  Eng^  had  been 
preserved  by  a  separation  of  the  purse  from  the  sword  ;  that  un- 
till  the  debts  s^  be  liquidated  &  apportioned  he  w^  never  assent 
in  Cong5,  or  elsewhere  to  the  scheme  of  the  Impost. 

Mr.  Bland  proposed  an  alternative  of  25  years,  or  until  the 
requisitions  of  Cong5,  according  to  the  Articles  of  Confed",  shall 
be  found  adequate.  On  this  proposition  the  votes  were  of  N.  H. 
div*,  R.  I.  no,  Con*  no,  N.  Y.  no  N.  J.  no,  P*  no,  Virga  ay,  N.  C. 
div^  ;  S.  C.  ay,  so  the  proposition  was  not  agreed  to. 

On  the  main  question  for  25  years  it  was  voted  in  the  affirma 
tive. 

Q.  3.  Shall  the  appointm?  of  Collectors  be  left  to  the  States, 
they  to  be  amenable  to  &  under  the  controul  of,  Cong5  ?  —  ay  ; 
several  States  as  N.  Y.  &  P*  dissenting.1 

1  In  the  meantime  tidings  of  peace  were  momentarily  expected.  Madison 
wrote  to  his  father  Feby.  12  : 

"  I  readily  suppose,  from  the  reports  prevalent  here,  that  some  information 
on  the  subject  of  peace  will  be  expected,  &  I  wish  it  were  in  my  power  to 
gratify  you.  The  truth  is,  we  are  in  nearly  as  great  uncertainty  here  as  you 


1783]  JAMES  MADISON.  367 


THURSDAY,    FEE?    I3TH. 

The  Com1:  report  to  Cong5,  the  alterations  yesterday  agreed  on 
with  respect  to  the  5  Per  C  Impost. 

The  Deputy  Sec5^  at  War  reported  to  Congress  the  result  of  the 
inquiry  directed  by  them  on  the  [24th]  day  of  [January,]  into 
the  seizure  of  goods  destined  for  the  British  Prisoners  of  war 
under  passport  from  Gen!  Washington.  From  this  report  it  ap 
peared  that  some  of  the  Seizors  had  pursued  their  claim  under 
the  law  of  the  State  &  that  in  consequence  the  goods  had  been 
condemned  &  ordered  for  sale.  The  papers  were  referred  to  a 
Com*:  consisting  of  Mr.  Rutledge,  Mr.  Ghoram  &  Mr.  Lee,  who 
after  hav*  retired  for  a  few  moments  reported,  that  the  Sec?  of 
War  should  be  authorized  &  directed  to  cause  the  goods  to  be 
taken  from  the  places  where  they  had  been  deposited,  to  employ 
such  force  as  w^  be  sufficient,  and  that  the  Duke  de  Lauzun 
whose  Legion  was  in  the  neighbourhood,  should  be  requested  to 
give  the  Sec5;  such  aid  as  he  might  apply  for. 

This  report  was  generally  regarded  by  Cong!  as  intemperate, 
and  the  proposed  recourse  to  the  French  Legion  as  flagrantly  im 
prudent.  Mr.  Hamilton  said  that  if  the  object  had  been  to  em 
broil  the  country  w*  their  Allies  the  expedient  would  have  been 
well  conceived.  1  He  added  that  the  exertion  of  force  would 
not  under  these  circumstances  meet  the  sense  of  the  people  at 
large.  Mr.  Ghoram  s^  he  denied  this  with  respect  to  the  people 
of  Massachusetts. 

Mr.  Lee  on  the  part  of  the  Com':  said  that  the  D.  de  Lauzun 
had  been  recurred  to  as  being  in  the  neighbourhood  &  having 
Cavalry  under  his  Command  which  would  best  answer  the  occa- 

can  be.  Every  day  almost  brings  forth  some  fresh  rumour,  but  it  is  so  mingled 
with  mercantile  speculations  that  little  faith  is  excited.  The  most  favorable 
evidence  on  the  side  of  peace  seems  to  be  a  material  fall  in  the  price  of  im 
ported  goods,  which  considering  the  sagacity  and  good  intelligence  of  merchants 
is  a  circumstance  by  no  means  to  be  despised.  A  little  time  will  probably  de 
cide  in  the  case,  when  I  shall  follow  this  with  something  more  satisfactory." 
Mad.  MSS. 

1  This  was  an  oblique  allusion  to  Mr.  Lee,  whose  enmity  to  the  French  was 
suspected  by  him  &c.  [Note  in  MS.] 


368  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1783 

sion  ;  and  that  the  Report  was  founded  on  wise  &  proper  consid 
erations. 

Mr.  Mercer,  Mr.  Williamson  Mr.  Ramsay  Mr.  Wilson  &  Mr. 
Madison,  strenuously  opposed  the  Report,  as  improper  altogether 
as  far  as  it  related  to  the  French  Legion,  and  in  other  respects  so 
until  the  State  of  P?  s?  on  a  summons  refuse  to  restore  the  articles 
seized. 

Mr.  Rutledge  with  equal  warmth  contended  for  the  expediency 
of  the  measures  reported. 

Mr.  Mercer  &  Mr.  Madison  at  length  proposed  that  Congress 
s?  assert  the  right  on  this  subject  &  summon  the  State  of  Pen?  to 
redress  the  wrong  immediately.  The  Report  was  recommitted 
with  this  proposition  &  Mr.  Wilson  &  Mr.  Mercer  added  to 
y?  Com? 

The  speech  of  the  K.  of  G.  B.  on  the  5^  of  Dec.r,  1782,  arrived 
&  produced  great  joy  in  general,  except  among  the  merch'.5  who 
had  great  quantities  of  merchandize  in  store  the  price  of  which 
immediately  &  materially  fell.  The  most  judicious  members  of 
Cong?  however  suffered  a  great  diminution  of  their  joy  from  the 
impossibility  of  discharging  the  arrears  &  claims  of  the  army  & 
their  apprehensions  of  new  difficulties  from  that  quarter.  * 


FRIDAY  FEE?"   14. 

Mr.  Jones  Mr.  Rutledge  &  Mr.  Wilson  to  whom  had  been 
referred  on  Tuesday  last  a  letter  from  Mr.  Jefferson  stating 

1  "  I  heartily  congratulate  you  on  the  dawn  of  peace,  presented  in  the  enclosed 
paper.  Apprehending  that  the  commercial  sagacity  of  this  and  intervening 
places  may  seize  the  crisis  to  speculate  on  the  staple  of  Virginia,  we  have 
judged  it  prudent  to  despatch  a  messenger,  with  the  intelligence  to  the  Govern 
ment.  Private  letters  will  also  scatter  it  along  the  road. 

"  I  will  not  damp  your  joy  by  dwelling  on  prospects  which  have  that  tend 
ency  ;  but  it  will  not  be  improper  to  hint  to  you,  that  there  is  much  reason  to 
believe  that  the  cloud  which  has  been  some  time  lowering  on  the  North  river, 
will  not  be  dispelled  by  the  rays  of  peace.  The  opinion  seems  to  be  well 
founded,  that  the  arms  which  have  secured  the  liberties  of  their  country  will 
not  be  laid  down,  until  justice  is  secured  to  those  who  have  wielded  them  ;  and 
that  dangerous  convulsions  would  be  hazarded  by  orders  for  that  purpose.  I 
have  not  time  to  add  more  at  present. — Madison  to  Edmund  Randolph, 
February  15,  1783.  Madison  Papers  (1840). 


1 7  83]  JAMES  MADISON.  369 

the  obstacles  to  his  voyage,  reported  that  they  had  conferred 
with  the  Agent  of  Marine  who  s?  there  was  a  fit  vessel  ready 
for  sea  in  this  port  but  was  of  opinion  the  arrival  of  the 
British  King's  Speech  would  put  a  stop  to  the  sailing  of  any 
vessels  from  the  ports  of  America  untill  something  definite  should 
take  place  ;  and  that  if  Congress  judged  fit  that  Mr.  Jefferson  s? 
proceed  immediately  to  Europe  it  would  be  best  to  apply  to  the 
French  Minister  for  one  of  the  Frigates  in  the  Chesapeake.  The 
general  opinion  of  Cong?  seemed  to  be  that  under  present  cir 
cumstances  he  s?  suspend  his  voyage  untill  the  further  order  of 
Cong"  ;  and  on  motion  of  Mr.  Ghoram,  seconded  by  Mr.  Wolcot 
the  Sec?'  of  Foreign  Affairs  was  accordingly  without  opposition 
directed  to  make  this  known  to  Mr.  Jefferson. 

The  Report  of  the  Com?  for  obtaining  a  valuation  of  land  was 
made  &  considered.     See  the  Journal  of  this  date. 


MONDAY   FEE?  17. 

The  report  respecting  a  valuation  of  land  being  lost  as  appears 
from  the  Journal,  it  was  revived  by  the  motion  of  Mr.  Dyer 
seconded  by  Mr.  Mercer  as  it  stands,1  the  appointment  of  Com- 
missrs  by  Cong-  for  adjusting  the  quotas,  being  changed  for  a 
grand  Committee  consisting  of  a  delegate  present  from  each 
State,  for  that  purpose. 

A  motion  was  made  to  strike  out  the  clause  requiring  the  con 
currence  of  nine  voices  in  the  report  to  Congress  ;  and  on  the 
question,  shall  the  words  stand  ?  the  States  being  equally  divided 
the  clause  was  expunged.  It  was  thereafter  reconsidered  & 
re-inserted. 

1  Voting  Aye  were  New  Hampshire,  Massachusetts,  Pennsylvania,  Virginia, 
North  Carolina  and  South  Carolina  ;  voting  No  were  New  York  and  New 
Jersey  ;  evenly  divided  were  Rhode  Island  and  Connecticut.  Maryland  had  but 
one  delegate  present,  Charles  Carroll,  who  voted  No.  In  the  Virginia^delega- 
tion,  Jones,  Bland,  and  Mercer  voted  Aye,  Madison  and  Lee  voting  No. 
— Journals  of  Congress,  iv. ,  163. 

On  Dyer's  motion  all  the  States  but  New  York  and  Maryland,  through 
Carroll,  whose  vote  did  not  count,  voted  Aye.  Outside  of  New  York  'and 
Maryland,  Madison  and  Lee  were  the  only  delegates  voting  No. — Id.,  164. 

VOL.  I.— 24. 


370  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1783 

The  whole  report  was  agreed  to  with  great  reluctance  by  al 
most  all,  by  many  from  a  spirit  of  accommodation  only,  &  the 
necessity  of  doing  something  on  the  subject.  Some  of  those  who 
were  in  the  negative  particularly  Mr.  Madison,  thought  the  plan 
not  within  the  spirit  of  the  Confederation,  that  it  would  be  inef 
fectual,  and  that  the  States  would  be  dissatisfied  with  it. 

A  motion  was  made  by  Mr.  Hamilton  2d?d  by  Mr.  Fitzsimmons 

to  renew  the  recommendation  of  the Feb?,  1782  for  vesting 

Congress  with  power  to  make  abatements  in  favor  of  States  parts 
of  which  had  been  in  possession  of  the  Enemy.  It  was  referred 
to  a  committee. 


TUESDAY,    FEBY     1 8. 
Com'  of  the  whole  on  the  subject  of  gen1,  funds. 

Mr.  Rutledge  &  Mr.  Mercer  proposed  that  the  Impost  of  5  Per 
C-  as  altered  &  to  be  recommended  to  the  States,  should  be  appro 
priated  exclusively,  first  to  the  interest  of  y?  debt  to  the  army  & 
then  in  case  of  surplus  to  the  principal.  Mr.  Rutledge  urged  in 
support  of  this  motion  that  it  would  be  best  to  appropriate  this 
fund  to  the  army  as  the  most  likely  to  be  obtained  as  their  merits 
were  superior  to  those  of  all  other  Creditors,  and  as  it  was  the 
only  thing  that  promised,  what  policy  absolutely  required,  some 
satisfaction  to  them. 

Mr.  Wilson  replied  that  he  was  so  sensible  of  the  merits  of  the 
army  that  if  any  discrimination  were  to  be  made  among  the  pub 
lic  creditors,  he  should  not  deny  them  perhaps  a  preference,  but 
that  no  such  discrimination  was  necessary  ;  that  the  ability  of  the 
public  was  equal  to  the  whole  debt,  and  that  before  it  be  split  into 
different  descriptions  the  most  vigorous  efforts  ought  to  be  made 
to  provide  for  it  entire.  That  we  ought  first  at  least  to  see  what 
funds  could  be  provided,  to  see  how  far  they  would  be  deficient, 
and  then,  in  the  last  necessity  only  to  admit  discriminations. 

Mr.  Ghoram  agreed  with  Mr.  Wilson.  He  said  an  exclusive 
appropriation  to  the  army  would  in  some  places  be  unpopular  and 
would  prevent  a  compliance  of  those  States  whose  Citizens  were 


1783]  JAMES  MADISON.  371 

the  greatest  Creditors  of  the  United  States  ;  since  without  the 
influence  of  the  public  creditors,  the  measure  could  never  be  car 
ried  through  the  States,  and  these  if  excluded  from  the  appropria 
tion  would  be  even  interested  in  frustrating  the  measure  & 
keeping  by  that  means  their  cause  a  common  one  with  the  army. 
Mr.  Mercer  applauded  the  wisdom  of  the  Confederation  in 
leaving  the  provision  of  money  to  the  States,  said  that  when  this 
plan  was  deviated  from  by  Congress,  their  objects  should  be  such 
as  were  best  known  &  most  approved  ;  that  the  States  were  jealous 
of  one  another,  &  w?  not  comply  unless  they  were  fully  acquainted 
with  &  approved  the  purpose  to  which  their  money  was  to  be  ap 
plied,  that  nothing  less  than  such  a  preference  of  the  army  would 
conciliate  them,  that  no  Civil  Creditor  would  dare  to  put  his 
claims  on  a  level  with  those  of  the  army,  and  insinuated  that  the 
speculations  which  had  taken  place  in  loan  office  certificates  might 
lead  to  a  revision  of  that  subject  on  principles  of  equity,  that  if 
too  much  were  asked  from  the  States  they  would  grant  nothing. 
He  said  that  it  had  been  alledged,  that  the  large  public  debt  if 
funded  under  Congress  would  be  a  cement  of  the  Confederacy. 
He  thought  on  the  contrary  it  would  hasten  its  dissolution  ;  as 
the  people  would  feel  its  weight  in  the  most  obnoxious  of  all  forms 
that  of  taxation.1 

1  "  I  am  glad  to  find  by  your  favor  of  the  7l.h  [ins]  tant  that  the  necessity  of  a  re- 
adoption  of  the  impost  presses  so  strongly  on  your  mind.  To  give  it  a  fair  ex 
periment  with  the  ensuing  Assembly  it  will  be  indispensable  that  you  should  be 
its  advocate  on  the  floor.  Those  who  effected  its  repeal  will  never  inactively 
suffer  it  to  be  reinstated  in  our  code.  Mercer  from  "what  motive  God  knows  says 
that  he  will  crawl  to  Richmond  on  his  bare  knees  to  prevent  it.  Having  already 
changed  his  opinion  on  the  subject  he  fears  perhaps  the  charge  of  unsteadi 
ness.  Perhaps  too  his  zeal  against  a  general  revenue  may  be  cooled\>y  the  accom 
plishment  in  Congress  of  a  plan  for  a  valuation  of  land  on  the  ruins  of  which 
he  among  others  suspected  the  former  was  to  be  established.  This  plan  passed 
Congress  yesterday.  It  proposes  that  the  States  shall  return  to  Cong?  before 
Jan?  next  their  respective  quantities  of  land  the  number  of  houses  thereon  dis 
tinguishing  dwelling  houses  from  others,  and  the  no  of  Inhabitants  distinguish 
ing  Whites  from  blacks.  These  data  aie  to  be  referred  to  a  Grand  Com®  ,  by 
whom  a  report  in  which  nine  voices  must  unite,  is  to  be  made  to  Congress 
which  report  is  to  settle  the  proportions  of  each  State,  &  to  be  ratified  or  re 
jected  by  Cong*  without  alteration.  Who  could  have  supposed  that  such  a 


372  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1783 

On  the  question  the  States  were  all  no  except  S.  Carolina, 
which  was  ay.1 

A  motion  was  made  by  Mr.  Rutledge,  2d?d  by  Mr.  Bland  to 
change  the  plan  of  the  impost  in  such  a  manner  as  that  a  tariff 
might  be  formed  for  all  articles  that  would  admit  of  it,  and  that  a 
duty  ad  valorem  sd-  be  collected  only  on  such  articles  as  would 
not  admit  of  it. 

In  support  of  such  an  alteration  it  was  urged  that  it  would 
lessen  the  opportunity  of  collusion  between  Collector  &  importer 
&  would  be  more  equal  among  the  States.  On  the  other  side  it 
was  alledged  that  the  States  had  not  objected  to  that  part  of  the 
plan,  and  a  change  might  produce  objections  —  that  the  nature 
&  variety  of  imports  would  require  necessarily  the  collection  to 
be  ad-valorem  on  the  greater  part  of  them,  that  the  forming  of  a 
book  of  rates  wd  be  attended  with  great  difficulties  &  delays,  and 
that  it  would  be  in  the  power  of  Congress  by  raising  the  rate 
of  the  article  to  augment  the  duty  beyond  the  limitation  of  5  per 
ct  and  that  this  consideration  would  excite  objections  on  the  part 
of  the  States — The  motion  was  negatived — 

A  motion  was  made  by  M*  Hamilton  2d?d  by  M?  Wilson  ;  that 
whereas  Congres  was  desirous  that  the  motives  &  views  of  their 

measure  could  ever  have  been  the  offspring  of  a  zealous  and  scrupulous  respect 
for  the  Confederation  ?  .  .  ." — Madison  to  Edmund  Randolph,  February 
18,  1783.  (Italics  for  cypher.) 

On  the  same  day  he  wrote  to  Jefferson  : 

"  The  last  paper  from  N.  Y.,  as  the  inclosed  will  show  you  has  brought  us 
another  token  of  the  approach  of  peace.  It  is  somewhat  mysterious  neverthe 
less  that  the  preliminaries  with  America  should  be  represented  by  Sec*  Town- 
send  as  actually  signed  and  those  with  France  as  to  be  signed,  as  also  that  the 
signing  of  the  latter  would  constitute  a  general  peace.  I  have  never  been  with 
out  my  apprehensions  that  some  tricks  would  be  tried  by  the  British  Court  not 
withstanding  their  exterior  fairness  of  late,  and  these  apprehensions  have  been 
rendered  much  more  serious  by  the  tenor  of  some  letters  which  you  have  seen  and 
particularly  by  the  intimation  of  Minister  of  France  to  Mr.  Livingston.  These 
considerations  have  made  me  peculiarly  solicitous  that  your  mission  should  be 
pursued  as  long  as  a  possibility  remained  of  your  sharing  in  the  object  of  it." 
(Italics  for  cypher). — Mad.  MSS. 

1  Virg*  — Mr.  Jones,  Mr.  Madison,  Mr.  Bland,  no  ;  Mr.  Lee,  Mr.  Mercer, 
ay.  [Note  in  MS.] 


1783]  JAMES  MADISON.  373 

measures  sd  be  known  to  their  constituents  in  all  cases  where  the 
public  safety  wd  admit,  that  when  the  subject  of  finances  was 
under  debate  the  doors  of  Cong?  sd  be  open.  Cong^  adjourned  it 
being  the  usual  hour  &  the  motion  being  generally  disrelished 
— The  P?  delegates  said  privately  that  they  had  brought  themselves 
into  a  critical  situation  by  dissuading  their  Constituents  from 
separate  provision  for  creditors  of  U.  S.  within  Pen?  hoping  that 
Cong?  wd  adopt  a  general  provision,  &  they  wished  their  constit 
uents  to  see  the  prospect  themselves  &  to  witness  the  conduct  of 
their  Delegates.  Perhaps  the  true  reason  was  that,  it  was  expected 
the  presence  of  public  creditors  numerous  &  weighty  in  Philad-a  wd 
have  no  influence  &  that  it  wd  be  well  for  the  public  to  come  more 
fully  to  the  knowledge  of  the  public  finances. 

Letter  recd  from  W™  Lee  at  Ghent  notifying  the  desire  of  the 
Emperor  [of  Austria]  to  form  a  commercial  treaty  with  the  U.  S., 
and  to  have  a  resid'  from  them.  Com1?  to  M'  Izard,  Ghoram  & 
Wilson. 


WEDNESDAY,     FEBRUARY    19. 

The  motion  made  yesterday  by  Mr.  Hamilton  for  opening  the 
doors  of  Congress  when  the  subject  of  the  finances  should  be  un 
der  debate  was  negatived,  Penn*  alone  being  ay. 

A  motion  was  made  by  Mr.  Hamilton  seconded  by  Mr.  Bland 
to  postpone  the  clause  of  the  report  made  by  the  Com*:  of  the 
whole,  for  altering  the  Impost,  viz.  the  clause  limiting  its  duration 
to  25  years,  in  order  to  substitute  a  proposition  declaring  it  to  be 
inexpedient  to  limit  the  period  of  its  duration  ;  first  because  it 
ought  to  be  commensurate  to  the  duration  of  the  debt,  2dl.y  be 
cause  it  was  improper  in  the  present  stage  of  the  business,  and 
all  the  limitation  of  which  it  wd.  admit  had  been  defined  in  the 
resolutions  of ,  1782. 

Mr.  Hamilton  said  in  support  of  his  motion  that  it  was  in  vain 
to  attempt  to  gain  the  concurrence  of  the  States  by  removing  the 
objections  publickly  assigned  by  them  against  the  Impost,  that 
these  were  the  ostensible  &  not  the  true  objections  ;  that  the  true 
objection  on  the  part  of  R.  I.  was  the  interference  of  the  impost 


374  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1783 

with  the  opportunity  afforded  by  their  situation  of  levying  con 
tributions  on  Con*,  &c,  which  rec^  foreign  supplies  through  the 
ports  of  R.  I.  that  the  true  objection  on  the  part  of  Va.  was  her 
having  little  share  in  the  debts  due  from  the  U.  S.  to  which  the 
impost  would  be  applied  ;  that  a  removal  of  the  avowed  objec 
tions  would  not  therefore,  remove  the  obstructions  whilst  it  would 
admit  on  the  part  of  Cong!  that  their  first  recommendation  went 
beyond  the  absolute  exigencies  of  the  public  ;  that  Cong!  having 
taken  a  proper  ground  at  first,  ought  to  maintain  it  till  time 
should  convince  the  States  of  the  propriety  of  the  measure. 

Mr.  Bland  said  that  as  the  debt  had  been  contracted  by  Con 
gress  with  the  concurrence  of  the  States,  and  Cong5,  was  looked 
to  for  payment  by  the  public  creditors,  it  was  justifiable  &  re 
quisite  in  them  to  pursue  such  means  as  would  be  adequate  to 
the  discharge  of  the  debt  ;  &  that  the  means  would  not  be  ade 
quate  if  limited  in  duration  to  a  period  within  which  no  calcula 
tions  had  shewn  that  the  debt  w^  be  discharged. 

On  the  motion  the  States  were  N.  Hampshire  divided,  Mas'.5 
no,  R.  Island  ay  ;  Con*  dr/? ;  N.  York,  ay,  N.  Jersey  ay,  Pen*  ay, 
Virg*  no  (Mr.  Bland  ay)  N.  Carolina  ay  S.  Carolina,  ay.  Mr. 
Rutledge  said  he  voted  for  postponing  not  in  order  to  agree  to 
Mr.  Hamilton's  motion  but  to  move  &  he  accordingly  renewed 
the  motion  made  in  Com*  of  the  whole,  viz  that  the  Impost 
should  be  appropriated  exclusively  to  the  army.  This  motion 
was  seconded  by  Mr.  Lee. 

Mr.  Hamilton  opposed  the  motion  strenuously  declared  that  as 
a  friend  to  the  army  as  well  as  to  the  other  Creditors  &  to  the 
public  at  large  he  could  never  assent  to  such  a  partial  distribu 
tion  of  Justice  ;  that  the  different  States  being  differently  at 
tached  to  different  branches  of  the  public  debt  would  never 
concur  in  establish?  a  fund  wc.h  was  not  extended  to  every  branch; 
that  it  was  impolitic  to  divide  the  interests  of  the  civil  &  military 
Creditors,  whose  joint  efforts  in  the  States  would  be  necessary  to 
prevail  on  them  to  adopt  a  general  revenue. 

Mr.  Mercer  favored  the  measure  as  necessary  to  satisfy  the 
army  &  to  avert  the  consequences  which  would  result  from  their 
disappointment  on  this  subject  ;  he  pronounced  that  the  army 
would  not  disband  until  satisfactory  provision  should  be  made,  & 


1783]  JAMES  MADISON.  375 

that  this  was  the  only  attainable  provision  ;  But  he  reprobated 
the  doctrine  of  permanent  debt  supported  by  a  general  &  perma 
nent  revenue  &  said  that  it  would  be  good  policy  to  separate  in 
stead  of  cementing  the  interests  of  the  Army  &  the  other  public 
creditors,  insinuating  that  the  claims  of  the  latter  were  not  sup 
ported  by  justice  &  said  that  the  loan  office  certificates  ought  to 
be  revised. 

Mr.  Fitzsimmons  observed  that  it  was  unnecessary  to  make  a 
separate  appropriation  of  the  Impost  to  one  particular  debt,  since 
if  other  funds  s^  be  superadded,  there  would  be  more  simplicity 
&  equal  propriety  in  an  aggregate  fund  for  the  aggregate  debt 
funded  ;  and  that  if  no  other  funds  should  be  superadded  it 
\vd.  be  unjust  &  impolitic  ;  that  the  States  whose  Citizens  were 
the  chief  creditors  of  the  U.  S.  wd.  never  concur  in  such  a  meas 
ure  ;  that  the  mercantile  interest  which  comprehended  the  chief 
Creditors  of  Pen*  had  by  their  influence  obtained  the  prompt  & 
full  concurrence  of  that  State  in  the  Impost,  and  if  that  influence 
were  excluded  the  State  would  repeal  its  law.  He  concurred 
with  those  who  hoped  the  army  wd.  not  disband  unless  provision 
sd.  be  made  for  doing  them  justice. 

Mr.  Lee  contended  that  as  every  body  felt  and  acknowledged 
the  force  of  the  demands  of  the  army,  an  appropriation  of  the 
Impost  to  them  w?  recommend  it  to  all  the  States  ;  that  distinct 
&  specific  appropriations  of  distinct  revenue  was  the  only  true 
System  of  finance,  and  was  the  practice  of  all  other  nations  who 
were  enlightened  on  this  subject ;  that  the  army  had  not  only 
more  merit  than  the  mercantile  creditors  ;  but  that  the  latter 
would  be  more  able  on  a  return  of  peace  to  return  to  the  business 
which  would  support  them. 

Mr.  Madison  said  that  if  other  funds  were  to  be  superadded  as 
the  Gentleman  (Mr.  Rutledge)  who  made  the  motion  admitted, 
it  was  at  least  premature  to  make  the  appropriation  in  question  ; 
that  it  wd  be  best  to  wait  till  all  the  funds  were  agreed  upon  & 
then  appropriate  them  respectively  to  those  debts  to  which  they 
s?  be  best  fitted  that  it  was  probable  the  impost  would  be  judged 
best  adapted  to  the  foreign  debt  ;  as  the  foreign  Creditors  could 
not  like  the  domestic  ever  recur  to  particular  States  for  separate 
payments  and  that  as  this  w?  be  a  revenue  little  felt  it  would  be 


376  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1783 

prudent  to  assign  it  to  those  for  whom  the  States  w?  care  least,  leav 
ing  more  obnoxious  revenues  for  those  Creditors  who  w?  excite  the 
Sympathy  of  their  Countrymen  and  c?  stimulate  them  to  do  justice. 

Mr.  Williamson  was  ags.1  the  motion  ;  said  he  did  not  wish  the 
army  to  disband  until  proper  provision  should  be  made  for  them  ; 
that  if  force  s?  be  necessary  to  excite  justice,  the  sooner  force 
was  applied  the  better. 

Mr.  Wilson  was  against  the  motion  of  Mr.  Rutledge,  he  ob 
served  that  no  instance  occurred  in  the  British  history  of  finance 
in  which  distinct  appropriations  had  been  made  to  distinct  debts 
already  contracted  ;  that  a  consolidation  of  funds  had  been  the 
result  of  experience  ;  that  an  aggregate  fund  was  more  simple  & 
would  be  most  convenient  ;  that  the  interest  of  the  whole  funded 
debt  ought  to  be  paid  before  the  principal  of  any  part  of  it ;  and 
therefore  in  case  of  surplus  of  the  impost  beyond  the  interest  of 
the  army  debt,  it  ought  at  any  rate  to  be  applied  to  the  interest 
of  the  other  debts,  and  not,  as  the  motion  proposed,  to  the  princi 
pal  of  the  army  debt.  He  was  fully  of  opinion  that  such  a  mo 
tion  would  defeat  itself,  that  by  dividing  the  interest  of  the  civil 
from  that  of  the  military  Creditors  provision  for  the  latter  would 
be  frustrated. 

On  the  question  on  Mr.  Rutledge's  motion  the  States  were, 
N.  H.  no,  Mass,  no,  Con'  no,  N.  J.  no,  Virg?  no,  (Mr.  Lee  and 
Mr.  Mercer  ay)  N.  C.  no,  S.  Carolina,  ay. 

On  the  clause  reported  by  the  Com?  of  the  whole  in  favor  of 
limiting  the  impost  to  25  years,  the  States  were  N.  H.  ay  Mas. 
ay  Con*  divd  ;  (Mr.  Dyer  ay,  Mr.  Wolcot  no)  N.  Y.  no,  N.  J. 
no,  P?  ay  (Mr.  Wilson  &  Mr.  Fitzsimmons  no)  V?  ay  (Mr.  Bland 
no)  N.  Carolina  ay,  S.  Carolina  ay,  so  the  question  was  lost. 

On  the  question  whether  the  appointment  of  Collectors  of  the 
Impost  shall  be  left  to  the  States,  the  Collectors  to  be  under  the 
controul,  &  be  amenable  to  Cong?,  there  were  7  ays  N.  Y.  & 
Pen?  being  no  &  N.  J.  divided. 


THURSDAY,  FEfiT  2O,    1783 

The  motion  for  limiting  the  impost  to  25  years  having  been 
yesterday   lost,   and   some  of  the  gentlemen   who   were   in   the 


1783]  JAMES  MADISON.  377 

negative  desponding  of  an  indefinite  grant  of  it  from  the  States, 
the  motion  was  reconsidered. 

Mr.  Wolcot  &  Mr.  Hamilton  repeat  the  inadequacy  of  a  defi 
nite  term.  Mr.  Ramsay  &  Mr.  Williamson  repeat  the  improba 
bility  of  an  indefinite  term  being  acceded  to  by  the  States,  &  the 
expediency  of  preferring  a  limited  impost  to  a  failure  of  it  alto 
gether. 

Mr.  Mercer  was  against  the  impost  altogether  but  would  con 
fine  his  opposition  within  Congress  :  He  was  in  favor  of  the 
limitation  as  an  alleviation  of  the  evil. 

Mr.  Fitzsimmons  animadverted  on  Mr.  Mercer's  insinuation 
yesterday  touching  the  loan-office  Creditors  ;  &  the  policy  of 
dividing  them  from  the  military  Creditors,  reprobated  every 
measure  which  contravened  the  principles  of  justice  &  public 
faith  ;  and  asked  whether  it  were  likely  that  Mas:  &  Pf,  to  whose 
Citizens  half  the  loan  office  debt  was  owing  would  concur  with 
Virga,  whose  Citizens  had  lent  but  little  more  than  three  hundred 
thousand  dollars,  in  any  plan  that  did  not  provide  for  that  in 
common  with  other  debts  of  the  U.  S.  He  was  against  a  limita 
tion  to  25  years. 

Mr.  Lee  wished  to  know  whether  by  Loan  office  Creditors 
were  meant  the  original  subscribers  or  the  present  holders  of  the 
certificates,  as  the  force  of  their  demands  may  be  affected  by  this 
consideration. 

Mr.  Fitzsimmons  saw  the  scope  of  the  question,  and  said 
that  if  another  scale  of  depreciation  was  seriously  in  view  he 
wished  it  to  come  out,  that  every  one  might  know  the  course  to 
be  taken. 

Mr.  Ghoram  followed  the  Sentiments  of  the  Gentleman  who 
last  spoke,  expressed  his  astonishment  that  a  Gentleman  (Mr. 
Lee)  who  had  enjoyed  such  opportunities  of  observing  the 
nature  of  public  credit,  should  advance  such  doctrines  as  were 
fatal  to  it.  He  said  it  was  time  that  this  point  s?  be  explained, 
that  if  the  former  scale  for  the  loan  office  certificates  was  to  be 
revised  and  reduced  as  one  member  from  Virg*  (Mr.  Mercer) 
contended,  or  a  further  scale  to  be  made  out  for  subsequent  de 
preciation  of  Certificates,  as  seemed  to  be  the  idea  of  the  other 
member,  (Mr.  Lee,)  the  restoration  of  public  credit  was  not  only 


378  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1783 

visionary  but  the  concurrence  of  the  States  in  any  arrangem1? 
whatever  was  not  to  be  expected.  He  was  in  favor  of  the  limita 
tion  as  necessary  to  overcome  the  objections  of  the  States. 

Mr.  Mercer  professed  his  attachment  to  the  principles  of  justice 
but  declared  that  he  thought  the  scale  by  which  the  loans  had 
been  valued  unjust  to  the  public  &  that  it  ought  to  be  revised  & 
reduced. 

On  the  question  for  the  period  of  25  years  it  was  decided  in 
the  affirmative  seven  States  being  in  favor  of  it  ;  N.  Jersey  & 
N.  York  only  being  no. 

Mr.  Mercer  called  the  attention  of  Congress  to  the  case  of  the 
goods  seized  under  a  law  of  Pen?,  on  which  the  Com?  had  not 
yet  reported,  and  wished  that  Cong5-  would  come  to  some  reso 
lution  declaratory  of  their  rights  &  which  would  lead  to  an 
effectual  interposition  on  the  part  of  the  Legislature  of  Pena 
After  much  conversation  on  the  subject  in  which  the  members 
were  somewhat  divided  as  to  the  degree  of  peremptoriness  with 
which  the  State  of  P?  should  be  called  on,  the  Resolution  on  the 
Journal,  was  finally  adopted  ;  having  been  drawn  up  by  the 
Sec?",  &  put  into  the  hands  of  a  member. 

The  Resolution1  passed  without  any  dissent. a 

[The  evening  of  this  day  was  spent  at  Mr.  Fitzsimmons'  by  Mr. 


1  "  Resolved^  That  it  does  not  appear  to  Congress  that  any  abuse  has  been 
made  of  the  passport  granted  by  the  commander  in  chief,  for  the  protection  of 
clothing  and  other  necessaries  sent  from  New  York  in  the  ship  Amazon,  for 
the  use  of  the  British  and  German  prisoners  of  war. 

"  Resolved,  That  the  goods  imported  in  the  said  ship  Amazon,  and  contained 
in  the  returns  laid  before  Congress  by  the  assistant  secretary  at  war,  are  fully 
covered  and  protected  by  the  said  passport,  and  ought  to  be  sent  with  all  ex 
pedition,  and  without  any  let  or  hindrance,  to  the  prisoners  for  whose  use  they 
were  designed." — Journals  of  Congress,  iv.,  165. 

The  Legislature  of  Pennsylvania  in  reply  to  this  declared  the  State  law 
under  which  the  seizures  had  been  made  unconstitutional  and  void. 

2  The  result  proved  that  mildness  was  the  soundest  policy.     The  Legislature 
in  consequence  having  declared  the  law  under  which  the  goods  were  seized  to 
be  void  as  contradictory  to  the  federal  Constitution.     Some  of  the  members  in 
Conversation  s"?  that  if  Congress  had  declared  the  law  to  be  void,  the  dis 
pleasure  of  the   Legislature  might  possibly  have  produced  a  different  issue. 
[Note  in  MS.] 


1783]  JAMES  MADISON. 


379 


Ghoram,  Mr.  Hamilton,  Mr.  Peters,  Mr.  Carrol,  &  Mr.  Madison. 
The  conversation  turned  on  the  subject  of  revenue  under  the 
consideration  of  Congress,  and  on  the  situation  of  the  army. 
The  conversation  on  the  first  subject  ended  in  a  general  concur 
rence  (Mr.  Hamilton  excepted)  in  the  impossibility  of  adding  to 
the  impost  on  trade  any  taxes  that  w?  operate  equally  throughout 
the  States,  or  be  adopted  by  them.  On  the  second  subject  Mr. 
Hamilton  &  Mr.  Peters  who  had  the  best  knowledge  of  the  tem 
per,  transactions  &  views  of  the  army,  informed  the  company 
that  it  was  certain  that  the  army  had  secretly  determined  not  to 
lay  down  their  arms  until  due  provision  &  a  satisfactory  prospect 
should  be  afforded  on  the  subject  of  their  pay  ;  that  there  was 
reason  to  expect  that  a  public  declaration  to  this  effect  would 
soon  be  made  ;  that  plans  had  been  agitated  if  not  formed  for 
subsisting  themselves  after  such  declaration  ;  that  as  a  proof  of 
their  earnestness  on  this  subject  the  Comander  was  already  be 
come  extremely  unpopular  among  almost  all  ranks  from  his 
known  dislike  to  every  unlawful  proceeding,  that  this  unpopularity 
was  daily  increasing  &  industriously  promoted  by  many  leading 
characters  ;  that  his  choice  of  unfit  &  indiscreet  persons  into  his 
family  was  the  pretext  and  with  some  the  real  motive  ;  but  the 
substantial  one  a  desire  to  displace  him  from  the  respect  &  confi 
dence  of  the  army  in  order  to  substitute  Gen!  [erased  &  illegible] 
as  the  conductor  of  their  efforts  to  obtain  justice.  Mr.  Hamilton 
said  that  he  knew  Gen?  Washington  intimately  and  perfectly, 
that  his  extreme  reserve,  mixed  sometimes  with  a  degree  of  asperity 
of  temper,  both  of  which  were  said  to  have  increased  of  late,  had 
contributed  to  the  decline  of  his  popularity  ;  but  that  his  virtue 
his  patriotism  &  his  firmness  would  it  might  be  depended  upon 
never  yield  to  any  dishonorable  or  disloyal  plans  into  which  he 
might  be  called  that  he  would  sooner  surfer  himself  to  be  cut  to 
pieces  ;  that  he,  (Mr.  Hamilton)  knowing  this  to  be  his  true 
character  wished  him  to  be  the  conductor  of  the  army  in  their 
plans  for  redress,  in  order  that  they  might  be  moderated  & 
directed  to  proper  objects,  &  exclude  some  other  leader  who 
might  foment  and  misguide  their  councils  ;  that  with  this  view  he 
had  taken  the  liberty  to  write  to  the  Gen!  on  this  subject  and  to 
recommend  such  a  policy  to  him.] 


380  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1783 


FRIDAY,  FEE?  21. 

Mr.  Mercer  made  some  remarks  tending  to  a  re-consideration 
of  y?  act  declaring  general  funds  to  be  necessary,  which  revived 
the  discussion  of  that  subject. 

Mr.  Madison  said  that  he  had  observed  throughout  the  pro 
ceedings  of  Congress  relative  to  the  establishment  of  such  funds 
that  the  power  delegated  to  Congress  by  the  Confederation  had 
been  very  differently  construed  by  different  members  &  that  this 
difference  of  construction  had  materially  affected  their  reasonings 
&  opinions  on  the  several  propositions  which  had  been  made  ; 
that  in  particular  it  had  been  represented  by  sundry  members 
that  Congress  was  merely  an  Executive  body  ;  and  therefore  that 
it  was  inconsistent  with  the  principles  of  liberty  &  the  spirit  of 
the  Constitution,  to  submit  to  them  a  permanent  revenue  which 
w?  be  placing  the  purse  &  the  sword  in  the  same  hands  ;  that  he 
wished  the  true  doctrine  of  the  Confederation  to  be  ascertained 
as  it  might  perhaps  remove  some  embarrassments  ;  and  towards 
that  end  would  offer  his  ideas  on  the  subject. 

He  said,  that  he  did  not  conceive  in  the  first  place  that  the 
opinion  was  sound  that  the  power  of  Congress  in  cases  of  revenue 
was  in  no  respect  Legislative,  but  merely  Executive  ;  and,  in  the 
second  place  that  admitting  the  power  to  be  Executive  a  perma 
nent  revenue  collected  &  dispensed  by  them  in  the  discharge  of 
the  debts  to  wc.h  it  s?  be  appropriated  would  be  inconsistent  with 
the  nature  of  an  Executive  body,  or  dangerous  to  the  liberties  of 
the  Republic. 

As  to  the  first  opinion  he  observed  that  by  the  Articles  of 
Confederation,  Cong*  had  clearly  &  expressly  the  right  to  fix 
the  quantum  of  revenue  necessary  for  the  public  exigencies,  & 
to  require  the  same  from  the  States  respectively  in  proportion  to 
the  value  of  their  land  ;  that  the  requisitions  thus  made  were  a 
law  to  the  States,  as  much  as  the  Acts  of  the  latter  for  complying 
with  them  were  a  law  to  their  individual  members  ;  that  the 
federal  constitution  was  as  sacred  and  obligatory  as  the  internal 
constitutions  of  the  several  States  ;  and  that  nothing  could  justify 
the  States  in  disobeying  acts  warranted  by  it,  but  some  previous 
abuse  and  infraction  on  the  part  of  Cong-  ;  that  as  a  proof  that 


1783]  JAMES  Af ADI  SON.  381 

the  power  of  fixing  the  quantum  &  making  requisitions  of  money, 
was  considered  as  a  legislative  power  over  the  purse,  he  would 
appeal  to  the  proposition  made  by  the  British  Minister  of  giving 
this  power  to  the  B.  Parliam' ,  &  leaving  to  the  American  Assem 
blies  the  privilege  of  complying  in  their  own  modes,  &  to  the 
reasonings  of  Congress  &  the  several  States  on  that  proposition. 
He  observed  further  that  by  the  articles  of  Confederation  was 
delegated  to  Cong?  a  right  to  borrow  money  indefinitely,  and 
emit  bills  of  Credit  which  was  a  species  of  borrowing,  for  repay 
ment  &  redemption  of  which  the  faith  of  the  States  was  pledged 
&  their  legislatures  constitutionally  bound.  He  asked  whether 
these  powers  were  reconcileable  with  the  idea  that  Congress  was 
a  body  merely  Executive  ?  He  asked  what  would  be  thought  in 
G.  B.,  from  whose  Constitution  our  Political  reasonings  were  so 
much  drawn,  of  an  attempt  to  prove  that  a  power  of  making 
requisitions  of  money  on  y?  Parliament  &  of  borrowing  money 
for  discharge  of  which  the  Parl-  s?  be  bound,  might  be  annexed 
to  the  Crown  without  changing  its  quality  of  an  Executive 
branch,  and  that  the  leaving  to  the  Parliam*  the  mode  only  of 
complying  with  the  requisitions  of  the  Crown  would  be  leaving 
to  it  its  supreme  &  exclusive  power  of  Legislation  ? 

As  to  the  second  point  he  referred  again  to  the  British  Consti 
tution  &  the  mode  in  which  provision  was  made  for  the  public 
debts,  observing  that  although  the  Executive  had  no  authority  to 
contract  a  debt,  yet  that  when  a  debt  had  been  authorized  or 
admitted  by  the  Parliament  a  permanent  &  irrevocable  revenue 
was  granted  by  the  Legislature,  to  be  collected  &  dispensed  by 
the  Executive  ;  and  that  this  practice  had  never  been  deemed  a 
subversion  of  the  Constitution,  or  a  dangerous  association  of  a 
power  over  the  purse  with  the  power  of  the  Sword. 

If  these  observations  were  just  as  he  conceived  them  to  be,  the 
establishment  of  a  permanent  revenue  not  by  any  assumed  author 
ity  of  Congress,  but  by  the  authority  of  the  States  at  the  recom 
mendation  of  Cong3,  to  be  collected  &  applied  by  the  latter  to  the 
discharge  of  the  public  debts,  could  not  be  deemed  inconsistent 
with  the  spirit  of  the  federal  Constitution,  or  subversive  of  the 
principles  of  liberty  ;  and  that  all  objections  drawn  from  such  a 
supposition  ought  to  be  withdrawn.  Whether  other  objections  of 


382  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1783 

sufficient  weight  might  not  lie  ag-*  such  an  establish',  was  another 
question.  For  his  part  although  for  various  reasons l  he  had 
wished  for  such  a  plan  as  most  eligible,  he  had  never  been  san 
guine  that  it  was  practicable  &  the  discussions  which  had  taken 
place  had  finally  satisfied  him  that  it  would  be  necessary  to  limit 
the  call  for  a  general  revenue  to  duties  on  commerce  &  to  call  for 
the  deficiency  in  the  most  permanent  way  that  could  be  reconciled 
with  a  revenue  established  within  each  State  separately  &  appro 
priated  to  the  Common  Treasury.  He  said  the  rule  which  he  had 
laid  down  to  himself  in  this  business  was  to  concur  in  every  ar- 
rangem*  that  s?  appear  necessary  for  an  honorable  &  just  fulfilment 
of  the  public  engagements  ;  &  in  no  measure  tending  to  augment 
the  power  of  Congress  which  sd-  appear  to  be  unnecessary  ;  and 
particularly  disclaimed  the  idea  of  perpetuating  a  public  debt. 

Mr.  Lee,  in  answer  to  Mr.  Madison,  said  the  doctrine  maintained 
by  him  was  pregnant  with  dangerous  consequences  to  the  liberties 
of  the  confederated  States  ;  that,  notwithstanding  the  specious 
arguments  that  had  been  employed  it  was  an  established  truth 
that  the  purse  ought  not  to  be  put  into  the  same  hands  with  the 
Sword  ;  that  like  arguments  had  been  used  in  favor  of  ship  money 

1  Among  other  reasons  privately  weighing  with  him,  he  had  observed  that 
many  of  the  most  respectable  people  of  America  supposed  the  preservation  of 
the  Confederacy  essential  to  secure  the  blessings  of  the  revolution  ;  and  per 
manent  funds  for  discharging  debts  essential  to  the  preservation  of  Union.  A 
disappointment  to  this  class  w?  certainly  abate  their  ardor  &  in  a  critical 
emergency,  might  incline  them  to  prefer  some  political  connection  with  G.  B., 
as  a  necessary  cure  for  our  internal  instability.  Again  Without  permanent  & 
general  funds  he  did  not  conceive  that  the  danger  of  convulsions  from  the  army 
could  be  effectually  obviated.  Lastly  he  did  not  think  that  any  thing  w?  be  so 
likely  to  prevent  disputes  among  the  States  with  the  calamities  consequent  on 
them.  The  States  were  jealous  of  each  other,  each  supposing  itself  to  be  on  the 
whole  a  creditor  to  the  others.  The  Eastern  States  in  particular  thought  them 
selves  so  with  regard  to  the  S.  States.  (See  Mr.  Ghoram,  in  the  debates  of  this 
day.)  If  general  funds  were  not  introduced  it  was  not  likely  the  balances  w? 
ever  be  discharged,  even  if  they  s?  be  liquidated.  The  consequence  w"?  be 
a  rupture  of  the  confederacy.  The  E.  States  would  at  sea  be  powerful  & 
rapacious  ;  the  Southern,  opulent  &  weak.  This  wd.  be  a  temptation  ;  the  de 
mands  on  the  S.  St.  would  be  an  occasion  ;  reprisals  w"?  be  instituted  ;  Foreign 
aid  would  be  called  in  by  first  the  weaker  then  the  stronger  side,  £  finally  both 
be  made  subservient  to  the  wars  &  politics  of  Europe.  [Note  in  MS.] 


1783]  JAMES  MADISON.  383 

in  the  reign  of  Charles  I  it  being  then  represented  as  essential  to 
the  support  of  the  Gov*,  that  the  Executive  should  be  assured  of 
the  means  of  fulfilling  its  engagements  for  the  public  service.  He 
said  it  had  been  urged  by  several  in  behalf  of  such  an  establish 
ment  for  public  credit  that  without  it  Congress  was  nothing  more 
than  a  rope  of  sand.  On  this  head  he  would  be  explicit  ;  he  had 
rather  see  Congress  a  rope  of  sand  than  a  rod  of  Iron.  He  urged 
finally  as  a  reason  why  some  States  would  not  &  ought  not  to  con 
cur  in  granting  to  Congress  a  permanent  revenue,  that  some  States 
as  Virg%  would  receive  back  a  small  part  by  paym*  from  the  U.  S. 
to  its  Citizens,  whilst  others  as  Pena-,  w?  receive  a  vast  surplus  ;  & 
consequently  by  draining  the  former  of  its  wealth. 

Mr.  Mercer  said  if  he  conceived  the  federal  compact  to  be  such 
as  it  had  been  represented  he  would  immediately  withdraw  from 
Congress  &  do  every  thing  in  his  power  to  destroy  its  existence  ; 
that  if  Cong?  had  a  right  to  borrow  money  as  they  pleased  and  to 
make  requisitions  on  the  States  that  w*  be  binding  on  them,  the 
liberties  of  the  States  were  ideal  ;  that  requisitions  ought  to  be 
consonant  to  the  Spirit  of  liberty  ;  that  they  should  go  frequently 
&  accompanied  with  full  information,  that  the  States  must  be  left 
to  judge  of  the  nature  of  them,  of  their  abilities  to  comply  with 
them  &  to  regulate  their  compliance  accordingly  ;  he  laid  great 
stress  on  the  omission  of  Cong5  to  transmit  half  yearly  to  the  States 
an  ace'  of  the  monies  borrowed  by  them  &c.  and  even  insinuated 
that  this  omission  had  absolved  the  States  in  some  degree  from 
the  engagements.  He  repeated  his  remarks  on  the  injustice  of 
the  rule  by  which  loan  office  Certificates  had  been  settled  &  his 
opinion  that  some  defalcations  would  be  necessary. 

Mr.  Holten  was  opposed  to  all  permanent  funds,  and  to  every 
arrangement  not  within  the  limits  of  the  Confederation. 

Mr.  Hamilton  enlarged  on  the  general  utility  of  permanent 
funds  to  the  federal  interests  of  this  Country,  &  pointed  out  the 
difference  between  the  nature  of  the  Constitution  of  the  British 
Executive  &  that  of  the  U.  S.  in  answer  to  Mr.  Lee's  reasoning 
from  the  case  of  Ship  money. 

Mr.  Ghoram  adverted  with  some  warmth  to  the  doctrines  ad 
vanced  by  Mr.  Lee  &  Mercer,  concerning  the  loan  office  Cred 
itors.  He  said  the  Union  could  never  be  maintained  on  any  other 


384  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1783 

ground  than  that  of  Justice  ;  that  some  States  had  suffered  greatly 
from  the  deficiencies  of  others  already  ;  that  if  Justice  was  not  to 
be  obtained  through  the  federal  system  &  this  system  was  to  fail 
as  would  necessarily  follow,  it  was  time  this  should  be  known  that 
some  of  the  States  might  be  forming  other  confederacies  adequate 
to  the  purposes  of  their  safety. 

This  debate  was  succeeded  by  a  discharge  of  the  Committee 
from  the  business  of  devising  the  means  requisite  for  restoring 
Public  credit,  &c  &c.  and  the  business  referred  to  a  Com':,  con 
sisting  of  Mr.  Ghoram,  Mr.  Hamilton,  Mr.  Madison,  Mr.  Fitz- 
simmons  &  Mr.  Rutledge.1 

1  "  Congress  are  still  engaged  on  the  subject  of  providing  adequate  revenues 
for  the  public  debts,  particularly  that  due  to  the  army.  The  recommendation 
of  the  Impost  will  be  renewed  with  perhaps  some  little  variation,  to  which  will 
be  superadded  probably  a  duty  on  a  few  enumerated  articles.  Mr.  Mercer 
altho1  he  continues  to  be  adverse  to  the  measure  declares  now  that  he  will  not 
carry  his  opposition  out  of  Congress.  Whether  any  other  general  revenues  will 
be  recommended  is  very  uncertain.  A  poll  tax  seems  to  be  the  only  one  suffi 
ciently  simple  &  equal  for  the  purpose,  and  besides  other  objections  to  which 
even  that  is  liable,  the  Constitution  of  Maryland  which  interdicts  such  a  tax  is 
an  insuperable  bar.  The  plan  talked  of  by  some  for  supplying  the  deficiency 
is  to  call  on  the  States  to  provide  each  its  proportion  of  a  permanent  revenue 
within  itself,  and  to  appropriate  it  to  the  continental  debt.  The  objections 
against  this  plan  are  that  as  the  execution  of  it  will  depend  on  a  unanimous  & 
continued  punctuality  in  the  13  States,  it  is  a  precarious  basis  for  public  credit, 
that  this  precariousness  will  be  increased  by  mutual  jealousies  among  the  States 
that  others  may  be  sparing  themselves  exertions  which  they  are  submitting  to  ; 
and  that  these  jealousies  will  be  still  more  increased  by  the  mutual  opinion 
which  prevails  that  they  are  comparatively  in  advance  to  the  U.  States  ;  an 
opinion  which  cannot  be  corrected  without  closing  the  accounts  between  all  of 
them  &  the  U.  States  ;  pre-requisites  to  which  are  a  valuation  of  the  land,  and 
a  final  discrimination  of  such  parts  of  the  separate  expenditures  of  the  States 
as  ought  to  be  transferred  to  the  common  mass,  from  such  parts  as  ought  in 
justice  to  fall  on  the  particular  States  themselves.  Some  States  also  will  con 
tend  and  it  would  seem  neither  ag?*  the  principles  of  justice  nor  the  spirit  of 
the  Confederation,  for  a  retrospective  abatement  of  their  share  of  the  past  debt 
according  to  their  respective  disabilities  from  year  to  year  throughout  the  war. 
What  will  be  the  end  of  this  complication  of  embarrassments  time  only  can 
disclose.  But  a  greater  embarrassment  than  any  is  still  behind.  The  discon 
tents  and  designs  of  the  army  are  every  day  taking  a  more  solemn  form.  It  is 
now  whispered  that  they  have  not  only  resolved  not  to  lay  down  their  arms  till 
justice  shall  be  done  them  but  that  to  prevent  surprise  a  public  declaration  will  be 


1783]  JAMES  MADISON.  385 

No  Congress  till 

TUESDAY,  FEBRUARY  25. 

In  favor  of  the  motion  of  Mr.  Oilman  (see  the  Journal  of  this 
date)  to  refer  the  officers  of  the  army  for  their  half -pay  to  their 
respective  States  it  was  urged  that  this  plan  alone  would  secure  to 
made  to  that  effect.  It  is  added  and  /  fear  with  too  nnich  certainty,  that  the  in 
fluence  of  General  Washington  is  rapidly  decreasing  in  the  army  insomuch  that 
it  is  even  in  contemplation  to  substitute  some  less  scrupulous  guardian  of  their 
interests. 

"  There  are  a  variety  of  rumors  concerning  peace  but  none  of  them  of  suffi 
cient  authority  to  be  particularized.  The  speech  of  the  King  of  G.  B.  to  his 
parliament,  and  the  letter  to  the  Lord  Mayor  of  London  from  Sec?  Townsend 
as  it  is  stated,  are  the  only  respectable  evidence  yet  rec?  There  are  also 
rumors  on  the  adverse  side  which  have  still  less  the  complexion  of  authenticity. 

' '  A  quantity  of  clothing  on  its  passage  through  this  State  to  the  British  pris 
oners  of  war  under  a  passport  of  Gen1.  Washington  was  lately  seized  and  con 
demned  under  a  law  of  this  State  ag^  the  importation  of  British  goods.  After 
several  fruitless  experiments  to  prevail  on  the  Seizors  to  relinquish  their  appeal 
to  the  law,  the  Legislature  have  I  am  told  cut  the  business  short  by  declaring 
the  law  as  far  as  it  interfered  with  the  authority  of  the  passport  to  be  unconsti 
tutional  &  void  ab  initio. 

"  You  will  suffer  me  to  renew  my  exhortations  to  an  exchange  of  your  office 
under  the  State  for  a  seat  in  the  Legislature.  It  depends  much  in  my  opinion 
on  the  measures  which  may  be  pursued  by  Congress  &  the  several  States  within 
the  ensuing  period  of  6  months  whether  prosperity  &  tranquillity,  or  confusion 
and  disunion  are  to  be  the  fruits  of  the  Revolution.  The  seeds  of  the  latter 
are  so  thickly  sown,  that  nothing  but  the  most  enlightened  and  liberal  policy 
will  be  able  to  stifle  them.  The  Eastern  States,  particularly  Massachusetts 
conceive  that  compared  with  the  Southern,  they  are  greatly  in  advance  in  the 
general  account.  A  respectable  Delegate  from  Massachusetts,  a  few  days  agor 
being  a  little  chafed\>y  some  expressions  of  Messrs.  Lee  d>°  Mercer  unfavorable 
to  loan-office  creditors  said  that  if  justice  was  not  to  be  obtained  thro'  general' 
confederacy,  the  sooner  it  was  known  the  better,  that  some  States  might  be 
forming  other  confederacies  adequate  to  the  purpose  adding  that  some  had  suf 
fered  immensely  from  the  want  of  a  proportional  compliance  with  demands  for 
men  &  money  by  others.  However  erroneous  these  ideas  may  be,  do  they  not 
merit  serious  attention  ?  Unless  some  amicable  &  adequate  arrangements  be 
speedily  taken  for  adjusting  all  the  subsisting  accounts,  and  discharging  the 
public  engagements,  a  dissolution  of  the  Union  will  be  inevitable.  Will  not, 
in  that  event,  the  Southern  States  which  at  sea  will  be  opulent  6*  weak,  be  an 
easy  prey  to  the  Eastern,  which  will  be  powerful  &>  rapacious?  and  particularly 
if  supposed  claims  of  justice  are  on  the  side  of  the  latter  will  there  not  be  a 
ready  pretext  for  reprisals  ?  The  consequence  of  such  a  situation  would  probably 

VOL.  I.  — 25. 


386  THE   WRITINGS  OF  [1783 

the  officers  any  advantage  from  that  engagement  ; 1  since  Congress 
had  no  independent  fund  out  of  which  it  could  be  fulfilled,  and 
the  States  of  Con*  &  R.  I.,  in  particular  would  not  comply  with 
any  recommendation  of  Cong  nor  even  requisition,  for  that  pur 
pose.  It  was  also  said  that  it  would  be  satisfactory  to  the  officers  ; 
and  that  it  would  apportion  on  the  States  that  part  of  the  public 
burden  with  sufficient  equality.  Mr.  Dyer  said  that  the  original 
promise  of  Congress  on  that  subject  was  considered  by  some  of 
the  States  as  a  fetch  upon  them,  and  not  within  the  spirit  of  the 
authority  delegated  to  Congress.  Mr.  Wolcot  said  the  States  w? 
give  Cong5  nothing  whatever  unless  they  were  gratified  in  this 
particular.  Mr.  Collins  said  R.  I.  had  expressly  instructed  her 
delegates  to  oppose  every  measure  tending  to  an  execution  of  the 
promise  out  of  monies  under  the  disposition  of  Congress. 

On  the  other  side  it  was  urged  that  the  half  pay  was  a  debt  as 
solemnly  contracted  as  any  other  debt  ;  and  was,  consequently,  as 
binding  under  the  12*  article  of  the  Confederation  on  the  States, 
&  that  they  could  not  refuse  a  requisition  made  for  that  purpose  ; 
that  it  would  be  improper  to  countenance  a  spirit  of  that  sort  by 
yielding  to  it  that  such  concessions  on  the  part  of  Cong5  w'-1  pro 
duce  compliances  on  the  part  of  the  States,  in  other  instances, 
clogged  with  favorite  conditions,  that  a  reference  of  the  officers 
to  the  particular  States  to  whose  lines  they  belong  would  not  be 


be  that  alliances  would  be  sought  first  by  the  weaker  &  then  by  the  stronger 
party  &  this  country  be  made  subject  to  the  wars  &  politics  of  Europe." — Madi 
son  to  Edmund  Randolph,  February  25,  1783.  (Italics  for  cypher.) 

1  "  Either  by  giving  them  security  for  the  payment  of  the  same  as  it  may  be 
come  due,  or  by  commutation  for  such  sum  in  gross,  as  may  be  mutually  agreed 
on  by  each  state,  and  the  officers  to  them  respectively  belonging  ;  that  each  and 
every  state,  which  shall  make  compensation  to  their  officers,  agreeably  to  the 
foregoing  resolution,  shall  be  exonerated  and  fully  and  finally  discharged  from 
their  respective  proportions  of  all  taxes  and  all  other  payments  of  monies  what 
soever,  on  account  of  half-pay  to  the  officers  belonging  to  the  United  States 
or  any  of  them  ;  provided  always  that  nothing  in  this  resolution  shall  extend  to 
discharge  any  state  from  paying  their  just  proportion  of  the  half-pay  which 
may  be  due  to  such  officers  as  have  not  heretofore  or  do  not  now  belong  to  the 
line  of  any  particular  state,  or  to  the  officers  belonging  to  any  particular  state, 
which  may  by  the  events  of  the  war  be  rendered  unable  to  make  such  compen 
sation." —  Journals  of  Congress,  iv. ,  166. 


1783]  JAMES  MADISON.  387 

satisfactory  to  the  officers  of  those  States  who  objected  to  half  pay, 
and  would  increase  the  present  irritation  of  Jhe  army  ;  that  to  do 
it  without  their  unanimous  consent  would  be  a  breach  of  the  con 
tract  by  which  the  U.  S.  collectively  were  bound  to  them  ;  and 
above  all  that  the  proposed  plan,  which  discharged  any  particular 
State  which  should  settle  with  its  officers  on  this  subject,  altho' 
other  States  might  reject  the  plan,  from  its  proportion  of  that  part 
of  the  public  burden,  was  a  direct  and  palpable  departure  from 
the  law  of  the  Confederation.  According  to  this  instrument  the 
whole  public  burden  of  debt  must  be  apportioned  according  to  a 
valuation  of  land,  nor  c?  any  thing  but  a  unanimous  concurrence 
of  the  States  dispense  with  this  law.  According  to  the  plan  pro 
posed  so  much  of  the  public  burden  as  the  \  pay  s?  amount  to, 
was  to  be  apportioned  according  to  the  number  of  officers  belong 
ing  to  each  line  ;  the  plan  to  take  effect  as  to  all  those  States 
which  should  adopt  it,  without  waiting  for  the  unanimous  adoption 
of  the  States  ;  and  that  if  Congress  had  authority  to  make  the 
number  of  officers  the  rule  of  apportioning  one  part  of  the  Public 
debt  on  the  States,  they  might  extend  the  rule  to  any  other  part 
or  to  the  whole,  or  might  substitute  any  other  arbitrary  rule  which 
they  should  think  fit.  The  motion  of  Mr.  Oilman  was  negatived. 
See  the  ays  &  noes  on  the  Journal.1 


WEDNESDAY,    FEE?     26. 

Mr.  Lee  observed  to  Congress  that  it  appeared  from  the  News 
papers  of  the  day  that  sundry  enormities  had  been  committed  by 
the  refugees  within  the  State  of  Delaware,  as  it  was  known  that 
like  enormities  had  been  committed  on  the  Shores  of  the  Chesa- 
peak,  notwithstanding  the  pacific  professions  of  the  Enemy  ;  that 
it  was  probable  hower  that  if  complaint  were  to  be  made  to  the 
British  Commander  at  N.  York  the  practice  would  be  restrained. 
He  accordingly  moved  that  a  Committee  might  be  appointed  to 
take  into  consideration  the  means  of  restraining  such  practices. 

1  Against  the  motion  were  New  York,  New  Jersey,  Maryland,  Virginia  ; 
North  Carolina  and  South  Carolina  ;  in  favor  of  it  New  Hampshire  and  Con 
necticut.  Massachusetts  and  Rhode  Island  each  voted  in  favor  but  by  one  dele 
gate  only.  New  Jersey  was  divided. — Journals  of  Congress,  iv.,  166,  167. 


388  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1783 

The  motion  was  2d^d  by  Mr.  Peters.  By  Mr.  Fitzsimmons  the 
motion  was  viewed  as  tending  to  a  request  of  favors  from  S-  Guy 
Carleton.  It  was  apprehended  by  others  that,  as  Gen!  Washington 
&  the  commanders  of  separate  armies  had  been  explicitly  informed 
of  the  sense  of  Congress  on  this  point,  any  fresh  measures  thereon 
might  appear  to  be  a  censure  on  them  ;  and  that  Congress  cd-  not 
ground  any  measure  on  the  case  in  question,  having  no  official 
information  relative  to  it.  The  motion  of  Mr.  Lee  was  negatived. 
But  it  appearing  from  the  vote  to  be  the  desire  of  many  members 
that  some  step  might  be  taken  by  Congress,  the  motion  of  Mr. 
Madison  &  Mr.  Mercer  as  it  stands  on  the  Journal  was  proposed 
and  agreed  to  as  free  from  all  objections.1 

A  motion  was  made  by  Mr.  Hamilton  to  give  a  brevet  commion. 
to  Majr  Burnet,  aid  to  Gen'  Greene  &  messenger  of  the  evacua 
tion  of  Charleston,  of  L  Colonel  ;  there  being  six  ayes  only  the 
motion  was  lost.  N.  H.,  no,  Mr.  Lee  &  Mercer  no. 

The  Committee  consisting  of  Mr.  Lee  &c.  to  whom  had  been 
referred  the  motion  of  Mr.  Hamilton  recommending  to  the  States 
to  authorize  Congress  to  make  abatements  in  the  retrospective 
apportionment  by  a  valuation  of  land  in  favor  of  States  whose 
ability  from  year  to  year  had  been  most  impaired  by  the  war  ; 
reported  that  it  was  inexpedient  to  agree  to  such  motion  because 
one  State  (Virg?)  having  disagreed  to  such  a  measure,  on  a  for 
mer  recomendation  to  Congress,  it  was  not  probable  that  another 
recommendation  would  produce  any  effect ;  and  because  the 
difficulties  of  making  such  abatements  were  greater  than  the  ad 
vantages  expected  from  them. 

Mr.  Lee  argued  in  favor  of  the  report  &  the  reasons  on  which 
it  was  grounded.  The  Eastern  delegations  were  for  leaving  the 
matter  open  for  future  determination  when  an  apportionment 
should  be  in  question. 

Mr.  Madison  said  he  thought  that  the  principle  of  the  motion 
was  conformable  to  justice  &  within  the  spirit  of  the  Confederation  ; 

1  It  recommended  to  the  executives  of  the  several  States  to  inform  the  com- 
mander-in-chief  or  "commander  of  a  separate  army"  whenever  outrages  on 
person  or  property  were  committed  by  persons  in  the  service  of  the  enemy,  in 
order  that  retaliatory  measures  might  be  taken. — Journals  of  Congress,  iv., 
167. 


1783]  JAMES  MADISON.  389 

according  to  which  apportionm1.5  ought  to  have  been  made  from 
time  to  time  throughout  the  war  according  to  the  existing  wealth 
of  each  State.  But  that  it  would  be  improper  to  take  up  this  case 
separately  from  other  claims  of  equity  which  would  be  put  in  by 
other  States  ;  that  the  most  likely  mode  of  obtaining  the  concur 
rence  of  the  States  in  any  plan  v?d.  be  to  comprehend  in  it  the 
equitable  interests  of  all  of  them  ;  a  comprehensive  plan  of  that 
sort  would  be  the  only  one  that  would  cut  off  all  sources  of  future 
controversy  among  the  States.  That  as  soon  as  the  plan  of 
revenue  sd.  be  prepared  for  recomendation  to  the  States  it  would 
be  proper  for  Cong?  to  take  into  consideration  &  combine  with  it 
every  object l  which  might  facilitate  its  progress,  &  for  a  complete 

1  He  had  in  view  the  follow?  objects  :  I.  The  abatements  proposed  by  Mr. 
Hamilton.  2.  A  transfer  into  the  common  mass  of  expenses  of  all  the  separate 
expenses  incurred  by  the  States  in  their  particular  defence.  3.  An  acquisition 
to  the  U.  States  of  the  vacant  territory.  The  plan  thus  extended  would  affect 
the  interest  of  the  States  as  follows,  viz.  N.  Hampshire  would  approve  the  es 
tablishment  of  a  General  revenue,  as  tending  to  support  the  confederacy,  to 
remove  causes  of  future  contention,  and  to  secure  her  trade  against  separate 
taxation  from  the  States  thro'  which  it  is  carried  on.  She  would  also  approve 
of  a  share  in  the  vacant  territory.  Having  never  been  much  invaded  by  the 
enemy  her  interests  would  be  opposed  to  the  abatements,  &  throwing  all  the 
separate  expenditures  into  the  common  mass.  The  discharge  of  the  public 
debts  from  the  common  treasury  would  not  be  required  by  her  interest  the  loans 
of  her  citizens  being  under  her  proportion.  See  the  statement  of  them. 

Massachusetts,  is  deeply  interested  in  the  discharge  of  the  public  debts.  The 
expedition  to  Penobscot  alone  interests  her,  she  supposes,  in  making  a  common 
mass  of  expenses  ;  her  interest  is  opposed  to  abatements  ;  the  other  objects 
w<?  not  peculiarly  affect  her. 

Rhode  Island,  as  a  weak  State  is  interested  in  a  General  revenue  as  tending 
to  support  the  Confederacy  and  prevent  future  contentions,  but  against  it  as  tend 
ing  to  deprive  her  of  the  advantage  afforded  by  her  situation  of  taxing  the  com 
merce  of  the  contiguous  States.  As  tending  to  discharge  with  certainty  the 
public  debts,  her  proportion  of  loans  interest  her  rather  against  it.  Having 
been  the  seat  of  war  for  a  considerable  time,  she  might  not  perhaps  be  opposed 
to  abatements  on  that  account.  The  exertions  for  her  defence  having  been 
previously  sanctioned,  it  is  presumed  in  most  instances,  she  would  be  opposed 
to  making  a  common  mass  of  expenses.  In  the  acquisition  of  vacant  territory 
she  is  deeply  and  anxiously  interested. 

Connecticut  is  interested  in  a  general  revenue  as  tending  to  protect  her  com 
merce  from  separate  taxation  from  N.  York  &  Rhode  Island  ;  and  somewhat 


390  THE   WRITINGS  OF  [1783 

provision  for  the  tranquillity  of  the  U.  States.       The  question  on 
Mr.  Hamilton's  motion  was  postponed. 

The  letter  from  Mr.  Morris  requesting  that  the  injunction  of 
secrecy  might  be  withdrawn  from  his  preceding  letter  signifying 
to  Congress  his  purpose  of  resigning,  was  committed  to. 


FEBRUARY     27TH. 

On  the  report  of  the  Com?  on  Mr.  Morris's  letter  the  injunction 
of  secrecy  was  taken  off  without  dissent  or  observation. 

The  attention  of  Congress  was  recalled  to  the  subject  of  half 

as  providing  for  loan  office  creditors.  Her  interest  is  opposed  to  abatements, 
and  to  a  common  mass  of  expenses.  Since  the  condemnation  of  her  title  to  her 
Western  Claims,  she  may  perhaps  consider  herself  as  interested  in  the  acqui 
sition  of  the  vacant  lands.  In  other  respects,  she  \v<?  not  be  peculiarly  affected. 

N.  York  is  exceedingly  attached  to  a  general  revenue  as  tending  to  sup 
port  the  confederacy  and  prevent  future  contests  among  the  States.  Although 
her  Citizens  are  not  lenders  beyond  the  proportion  of  the  State,  yet  individuals 
of  great  weight  are  deeply  interested  in  provision  for  public  debts.  In  abate 
ments  N.  York  is  also  deeply  interested.  In  mak?  a  common  mass  also 
interested,  and  since  the  acceptance  of  her  cession,  interested  in  those  of  other 
States. 

N.  Jersey  is  interested  as  a  smaller  State,  in  a  General  revenue  as  tend?  to 
support  the  confederacy,  and  to  prevent  future  contests  and  to  guard  her  com 
merce  agsF  the  separate  taxation  of  Pennsylvania  and  N.  Y.  The  loans  of  her 
citizens  are  not  materially  disproportionate.  Although  this  State  has  been 
much  the  theatre  of  the  war,  she  wld  not  perhaps  be  interested  in  abatements. 
Having  had  a  previous  sanction  for  particular  expenditures  her  interest  w<?  be 
opposed  to  a  common  mass.  In  the  vacant  territory,  she  is  deeply  and  anxiously 
interested. 

Penn?  is  deeply  interested  in  a  general  revenue,  the  loans  of  her  Citizens 
amounting  to  more  than  \  of  that  branch  of  the  public  debt.  As  far  as  a  gen 
eral  impost  on  trade  would  restrain  her  from  taxing  the  trade  of  N.  Jersey,  it 
would  be  against  her  interest.  She  is  interested  against  abatements  ;  and  against 
a  common  mass,  her  expenditures  having  been  always  previously  sanctioned. 
In  the  vacant  territory,  she  is  also  interested. 

Delaware  is  interested  by  her  weakness  in  a  general  revenue  as  tending  to 
support  the  confederacy  &  future  tranquillity  of  the  States  ;  but  not  materially, 
by  the  credits  of  her  Citizens.  Her  interest  is  opposed  to  abatements  &  to  a 
common  mass.  To  the  vacant  territory  she  is  firmly  attached. 

Maryland.  Having  never  been  the  Seat  of  war  &  her  Citizens  being  creditors 
below  her  proportion,  her  interest  lies  ag?1  a  general  revenue,  otherwise  than 


1783]  JAMES  MADISON.  391 

pay  by  Messrs.  Dyer  &  Wolcot,  in  order  to  introduce  a  reconsid 
eration  of  the  mode  of  referring  it  separately  to  the  States  to 
provide  for  their  own  lines. 

Mr.  Mercer  favored  the  reconsideration,  representing  the  com 
mutation  proposed,  as  tending  in  common  with  the  funding  of 
other  debts,  to  establish  &  perpetuate  a  monied  interest  in  the 
U.  S.  ;  that  this  monied  interest  would  gain  the  ascendance  of  the 
landed  interest,  would  resort  to  places  of  luxury  &  splendor,  and, 
by  their  example  &  influence,  become  dangerous  to  our  republi 
can  constitutions.  He  said  however  that  the  variances  of  opinion 
&  indecision  of  Congress  were  alarming  &  required  that  some 
thing  should  be  done  ;  that  it  w?  be  better  to  new-model  the 
Confederation,  or  attempt  any  thing,  rather  than  to  do  nothing. 

as  she  is  interested  in  common  with  others  in  the  support  of  the  confederacy 
&  tranquillity  of  the  U.  S.  ;  but  against  abatements,  and  against  a  common 
mass.  The  vacant  lands  are  a  favorite  object  to  her. 

Virg?  ,  in  common  with  the  Southern  States  as  likely  to  enjoy  an  opulent 
and  defenceless  trade  is  interested  in  a  general  revenue,  as  tending  to  secure 
to  her  the  protection  of  the  confederacy  ag!1  the  maritime  superiority  of  the 
E.  States  ;  but  ag?4  it  as  tending  to  discharge  loan  office  debts  and  to  deprive 
her  of  the  occasion  of  taxing  the  comerce  [of]  N.  Carolina.  She  is  interested 
in  abatements,  and  essentially  so  in  common  mass,  not  only  her  eccentric  ex 
penditures  being  enormous,  but  many  of  her  necessary  ones  hav?  rec?  no  pre 
vious  or  subsequent  sanction.  Her  cession  of  territory  would  be  considered  as 
a  sacrifice. 

N.  Carolina  is  interested  in  a  general  revenue  as  tending  to  ensure  the  pro 
tection  of  y<r  Confederacy  ags.1  the  maritime  superiority  of  E.  States  and  to 
guard  her  trade  from  separate  taxation  by  Virginia  and  S.  Carolina.  The  loans 
of  her  Citizens  are  inconsiderable.  In  abatements  and  in  a  common  mass  she 
is  essentially  interested.  In  the  article  of  territory,  she  would  have  to  make  a 
sacrifice.  • 

South  Carolina  is  interested,  as  a  weak  &  exposed  State  in  a  general  revenue 
as  tending  to  secure  to  her  the  protection  of  the  confederacy  ag5.1  Enemies  of 
every  kind,  and  as  providing  for  the  public  Creditors,  her  Citizens  being  not 
only  loan  office  Creditors  beyond  her  proportion,  but  having  immense  unliqui 
dated  demands  ag^  the  U.  States.  As  restraining  her  power  over  the  commerce 
of  N.  Carolina,  a  general  revenue  is  opposed  to  her  interests.  She  is  also 
materially  interested  in  abatements,  and  in  a  common  mass.  In  the  article  of 
territory  her  sacrifice  w"?  be  inconsiderable. 

Georgia  as  a  feeble  an[d]  opulent  &  frontier  State  is  peculiarly  interested  in  a 
general  revenue,  as  tending  to  support  the  confederacy.  She  is  also  interested 


392  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1783 

Mr.  Madison  reminded  Cong5,  that  the  commutation  proposed 
was  introduced  as  a  compromise  with  those  to  whom  the  idea  of 
pensions  was  obnoxious  &  observed  that  those  whose  scruples  had 
been  relieved  by  it  had  rendered  it  no  less  obnoxious  than  pen 
sions  by  stigmatizing  it  with  the  name  of  a  perpetuity.  He  said 
the  public  situation  was  truly  deplorable.  If  the  payment  of  the 
•capital  of  the  public  debts  was  suggested,  it  was  said  &  truly  said 
to  be  impossible  ;  if  funding  them  &  paying  the  interest  was  pro 
posed,  it  was  exclaimed  ags.fc  as  establishing  a  dangerous  moneied 
interest,  as  corrupting  the  public  manners,  as  administering  poison 
to  our  republican  constitutions.  He  said  he  wished  the  revenue 
to  be  established  to  be  such  as  would  extinguish  the  capital  as 
well  as  pay  the  interest  within  the  shortest  possible  period  ;  and 
was  as  much  opposed  to  perpetuating  the  public  burdens  as  any 
one.  But  that  the  discharge  of  them  in  some  form  or  other  was 
essential,  and  that  the  consequences  predicted  therefrom  could 

in  it  somewhat  by  the  creditors  of  her  Citizens.  In  abatements  she  is  also 
interested,  and  in  a  common  mass  essentially  so.  In  the  article  of  territory 
She  would  make  an  important  sacrifice. 

To  make  this  plan  still  more  complete  for  the  purpose  of  removing  all  present 
complaints,  and  all  occasions  of  future  contests,  it  may  be  proper  to  include  in 
it  a  recommendation  to  the  States  to  rescind  the  rule  of  apportioning  pecuniary 
burdens  according  to  the  value  of  the  land,  &  to  substitute  that  of  numbers, 
reckoning  two  slaves  as  equal  to  one  freeman. 

STATE    OF   THE    LOAN    OFFICE    DEBT. 

Specie  Dollars. 

65,820  13  7 
410,218  30 
313,741  82  3 
113,341  ii  i 

90,442  10  i 

.  11,437,410  80 

This  it  is  to  be  observed  is  only  the  list  of  loan  office  debts.  The  unliqui 
dated  debts  and  liquidated  debts  of  other  denominations  due  to  individuals 
will  vary  inexpressibly  the  relative  quantum  of  credits  of  the  several  States. 
It  is  to  be  further  observed  that  this  only  shews  the  original  credits  trans 
fers  having  being  constant ;  heretofore  they  have  flowed  into  P*  .  Other  States 
may  hereafter  have  an  influx.  [Note  in  MS.] 


Specie  Dollars. 

N.  H. 

3^6  ^7Q    ^8    7 

Delaware 

Mass. 

.     .     .     2,361,866  66  5 

Maryland 

R.  Island 

.     .     .        699,725  37  4 

Virg? 

Con*. 

1,270,115  30  o 

N.  Carolina 

N.  York    . 

.     .     .        949.729  57  5 

S.  Carolina 

N.  Jersey 

.     .     .        658,883  69 

Total 

Pen? 

3.048,004.    11   4. 

1783]  JAMES  MADISON.  393 

not  be  more  heterogeneous  to  our  republican  character  &  consti 
tutions,  than  a  violation  of  the  maxims  of  good  faith  and  common 
honesty.  It  was  agreed  that  the  report  for  commuting  j-  pay 
should  lie  on  the  table  till  to-morrow,  in  order  to  give  an  oppor 
tunity  to  the  Delegates  of  Connecticut  to  make  any  proposition 
relative  thereto  which  they  should  judge  proper. 

The  report  of  the  Comm?,  consisting  of  Mr.  Ghoram  Mr.  Ham 
ilton  Mr.  Madison  Mr.  Rutledge  &  Mr.  Fitzsimmons,  was  taken 
up.  It  was  proposed  that  in  addition  to  the  impost  of  5  Per  Cl 
ad  valorem  the  States  be  requested  to  enable  Cong?  to  collect  a 
duty  of  \  of  a  dollar  per  bushel  on  salt  imported  ;  of  -§§  per  Gal 
lon  on  all  wines  do.  and  of  -fa  per  Gallon  on  all  rum  &  brandy  do. 

On  the  first  article  it  was  observed  on  the  part  of  the  East: 
States,  that  this  would  press  peculiarly  hard  on  them  on  ace'  of 
the  salt  consumed  in  the  fisheries  ;  and  that  it  would  besides  be 
injurious  to  the  national  interest  by  adding  to  the  cost  of  fish. 
And  a  drawback  was  suggested. 

On  the  other  side  it  was  observed  that  the  warmer  climate  & 
more  dispersed  settlements  of  the  Southern  States,  required  a 
greater  consumption  of  salt  for  their  provisions,  that  salt  might 
&  would  be  conveyed  to  the  fisheries  without  previous  importation, 
that  the  effect  of  the  duty  was  too  inconsiderable  to  be  felt  in  the 
cost  of  fish  &  that  the  rum  in  the  N.  E.  States  being  in  a  great 
degree  manufactured  at  home,  they  would  have  greater  advan 
tage  in  this  respect,  than  the  other  States  could  have  in  the  article 
of  Salt,  that  a  drawback  could  not  be  executed  in  our  complicated 
govern'  with  ease  or  certainty. 

Mr.  Mercer  on  this  occasion  declared  that  altho'  he  thought 
those  who  opposed  a  general  revenue  right  in  their  principles,  yet 
as  they  appeared  to  have  formed  no  plan  adequate  to  the  public 
exigencies,  and  as  he  was  convinced  of  the  necessity  of  doing 
something,  he  should  depart  from  his  first  resolution  and  strike  in 
with  those  who  were  pursuing  the  plan  of  a  general  revenue. 

Mr.  Holten  said  he  had  come  lately  into  Congress  with  a  pre 
determination  against  any  measures  for  discharging  the  public 
engagements  other  than  those  pointed  out  in  the  Confederation, 
&  that  he  had  hitherto  acted  accordingly.  But  that  he  saw  now 
so  clearly  the  necessity  of  making  provision  for  that  object,  and 


394  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1783 

the  inadequacy  of  the  Confederation  thereto,  that  he  should  con 
cur  in  recommending  to  the  States  a  plan  of  a  general  revenue. 

A  question  being  proposed  on  the  duties  on  salt  there  were  9 
ays,  N.  H.  alone  being  no,  R.  I.  not  present. 

It  was  urged  by  some  that  the  duty  on  wine  should  be  aug 
mented  ;  but  it  appeared  on  discussion  &  some  calculations, 
that  the  temptation  to  smuggling  w.d  be  rendered  too  strong,  & 
the  revenue  thereby  diminished.  Mr.  Bland  proposed  that,  in 
stead  of  a  duty  on  the  Gallon  an  ad-valorem  duty  should  be  laid 
on  wine,  and  this  idea  after  some  loose  discussion,  was  agreed  to, 
few  of  the  members  interesting  themselves  therein,  and  some  of 
them  having  previously  retired  from  Congress. 


FRIDAY,    FEBRUARY    28. 

A  motion  was  made  by  Mr.  Wolcot  and  Mr.  Dyer  to  refer  the 
half  pay  to  the  States,  little  differing  from  the  late  motion  of  Mr. 
Gilman,  except  that  it  specified  5  years'  whole  pay  as  the  proper 
ground  of  composition  with  the  Officers  of  the  respective  lines. 
On  this  proposition  the  arguments  used  for  and  ag5*  Mr.  Oilman's 
motion  were  recapitulated.  It  was  negatived,  Con*  alone  answer 
ing  in  the  affirmative,  and  no  division  being  called  for. 

On  the  question  to  agree  to  the  report  for  a  commutation  of  5 
years'  whole  pay,  there  being  7  ays  only  it  was  considered  whether 
this  was  an  appropriation  or  a  new  ascertainment  of  a  sum  of 
money  necessary  for  the  public  service.  Some  were  of  opinion 
at  first  that  it  did  not  fall  under  that  description,  viz  of  an  appro 
priation.  Finally  the  contrary  opinion  was  deemed  almost  unani 
mously  safest,  as  well  as  the  most  accurate.  Another  question 
was  whether  7  or  9  votes  were  to  decide  doubts  whether  7  or  9 
were  requisite  on  any  question.  Some  were  of  opinion  that  the 
Secretary  ought  to  make  an  entry  according  to  his  own  judgment 
and  that  that  entry  s?  stand  unless  altered  by  a  positive  instruc 
tion  from  Cong5.  To  this  it  was  objected  that  it  w?  make  the 
Sec?"  the  Sovereign  in  many  cases,  since  a  reversal  of  his  entry 
w?  be  impossible,  whatever  that  entry  might  be  ;  that  particularly 
he  might  enter  7  votes  to  be  affirmative  on  a  question  where  9 


1783]  JAMES  MADISON.  395 

were  necessary,  and  if  supported  in  it  by  a  few  States  it  w?  be 
irrevocable.  It  was  said,  by  others,  that  the  safest  rule  w^  be  to 
require  9  votes  to  decide  in  all  cases  of  doubt  whether  9  or  7  were 
necessary.  To  this  it  was  objected  that  one  or  two  States,  and  in 
any  situation  6  States  might  by  raising  doubts,  stop  seven  from 
acting  in  any  case  which  they  disapproved.  Fortunately  on  the 
case  in  question  there  were  9  States  of  opinion  that  nine  were 
requisite,  so  the  difficulty  was  got  over  for  the  present. 

On  a  reconsideration  of  the  question  whether  the  duty  on 
wine  should  be  on  the  quantity  or  on  the  value  the  mode  reported 
by  the  Com?  was  reinstated,  and  the  whole  report  recomitted  to 
be  included  with  the  5  Per  O  ad  valorem,  in  an  Act  of  recoirien- 
dation  to  the  States. 

MONDAY    MARCH    30. 

The  Comm?  on  revenues,  reported  in  addition  to  the  former 
articles  recommended  by  them,  a  duty  of  f  of  a  dollar  per  112 
lbs  on  all  brown  sugar,  i  dollar  on  all  powdered,  lumped  &  clayed 
sugars,  other  than  loaf  sugar,  \\  dollar  per  112  lbs  on  all  loaf 
sugars,  -gV  of  a  dollar  per  Ib  on  all  Bohea  Teas,  and  TV  of  a  dollar 
on  all  finer  Indian  Teas.  This  report  without  debate  or  opposi 
tion  was  recommitted  to  be  incorporated  with  the  general  plan. 


TUESDAY    MARCH    4.    &    WEDNESDAY   MARCH    5. 

The  motion  of  Mr.  Hamilton  on  the  Journal,  relative  to  the 
abatement  of  the  quotas  of  distressed  States  1  was  rejected,  partly 
because  the  principle  was  disapproved  by  some,  and  partly  be 
cause  it  was  thought  improper  to  be  separated  from  other  objects 
to  be  recommended  to  the  States.  The  latter  motive  produced 
the  motion  for  postponing  which  was  lost. 

1  "  Whereas,  in  the  opinion  of  Congress,  it  is  essential  to  those  principles  of 
justice  and  liberality,  which  ought  to  govern  the  intercourse  between  these 
States,  that  in  the  final  adjustment  of  accounts  for  the  supplies  or  contributions 
of  the  States  respectively,  toward  the  common  expenses  in  the  course  of  the 
war,  equitable  allowances  should  be  made  in  favor  of  those  States,  parts  of 
which  have  been  at  different  periods  in  possession  of  the  enemy  ;  and  whereas 


396  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1783 

The  Committee  to  whom  had  been  referred  the  letters  of  resig 
nation  of  Mr.  Morris  reported  as  their  opinion  that  it  was  not 
necessary  for  Cong5,  immediately  to  take  any  steps  thereon. 
They  considered  the  resignation  as  conditional,  and  that  if  it 
sd  eventually  take  place  at  the  time  designated,  there  was  no 
necessity  for  immediate  provision  to  be  made. 

Mr.  Bland  moved  that 1  &c  (see  Journal  of  Mar.  5). 

This  motion  produced  on  these  two  days  lengthy  &  warm  de 
bates,  Mr.  Lee  &  Mr.  Bland  on  one  side  disparaging  the  Adminis 
tration  of  Mr.  Morris,  and  throwing  oblique  censure  on  his 
character.  They  considered  his  letter  as  an  insult  to  Cong?,  & 
Mr.  Lee  declared  that  the  man  who  had  published  to  all  the  world 
such  a  picture  of  our  national  character  &  finances  was  unfit  to 
be  a  Minister  of  the  latter.  On  the  other  side  Mr.  Wilson  &  Mr. 
Hamilton  went  into  a  copious  defence  &  Panegyric  of  Mr.  Morris, 
the  ruin  in  which  his  resignation  if  it  s?  take  effect  w?  involve 
public  credit  and  all  the  operations  dependent  on  it  ;  and  the 
decency  altho'  firmness,  of  his  letters.  The  former  observed  that 
the  declaration  of  Mr.  Morris,  that  he  w?  not  be  the  minister  of 
Injustice  c?  not  be  meant  to  reflect  on  Cong?,  because  they  had 
declared  the  funds  desired  by  Mr.  Morris  to  be  necessary  ;  and 
that  the  friends  of  the  latter  could  not  wish  for  a  more  honorable 
occasion  for  his  retreat  from  public  life,  if  they  did  not  prefer  the 
public  interest  to  considerations  of  friendship.  Other  members 
were  divided  as  to  the  propriety  of  the  letters  in  question.  In 
general  however  they  were  thought  reprehensible,  as  in  general 
also  a  conviction  prevailed  of  the  personal  merit  &  public  import 
ance  of  Mr.  Morris.  All  impartial  members  foresaw  the  most 

the  strict  application  of  the  rule  prescribed  by  the  8th  article  of  the  confedera 
tion,  as  declared  by  the  resolution  of  the  17th  February,  would  operate  greatly 
to  the  prejudice  of  such  States,  and  to  the  calamities  of  war,  and  an  undue 
proportion  of  the  public  burden 

"  Resolved,  That  Congress  will,  in  the  application  of  the  said  rule,  make  such 
abatements  in  favor  of  the  said  States,  as  from  a  full  consideration  of  circum 
stances  shall  appear  to  them  just  and  equitable,  for  the  time  the  said  parts  of 
the  said  States  may  have  been  in  possession  of  the  enemy." — Journals  of 
Congress •,  iv.,  169,  170. 

1  "  A  committee  be  appointed  to  devise  the  most  proper  means  of  arranging 
the  Department  of  Finance." — Journals  of  Congress,  iv.,  171. 


1 7 83]  JAMES  MADISON.  397 

alarming  consequences  from  his  resignation.  The  prevailing  ob 
jection  to  Mr.  Eland's  motion  was  that  its  avowed  object  &  tend 
ency  was  to  re-establish  a  board  in  place  of  a  single  minister  of 
finance.  Those  who  apprehended  that  ultimately  this  might  be 
unavoidable,  thought  it  so  objectionable  that  nothing  but  the  last 
necessity  would  justify  it.  The  motion  of  Mr.  Bland  was  lost  ; 
and  a  Comm?  appointed  generally  on  the  letters  of  Mr.  Morris.1 


THURSDAY  MARCH  6. 

The  com?  on  Revenue  made  a  report  which  was  ordered  to  be 
printed  for  each  member,  and  to  be  taken  up  on  monday  next. 


FRIDAY  MARCH    7. 

Printed  copies  of  the  Report  above-mentioned  were  delivered 
to  each  member,  as  follows,  viz. 

(i.)  "Resolved,  that  it  be  recommended  to  the  several  States, 
as  indispensably  necessary  to  the  restoration  of  public  credit,  and 
the  punctual  &  honorable  discharge  of  the  public  debts,  to  vest 
in  the  U.  S.  in  Cong?  assem?  a  power  to  levy  for  the  use  of  the 
U.  S.  a  duty  of  5  Per  C-  ad  valorem,  at  the  time  and  place  of  im 
portation,  upon  all  goods,  wares  &  merchandizes  of  foreign  growth 
&  manufactures,  which  may  be  imported  into  any  of  the  said 
States,  from  any  foreign  port,  island  or  plantation,  except  arms, 

1  ' '  Provision  for  the  public  debt  continues  the  wearisome  topic  of  congres 
sional  discussion.  Mercer  declared  that  although  he  deems  the  opponents  of  a 
general  revenue  right  in  principle,  yet  as  they  had  no  plan  and  it  was  essential 
that  something  should  be  done  he  should  strike  in  with  the  other  side. 

"  A  letter  from  Gen1.  Knox  is  in  Town  which  I  understand,  places  the  tem 
per  and  affairs  of  the  army  in  a  less  alarming  view  than  some  preceding 
accounts. 

' '  The  resignation  of  the  Superintend*,  of  finance  with  his  motives  are  con 
tained  in  the  paper  enclosed.  It  is,  as  you  may  well  suppose  a  subject  of 
general  and  anxious  conversation.  Its  effect  on  public  credit  will  be  fully 
anticipated  by  your  knowledge  of  our  affairs.  Yesterday's  mail  brought  me  no 
letter  from  you." — Madison  to  Edmund  Randolph,  March  4,  1783.  (Italics  for 
cypher.)  Mad.  MSS. 


398  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1783 

ammunition,  clothing,  and  other  articles  imported  on  account  of 
the  U.  States  or  any  of  them ;  and  except  wool  cards,  cotton 
cards,  &  wire  for  making  them  ;  and  also  except  Salt  during  the 
war  : 

(2.)  Also  a  like  duty  of  5  Per  C  ad  valorem,  on  all  prizes 
&  prize  goods  condemned  in  the  Court  of  Admiralty  of  any  of 
these  United  States  as  lawful  prize  : 

(3.)  Also  to  levy  a  duty  of  \  of  a  dollar  per  bushel  on  all  salt 
imported  as  aforesaid  after  the  war  ;  TV  of  a  dollar  per  gallon  on 
all  wines,  -fa  of  a  dollar  per  gallon  on  all  rum  and  brandy  ;  f  of 
a  dollar  per  112  Ibs  on  all  brown  sugars,  i  dollar  per  112  Ibs  on 
all  powdered,  lump  and  clayed  sugars  other  than  loaf  sugars, 
i^d?  per  112  Ibs  on  all  loaf  sugars  ;  -3^  of  a  dollar  per  pound  on 
all  Bohea  Tea,  and  T\  of  a  dollar  per  Ib  on  all  finer  India  teas, 

imported  as  aforesaid,  after ,  in  addition  to 

the  five  per  C-  above-mentioned  : 

(4.)  Provided  that  none  of  the  said  duties  shall  be  applied  to 
any  other  purpose  than  the  discharge  of  the  interest  or  principal 
of  the  debts  which  shall  have  been  contracted  on  the  faith  of  the 
U.  S.  for  supporting  the  present  war,  nor  be  continued  for  a 
longer  term  than  25  years  :  and  provided  that  the  collectors  of 
the  said  duties  shall  be  appointed  by  the  States  within  which  their 
orifices  are  to  be  respectively  exercised,  but  when  so  appointed, 
shall  be  amenable  to  &  removable  by  the  U.  S.  Cong?  ass?  alone  ; 
and  in  case  any  State  shall  not  make  such  appointment  within 
,  after  notice  given  for  that  purpose,  the  appoint 
ment  may  then  be  made  by  the  U.  S.  in  Cong?  ass? 

(5.)  That  it  be  further  recommended  to  the  several  States  to 
establish  for  a  like  term  not  exceeding  25  years,  and  to  appro 
priate  to  the  discharge  of  the  interest  &  principal  of  the  debts 
which  shall  have  been  contracted  on  the  faith  of  the  U.  S.,  for 
supporting  the  present  war,  substantial  and  effectual  revenues  of 
such  a  nature  as  they  may  respectively  judge  most  convenient,  to 
the  amount  of ,  and  in  the  propor 

tion  following  viz. 

The  said  revenues  to  be  collected  by  persons  appointed  as  afore 
said,  but  to  be  carried  to  the  separate  credit  of  the  States  within 


1783]  JAMES  MADISON.  399 

which  they  shall  be  collected  and  be  liquidated  and  adjusted 
among  the  States  according  to  the  quotas  which  may  from  time 
to  time  be  allotted  to  them. 

(6.)  That  an  annual  account  of  the  proceeds  and  application 
of  the  aforementioned  revenues  shall  be  made  out  &  transmitted 
to  the  several  States,  distinguishing  the  proceeds  of  each  of  the 
specified  articles,  and  the  amount  of  the  whole  revenue  received 
from  each  State. 

(7.)  That  none  of  the  preceding  resolutions  shall  take  effect 
untill  all  of  them  shall  be  acceded  to  by  every  State,  after  which 
accession  however,  they  shall  be  considered  as  forming  a  mutual 
compact  among  all  the  States,  and  shall  be  irrevocable  by  any 
one  or  more  of  them  without  the  concurrence  of  the  whole,  or  a 
majority,  of  the  United  States  in  Cong?  assembled  : 

(8.)  That,  as  a  further  means,  as  well  of  hastening  the  ex 
tinguishment  of  the  debts,  as  of  establishing  the  harmony  of  the 
U.  States,  it  be  recommended  to  the  States  which  have  passed  no 
acts  towards  complying  with  the  resolutions  of  Congress  of  the 
6th  of  Sepr  and  the  iothof  Oct",  1870,  relative  to  territorial  cessions, 
to  make  the  liberal  cessions  therein  recommended,  &  to  the  States 
which  may  have  passed  acts  complying  with  the  said  resolutions 
in  part  only,  to  revise  &  complete  such  compliance. 

(9.)  That,  in  order  to  remove  all  objections  against  a  retro 
spective  application  of  the  constitutional  rule  of  apportioning  to 
the  several  States  the  charges  &  expenses  which  shall  have  been 
supplied  for  the  common  defence  or  general  welfare,  it  be  recom 
mended  to  them  to  enable  Congress  to  make  such  equitable  ex 
ceptions  and  abatements  as  the  particular  circumstances  of  the 
States  from  time  to  time,  during  the  war,  may  be  found  to  require  : 

(10.)  That  conformably  to  the  liberal  principles  on  which 
these  recommendations  are  founded,  and  with  a  view  to  a  more 
amicable  and  complete  adjustment  of  all  accounts  between  the 
U.  S.  and  individual  States,  all  reasonable  expenses  which  shall 
have  been  incurred  by  the  States  without  the  sanction  of  Cong5, 
in  their  defence  ags'  or  attacks  upon  British  or  Savage  enemies, 
either  by  sea  or  by  land,  and  which  shall  be  supported  by  satis 
factory  proofs,  shall  be  considered  as  part  of  the  common  charges 
incident  to  the  present  war,  and  be  allowed  as  such  : 


400  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1783 

(u.)  That  as  a  more  convenient  and  certain  rule  of  ascer 
taining  the  proportions  to  be  supplied  by  the  States  respectively 
to  the  common  Treasury,  the  following  alteration  in  the  articles 
of  confederation  and  perpetual  union  between  these  States,  be 
and  the  same  is  hereby,  agreed  to  in  Congress,  &  the  several 
States  are  advised  to  authorize  their  respective  delegates  to  sub 
scribe  and  ratify  the  same,  as  part  of  the  said  instrument  of  Union, 
in  the  words  following,  to  wit. 

(12)  "So  much  of  the  8l.h  of  the  Articles  of  Confederation  & 
perpetual  Union  between  the  thirteen  States  of  America  as  is  con 
tained  in  the  words  following  to  wit  '  All  charges  of  war  &c  (to 
the  end  of  the  paragraph) — [and  all  other  expenses  that  shall  be 
incurred  for  the  common  defence  or  general  welfare,  and  allowed 
by  the  United  States  in  Congress  assembled,  shall  be  defrayed 
out  of  a  common  treasury,  which  shall  be  supplied  by  the  several 
States,  in  proportion  to  the  value  of  all  land  within  each  State 
granted  to,  or  surveyed  for,  any  person,  as  such  land,  and  the 
buildings  and  improvements  thereon,  shall  be  estimated  accord 
ing  to  such  mode  as  the  United  States  in  Congress  assembled 
shall,  from  time  to  time,  direct  and  appoint,]' — is  hereby  revoked 
and  made  void,  and  in  place  thereof,  it  is  declared  and  Con 
cluded,  the  same  having  been  agreed  to  in  a  Congress  of  the 
United  States,  that  all  charges  of  war,  and  all  other  expenses  that 
shall  be  incurred  for  the  common  defence  or  general  welfare  and 
allowed  by  the  U.  S.  in  Congress  assembled  shall  be  defrayed  out 
of  a  common  treasury,  which  shall  be  supplied  by  the  several 
States  in  proportion  to  the  number  of  inhabitants  of  every  age, 
sex  &  condition,  except  Indians  not  paying  taxes  in  each  State  ; 
which  number  shall  be  triennially  taken  &  transmitted  to  the  U. 
S.  in  Cong*  assembled,  in  such  mode  as  they  shall  direct  and  ap 
point  ;  provided  always  that  in  such  numeration  no  persons  shall 
be  included  who  are  bound  to  servitude  for  life,  according  to  the 
laws  of  the  State  to  which  they  belong,  other  than  such  as  may  be 
between  the  ages  of  ' years." 

1  In  the  draught  as  laid  before  the  Com?  by the  (7)  paragraph 

was  placed  last  of  all,  so  as  to  render  the  plan  individual.     In  the  (10)  para 
graph  the  word  "  reasonable  "  before  the  word  "  expenses,"  was  not  inserted  ; 


1783]  JAMES  MADISON.  401 


MONDAY,    MARCH     IO. 

See  the  Journal.  Much  debate  passed  relative  to  the  proposed 
commutation  of  half  pay  ;  Some  wishing  it  to  take  place  on  con 
dition  only  that  a  majority  of  the  whole  army  should  concur 
others  preferring  the  plan  expressed  on  the  journal,  and  not 
agreed  to.1 

TUESDAY,    MARCH     II. 

The  Report  entered  on  Friday,  the  7  of  March  was  taken  into 
consideration.  It  had  been  sent  by  order  of  Cong-  to  the  Sup1  of 
Finance  for  his  remarks  which  were  also  on  the  table.  These 
remarks  were  in  substance  :  that  it  w*  be  better  to  turn  the  5 
per  c^  ad  valorem  into  a  Tariff,  founded  on  an  enumeration  of 
the  several  classes  of  imports,  to  which  ought  to  be  added  a  few 
articles  of  exports  ;  that  instead  of  an  apportionment  of  the  resi 
due  on  the  States,  other  general  revenues  from  a  land  tax,  re 
duced  to  J-  of  a  dollar  Per  Hundred  Acres,  with  a  house  tax 
regulated  by  the  numbers  of  windows,  and  an  excise  on  all 
Spirituous  liquors  to  be  collected  at  the  place  of  distillery  ought 

but  to  the  paragraph  was  added  ' '  provided  that  this  allowance  shall  not  be  ex 
tended  to  any  expenses  which  shall  be  declared  by  nine  votes  in  Congress  to  be 
manifestly  unreasonable."  In  other  respects  the  original  draught  was  unaltered, 
except  that  a  former  resolution  of  Congress  in  the  words  of  the  (6)  paragraph 
was  incorporated  by  the  Sec?  before  it  went  to  the  press.  [Note  in  MS.] 

1  It  was  introduced  by  Carroll,  Dyer,  and  Mifflin  and  provided  "  That  such 
officers  as  are  now  in  service,  and  continue  therein  to  the  end  of  the  war,  shall 
be  entitled  to  receive  the  sum  of  five  years'  full  pay  in  money,  or  securities  on. 
interest  at  six  per  cent,  per  annum,  at  the  option  of  Congress,  instead  of  the 
half-pay  promised  for  life  by  the  resolution  of  the  21^  of  October,  1780:  the 
said  securities  to  be  such  as  shall  be  given  to  the  other  creditors  of  the  United 
States  ;  provided  that  it  be  at  the  option  of  the  lines  of  the  respective  States, 
and  not  of  officers  individually  in  those  lines,  to  accept  or  reject  the  same  :  that 
all  officers  who  have  retired  from  service  upon  the  promise  of  half-pay  for  life, 
shall  be  entitled  to  the  benefits  of  the  above  resolution  ;  provided  that  those  of 
the  line  of  each  State,  collectively,  agree  thereto  ;  that  the  said  commutation 
shall  extend  to  the  corps  not  belonging  to  the  lines  of  particular  States,  the  ac 
ceptance  or  refusal  to  be  determined  by  corps  ;  that  all  officers  entitled  to  half- 
pay  for  life,  not  included  in  the  above  resolution,  may  collectively  agree  to 
accept  or  refuse  the  commutation." — Journals  of  Congress,  iv.,  173. 

VOL.  I. — 26 


402  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1783 

to  be  substituted  and  as  well  as  the  duties  on  trade  made  co 
existent  with  the  public  debts ;  the  whole  to  be  collected  by 
persons  app?  by  Cong?  alone.  And  that  an  alternative  ought  to 
be  held  out  to  y?  States,  either  to  establish  these  permanent  reve 
nues,  for  the  interest  or  to  comply  with  a  constitutional  demand 
of  the  principal  within  a  very  short  period. 

In  order  to  ascertain  the  sense  of  Con?  on  these  ideas  it  was 
proposed  that  the  following  short  questions  sd  be  taken  : 

1.  Shall  any  taxes  to  operate  generally  throughout  the  States, 
be  recommended  by  Cong?  other  than  duties  on  foreign  commerce? 

2.  Shall  the  5  Per  C-  ad  valorem  be  exchanged  for  a  tariff  ? 

3.  Shall  the  alternative  be  adopted,  as  proposed  by  the  Super 
intend*  of  Finance  ? 

On  the  i-1  question  the  States  were,  N.  H.  no,  Mas:  no,  Con' 
no,  N.  J.  no,  Mary?  no,  Virgf  no,  6  noes  &  5  ays. 

On  the  2?  question  there  were  7  ays. 

The  3?  question  was  not  put,  its  impropriety  being  generally 
proclaimed. 

In  consequence  of  the  2?  vote  in  favor  of  a  tariff,  the  3  first 
paragraphs  of  the  Rep'  were  recommitted  together  with  the  letter 
from  the  Superintend'  of  Finance. 

On  the  fourth  Par.  on  motion  of  Mr.  Dyer,  after  the  word 
"  war,"  in  line  5,  was  inserted  "  agreeably  to  the  resolution  of  the 
16  of  Dec'  last." 

A  motion  was  made  by  Mr.  Hamilton  and  Mr.  Wilson  to  strike 
out  the  limitation  of  25  years  and  to  make  the  revenue  co-existent 
with  the  debts.  This  question  was  lost,  the  States  being  N.  H., 
no,  Mas.,  no,  Cont'  div? ,  N.  Y.,  ay,  N.  J.,  ay,  P* ,  ay,  Del.,  ay, 
Mary?,  ay,  V?,  no,  N.  C.,  ay,  S.  C.,  no. 

A  motion  was  made  by  Mr.  Hamilton  &  Mr.  Wilson  to  strike 
out  the  clauses  relative  to  the  appointment  of  Collectors,  and  to 
provide  that  the  Collectors  s?  be  inhabitants  of  the  States  within 
which  they  s?  collect  should  be  nominated  by  Cong?,  and  ap 
pointed  by  the  States,  and  in  case  such  nomination  should  not 

be  accepted  or  rejected  within days  it  should  stand  good. 

On  this  question  there  were  5  ayes  and  6  noes.1 

1  "  Another  week  has  passed  without  affording  the  least  relief  from  our  sus 
pense  as  to  the  progress  of  peace.  At  New  York  they  are  so  much  in  the  dark 


1783]  JAMES  MADISON,  403 

WEDNESDAY    12,  TH.    13,   F.    14,   S.    15  OF  MARCH. 

These  days  were  employed  in  reading  the  despatches  brought 
on  Wednesday  morning  by  Capt.  Barney  commanding  the  Wash 
ington  Packet.  They  were  dated  from  Dec!"  4  to  24,  from  the 
Ministers  Plenipo:  for  peace,  with  journals  of  preceding  trans 
actions,  and  were  accompanied  by  the  Preliminary  articles  signed 
on  the  3ol.h  of  Nov. ,  between  the  said  Ministers  &  Mr.  Oswald 
the  British  Minister. 

The  terms  granted  to  America  appeared  to  Cong-  on  the  whole 
extremely  liberal.1  It  was  observed  by  several  however  that  the 

that  their  curiosity  has  recourse  to  the  gleanings  of  the  Philada.  gazettes.  The 
length  of  the  negotiation  may  be  explained,  but  the  delay  of  all  parties  to  notify 
its  progress  is  really  astonishing.  Our  last  official  information  is  nearly  5 
months  old  &  that  derived  from  the  royal  speech  upwards  of  three  months. 

"The  peremptory  style  &  publication  of  Mr.  M [orris]'3  letters  have  given 
offence  to  many  'without  &  to  some  within  Congress.  His  enemies  of  both  descrip 
tions,  are  industrious  in  displaying  their  impropriety.  I  wish  they  had  less  handk 
for  t\\e  purpose. 

' '  The  plan  before  Congress  for  the  arrangem*  of  our  affairs  is  to  ask  from  the 
States  a  power  to  levy  for  a  term  not  exceeding  25  years  the  5  Per  Cl.  impost, 
with  an  additional  impost  on  salt,  wine,  spirituous  liquors,  sugar  &  teas  ;  to 
recommend  to  them  to  establish  &  appropriate  permant  revenues  for  a  like  term 
for  the  deficiency  ;  the  proceeds  to  be  carried  to  their  credit ;  the  whole  to  be 
collected  by  persons  amenable  to  Congf,  but  app<?  by  the  States  ;  to  complete 
the  territorial  cessions  ;  to  enable  Cong3  to  make  abatements  in  favor  of  suffer 
ing  States  ;  Cong5,  on  their  part  declaring  that  all  reasonable  military  expenses 
separately  incurred  by  the  States  without  their  sanction  either  by  sea  or  land  shall 
be  part  of  the  common  mass  ;  and  proposing  to  the  States  a  substitution  of  numbers 
in  place  of  a  valuation  of  land  ;  3  slaves  to  be  equal  to  I  freeman.  The  fate  of 
this  plan  in  Cong3,  is  uncertain,  £  still  more  so  among  the  States.  It  makes 
a  decent  provision  for  the  public  debts  &  seems  to' comprehend  the  most 
dangerous  sources  of  future  contests  among  ourselves.  If  the  substance  of  it  is 
rejected,  and  nothing  better  introduced  in  its  place,  I  shall  consider  it  as  a 
melancholy  proof  that  narrow  &  local  views  prevail  over  that  liberal  policy  & 
those  mutual  concessions  which  our  future  tranquillity  &  present  reputation  call 
for. 

''Mr.  J.  is  still  here,  agitated  as  you  may  suppose  with  the  suspense  in  which 
he  is  kept.  He  is  anxious  as  myself  for  your  going  into  the  Legislature.  Let 
me  know  your  final  determination  on  this  point." — Madison  to  Edmund  Ran 
dolph,  March  n,  1783.  (Italics  for  cypher.)  Mad.  MSS. 

1  "Capt.  Barney  commanding  the  American  packet  boat  which  has  been  long 
expected  with  official  intelligence  from  our  Ministers  in  Europe  arrived  here 


404 


THE   WRITINGS  OF  [1783 


stipulation  obliging  Cong?  to  recommend  to  the  States  a  restitu 
tion  of  confiscated  property,  altho'  it  could  scarcely  be  understood 
that  the  States  would  comply,  had  the  appearance  of  sacrificing 
the  dignity  of  Cong5,  to  the  pride  of  the  British  King. 

The  separate  &  secret  manner  in  which  our  Ministers  had  pro 
ceeded  with  respect  to  France  &  the  confidential  manner  with 
respect  to  the  British  Ministers  affected  different  members  of 
Cong^  very  differently.  Many  of  the  most  judicious  members 
thought  they  had  all  been  in  some  measure  ensnared  by  the  dex 
terity  of  the  British  Minister  ;  and  particularly  disapproved  of 
the  conduct  of  Mr.  Jay  in  submitting  to  the  Enemy  his  jealousy 
of  the  French  without  even  the  knowledge  of  Dr.  Franklin,  and 
of  the  unguarded  manner  in  which  he,  Mr.  A.  &  Dr.  F.,  had  given 
in  writing  sentiments  unfriendly  to  our  Ally,  and  serving  as 
weapons  for  the  insidious  policy  of  the  Enemy.  The  separate 
Article  was  most  offensive,  being  considered  as  obtained  by  G.  B. 

this  morning.  He  brings  a  supply  of  money  the  sum  of  which  I  cannot  as  yet 
specify  &  comes  under  a  passport  from  the  King  of  G.  B.  The  despatches  from 
our  Ministers  are  dated  the  5,  14  &  24  of  Dec!  .  Those  of  the  14*  inclose  a 
copy  of  the  preliminary  articles,  provisionally  signed  between  the  American  & 
British  Plenipotentiaries.  The  tenor  of  them  is  that  the  U.S.  shall  be  acknow 
ledged  £  treated  with  as  free,  sovereign  &  independ1.  ;  that  our  boundaries  shall 
begin  at  the  mouth  of  the  St.  Croix,  run  thence  to  the  ridge  dividing  the  waters 
of  the  Atlantic  from  those  of  St.  Laurence,  thence  to  the  head  of  Con*  river, 
thence,  down  to  45°  N.  L.  thence  to  Cadaraqui  ;  thence  thro'  the  middle  of 
Lakes  Ontario,  Erie,  Huron,  &  Superior,  to  Long  Lake  to  the  Lake  of  the 
Woods  &  thence  due  W.  to  the  Missi?1,  thence  down  the  middle  of  the  river  to 
L.  31,  thence  to  Apalachicola,  to  Flint  river,  to  St.  Marys,  &  down  the  same  to 
the  Atlantic  ;  that  the  fisheries  shall  be  exercised  nearly  as  formerly  ;  that 
Congress  shall  earnestly  recommend  to  the  States  a  restitution  of  confiscated 
property,  a  permission  to  the  refugees  to  come  &  remain  for  I  year  within  the 
States  to  solicit  restitution,  and  that  in  the  most  obnoxious  cases  restitution 
may  be  demanded  of  purchasers  on  reimbursing  them  the  price  of  the  property, 
that  debts  contracted  prior  to  1775  shall  be  mutually  paid  according  to  sterling 
value  ;  that  all  prisoners  shall  be  mutually  set  at  liberty,  troops  withdrawn  &  all 
records  &  papers  restored  ;  that  the  navigation  of  the  Mississippi,  from  the 
source  to  the  mouth,  shall  be  mutually  free  for  the  subjects  of  G.  B.  &  the  Citi 
zens  of  America,  a  proposition  comprehending  the  W.  I.,  was  offered  on  the 
subject  of  Commerce,  but  not  admitted  on  the  part  of  G.  B. 

"  In  the  course  of  the  negotiation  G.  B.  contended  for  not  only  the  limits 


1783]  JAMES  MADISON.  405 

not  for  the  sake  of  the  territory  ceded  to  her,  but  as  a  means  of 
disuniting  the  U.  S.  &  France,  as  inconsistent  with  the  spirit  of 
the  Alliance,  and  a  dishonorable  departure  from  the  candor  recti 
tude  &  plain  dealing  professed  by  Cong* .  The  dilemma  in  wc.h 
Cong^  were  placed  was  sorely  felt.  If  they  s?  communicate  to  the 
F.  Minister  every  thing  they  exposed  their  own  Ministers,  des 
troyed  all  confidence  in  them  on  the  part  of  France  &  might 
engage  them  in  dangerous  factions  ag5.'  Cong?,  which  was  the  more 
to  be  apprehended,  as  the  terms  obtained  by  their  management 
were  popular  in  their  nature.  If  Cong5  s?  conceal  every  thing,  & 
the  F.  Court  s?  either  from  the  Enemy  or  otherwise  come  to  the 
knowledge  of  it  all  confidence  w?  be  at  an  end  between  the  allies  ; 
the  enemy  might  be  encouraged  by  it  to  make  fresh  experiments, 
&  the  public  safety  as  well  as  the  national  honor  be  endangered. 
Upon  the  whole  it  was  thought  &  observed  by  many  that  our 
Ministers  particularly  Mr.  Jay,  instead  of  making  allowances  for 
&  affording  facilities  to  France  in  her  delicate  situation  between 
Spain  &  the  U.  S.,  had  joined  with  the  enemy  in  taking  advantage 

marked  out  in  the  Quebec  Act,  but  all  ungranted  soil,  for  a  contraction  of  the 
fisheries,  and  for  absolute  stipulations  in  favor  of  the  loyalists. 

"  The  despatches  of  the  14*  Speak  also  of  the  principal  preliminaries  between 
F.  &  G.  B.  being  settled  ;  but  of  little  progress  being  made  in  those  between 
Hoi?  &  Sp?  ,  &  the  latter  ;  &  of  none  between  Sp?  &  the  U.  S. 

"A  letter  of  the  24^  of  Dec1:  from  Dr.  Franklin  varies  the  scene  somewhat.  It 
says  that  uncertainties  were  arising  from  the  unsettled  state  of  minds  in  Eng 
land  &  incloses  a  letter  from  the  C'  de  Vergennes,  observing  that  difficulties 
had  arisen  from  the  very  facilities  yielded  on  the  part  of  France  ;  &  concluding 
with  these  words  as  well  as  I  can  recollect,  '  Je  ne  desespere  pas  ;  J'espere 
plutot  ;  mais  tout  est  incertain.' 

' '  Franklin's  correspondence  on  this  occasion  denotes  a  vigor  of  intellect,  which 
is  astonishing  at  his  age.  A  letter  to  the  British  Minister  on  the  case  of  the 
Tories  in  particular  is  remarkable  for  strength  of  reasoning  of  sentiment  &  of 
expression.  He  concludes  his  letter  to  Cong5:  with  observing  that  he  is  now 
entering  on  his  7Sl.h  year,  50  of  which  have  been  spent  in  the  public  Service  and 
that  having  lived  to  see  like  Simeon  of  old  the  salvation  of  his  Country  his 
prayer  is  that  he  may  be  permitted  to  retire  from  public  life.  Mr.  Adams  has 
also  transmitted  his  resignation. 

"  The  arrival  of  this  intelligence  will  probably  procure  from  Cong?  some  final 
decision  with  respect  to  Mr.  Jefferson." — Madison  to  Edmund  Randolph, 
March  12,  1783.  Mad.  MSS. 


406  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1783 

of  it  to  increase  her  perplexity  ;  &  that  they  had  made  the  safety 
of  their  Country  depend  on  the  Sincerity  of  L?  Shelburne,  which 
was  suspected  by  all  the  world  besides,  and  even  by  most  of  them 
selves.  See  Mr.  L's.  letter  Dec!"  24th. 

The  displeasure  of  the  French  Court  at  the  neglect  of  our  Min 
isters  to  maintain  a  confidential  intercourse  &  particularly  to 
communicate  the  preliminary  articles  before  they  were  signed, 
was  not  only  signified  to  the  Sec?'  of  F.  A.,  but  to  sundry  members 
by  the  Chevf  de  la  Luzerne.  To  the  former  he  shewed  a  letter 
from  C  de  Vergennes  directing  him  to  remonstrate  to  Cong?  ags' 
the  conduct  of  the  American  Ministers  ;  which  a  subsequent  let 
ter  countermanded  alledged  that  Doc'  F.  had  given  some  explan 
ations  that  had  been  admitted  ;  &  told  Mr.  Livingston  that  the 
American  Ministers  had  deceived  him  (de  Vergennes)  by  telling 
him  a  few  days  before  the  preliminary  articles  were  signed,  that 
the  agreement  on  them  was  at  a  distance  ;  that  when  he  carried 
the  articles  signed  into  Council,  the  King  expressed  great  indig 
nation,  &  asked  if  the  Americans  served  him  thus  before  peace 
was  made,  &:  whilst  they  were  begging  for  aids,  what  was  to  be 
expected  after  peace  &c.  To  several  Members  he  mentioned  that 
the  King  had  been  surprised  &  displeased  &  that  he  said  he  did 
not  think  he  had  such  allies  to  deal  with.  To  one  of  them  who 
asked  whether  the  C  of  F.  meant  to  complain  of  them  to  Cong?, 
M.  Marbois  answered  that  Great  Powers  never  complained  but  that 
they  felt  &  remembered.  It  did  not  appear  from  any  circumstances 
that  the  separate  article  was  known  to  the  Court  of  F.,  or  to  the 
Chev^  de  la  Luzerne. 

The  publication  of  the  preliminary  articles  excepting  the  sepa 
rate  article  in  the  Newspaper  was  not  a  deliberate  act  of  Cong?.  A 
hasty  question  for  enjoining  secrecy  on  certain  parts  of  the  de 
spatches  which  included  those  articles,  was  lost  ;  and  copies  hav? 
been  taken  by  members  &  some  of  them  handed  to  the  Delegates 
of  Pen?,  one  of  them  reached  the  printer.  When  the  publication 
appeared  Cong5  in  general  regretted  it,  not  only  as  tending  too  much 
to  lull  the  States,  but  as  leading  France  into  suspicions  that 
Congress  favored  the  premature  signature  of  the  articles  and  were 
at  least  willing  to  remove  in  the  minds  of  the  people  the  blame  of 
delaying  peace  from  G.  B.  to  France. 


1783]  JAMES  MADISON.  407 


MONDAY,    MARCH     I  7. 

A  letter  was  recd  from  Gen?  Washington  inclosing  two  anony 
mous  &  inflammatory  exhortations  to  the  army  to  assemble  for 
the  purpose  of  seeking  by  other  means,  that  justice  which  their 
Country  shewed  no  disposition  to  afford  them.  The  steps  taken 
by  the  Gen!  to  avert  the  gathering  storm  &  his  professions  of  in 
flexible  adherence  to  his  duty  to  Congress  &  to  his  Country,  ex 
cited  the  most  affectionate  sentiments  towards  him.  By  private 
letters  from  the  army  &  other  circumstances  there  appeared  good 
ground  for  suspecting  that  the  Civil  creditors  were  intriguing  in 
order  to  inflame  the  army  into  such  desperation  as  w?  produce  a 
general  provision  for  the  public  debts.  These  papers  were  com 
mitted  to  Mr.  Gilman  Mr.  Dyer,  Mr.  Clark  Mr.  Rutledge  &  Mr. 
Mercer.  The  app*  of  These  Gentlemen  was  brought  about  by  a 
few  members  who  wished  to  saddle  with  this  embarrassment  the 
men  who  had  opposed  the  measures  necessary  for  satisfying  the 
army  viz.  the  half  pay  &  permanent  funds ;  agst  one  or  other  of 
which  the  individuals  in  question  had  voted. 

This  alarming  intelligence  from  the  army  added  to  the  critical 
situation  to  wc.h  our  affairs  in  Europe  were  reduced  by  the  variance 
of  our  Ministers  with  our  Ally,  and  to  the  difficulty  of  establish 
ing  the  means  of  fulfilling  the  Engagem1.5  &  securing  the  harmony 
of  the  U.  S.  &  to  the  confusions  apprehended  from  the  approach 
ing  resignation  of  the  Superint*  of  Finance,  gave  peculiar  awe  & 
solemnity  to  the  present  moment,  &  oppressed  the  minds  of 
Cong?  with  an  anxiety  &  distress  which  had  been  scarcely  felt  in 
any  period  of  the  revolution.1 

"  My  letter  by  Express  communicated  to  you  the  outlines  of  the  intelligence 
brought  by  Capt.  Barney  from  our  Ministers  in  Europe.  The  tediousness  of 
the  Cypher  does  not  permit  me  now  to  enter  into  detail.  I  can  only  add  that 
notwithstanding  the  flattering  aspect  of  the  preliminary  Articles  there  are  var 
ious  circumstances  which  check  our  confidence  in  them,  as  there  are  some  which 
will  detract  from  our  joy  if  they  should  be  finally  established.  To  explain  this 
it  must  suffice  to  observe  that  The  latest  letters  from  our  Ministers  express  the 
greatest  jealousy  of  G.  B.  and,  secondly  that  the  situation  of  France  between 
the  interfering  claims  of  Spain  &*  the  U.  S.,  to  which  may  perhaps  be  added 
some  particular  mews  of  her  own  having  carried  her  into  a  discountenance  of 
claims  the  suspicions  of  our  ministers  on  that  side  gave  an  opportunity  to  British 


408  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1783 


TUESDAY  MARCH    1 8. 

On  the  report  of  the  Committee  to  whom  the  3  paragraphs  of 
the  Report  on  revenues  (see  March  the  6  &  7)  had  been  recom 
mitted,  the  said  paragraphs  were  expunged  so  as  to  admit  the 
following  amendments  which  took  place  without  opposition,  viz 

"Resolved  That  it  be  recommended  &c  &c  (see  iv.'  i  P).  x 

Dol! 

Upon  all  rum  of  Jamaica  proof  per  Gallon ^ 

Upon  all  other  spirituous  liquors -/$ 

Upon  Madeira  wine Jf 

Upon  the  wines  of  Lisbon,  Oporto,  those  called  Sherry  & 

upon  all  French  wines ^ 

Upon  the  wines  called  Malaga  or  Teneriffe -^ 

Upon  all  other  wines -^ 

Upon  common  Bohea  Tea,  Per  Ib T^ 

address  to  decoy  them  into  a  degree  of  confidence  which  seems  to  leave  their  own 
reputations  as  well  as  the  safety  of  their  country  at  the  mercy  of  Shelburne,  In 
this  business  Jay  has  taken  the  lead  &  proceeded  to  a  length  of  which  you  can 
form  little  idea.  Adams  has  followed  with  cordiality.  Franklin  has  been 
dragged  into  it.  Laurens  in  his  separate  letter  professes  a  violent  suspicion  of 
G.  B.  and  good  will  &  confidence  toward  France.  The  dilemma  to  which  Con 
gress  are  reduced  is  infinitely  perplexing.  If  they  abet  the  proceedings  of  their 
Ministers,  #// confidence  with  France  is  at  an  end  which  in  the  event  of  a  renewal 
of  the  war,  must  be  dreadful  as  in  that  of  peace  it  may  be  dishonorable.  If  they 
[dis]avow  the  conduct  of  their  Ministers,  by  their  usual  frankness  of  communi 
cation,  the  most  serious  inconveniences  also  present  themselves.  The  torment  of 
this  dilemma  cannot  be  justly  conveyed  without  a  fuller  recital  of  facts  than  is 
permitted.  I  wish  you  not  to  hazard  even  an  interlined  decypherment  of  those 
which  I  have  deposited  in  your  confidence. 

"  Despatches  were  yesterday  rec"?  from  Gen1.  Washington  which  have  revived 
£  increased  our  apprehensions  on  that  side.  There  seems  to  be  reason  to  sus 
pect  that  the  intrigues  of  the  civil  creditors  fan  the  discontents  of  the  army. 
The  conduct  of  Washington  does  equal  honor  to  his  prudence  and  to  his  virtue. 

"  The  state  of  our  foreign  affairs  and  of  the  army  combined  with  the  diffi 
culty  and  uncertainty  of  providing  for  justice  &  for  our  finances  &  with  the  ap 
proaching  exit  of  Morris,  give  a  peculiar  solemnity  to  the  present  moment.  God 
send  us  a  speedy  &  honorable  deliverance  from  every  danger.  Pray  hasten  the 
new  cypher  which  you  have  promised." — Madison  to  Edmund  Randolph, 
March  18,  1783.  (Italics  represent  cypher.)  Mad.  MSS. 

1  See  pp.  397,  398. 


1783]  JAMES  MADISON.  409 


Upon  all  other  Teas 
Upon  pepper,  per  Ib 
Upon  Brown  Sugar  per  Ib 
Upon  loaf  Sugar 
Upon  all  other  Sugars 
Upon  molasses  per  Gallon 
Upon  Cocoa  &  Coffee,  per  Ib 
Upon  Salt  after  the  war,  per  bushel, 


And  upon  all  goods,  except  arms,  ammunition  &  clothing  or 
other  articles,1  imported  for  the  use  of  the  U.  S.,  a  duty  of  5  Per 
C-  ad  valorem  : 

Provided  that  there  be  allowed  a  bounty  of  £  of  a  dollar  for 
every  Quintal  of  dried  fish  exported  from  the  U.  S.,  and  a  like  sum 
for  every  Barrel  of  Pickled  fish,  beef  or  pork  to  be  paid  or  al 
lowed  to  the  exporter  thereof  at  the  port  from  which  they  shall 
be  so  exported. 

The  arguments  urged  by  Mr.  Wilson  in  behalf  of  his  motion 
(see  Journal)  for  a  land  tax  [of  J-  of  a  dollar  for  100  acres]  other 
than  those  heretofore  generally  urged  were  that  it  was  more 
moderate  than  had  been  paid  before  the  revolution  &  it  cd  not  be 
supposed  the  people  wd  grudge  to  pay  as  the  price  of  their  liberty 
what  they  formerly  paid  to  their  oppressors  ;  that  if  it  was  un 
equal,  this  inequality  wd  be  corrected  by  the  States  in  other  taxes 
—  that  as  the  tax  on  trade  would  fall  chiefly  on  the  inhabitants  of 
the  lower  Country  who  consumed  the  imports,  the  tax  on  land 
would  affect  those  who  were  remote  from  the  Sea  &  consumed  little. 

On  the  opposite  side  it  was  alledged  that  such  a  tax  was  repug 
nant  to  the  popular  ideas  of  equality  &  particularly  wd  never  be 
acceded  to  by  the  S.  States  at  least  unless  they  were  to  be  respec 
tively  credited  for  the  amount  ;  and  if  such  credit  were  to  be 
given,  it  wd  be  best  to  let  the  States  chuse  such  taxes  as  would 
best  suit  them. 

1  The  other  exception,  as  to  the  Cards  &  the  wire  for  making  them  &c.,  was 
struck  out  unanimously  on  the  motion  of  Mr.  Clark  ;  being  considered  as  no 
longer  necessary  &  contrary  to  the  general  policy  of  encouraging  necessary 
manufactures  among  ourselves.  [Note  in  MS.] 


4io  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1783 

A  letter  came  in  &  was  read  from  the  Sec^  of  F.  A.  stating  the 
perplexing  alternative  to  which  Cong-  were  reduced  by  the  secret 
article  relating  to  West  Florida,  either  of  dishonoring  themselves 
by  becoming  a  party  to  the  concealment  or  of  wounding  the  feel 
ings  &  destroying  the  influence  of  our  Ministers  by  disclosing  the 
article  to  the  French  Court  ;  and  proposing  as  advisable  on  the 
whole 

1.  That  he  be  authorized  to  communicate  the  article  in  ques 
tion  to  The  French  Minister  in  such  manner  as  would  best  tend 
to  remove  the  unfavorable  impressions  which  might  be  made  on 
the  C-  of  F.  as  to  the  sincerity  of  Congress  or  their  Ministers. 

2.  That  the  s?  Ministers  be  informed  of  this  communication, 
and  instructed  to  agree  that  the  limit  for  W.  F.,  proposed  in  the 
separate  article  be  allowed  to  whatever  power  the  said  colony  may 
be  confirmed  by  a  Treaty  of  peace. 

3.  That  it  be  declared  to  be  the  sense  of  Congress  that  the  pre 
liminary  articles  between  the  U.  S.  &  G.  B.  are  not  to  take  effect 
untill  peace  shall  be  actually  signed  between  the  Kings  of  F.  & 
G.  B.1 

Ordered  that  to-morrow  be  assigned  for  the  consideration  of 
the  said  letter.  

WEDNESDAY    MARCH    19. 

A  letter  was  read  from  the  Superintend'  of  Finance,  inclosing 
letters  from  Doc-  Franklin,  accompan?  with  extracts  from  the 
G  de  Vergennes  relative  to  money  affairs,  the  Sup*  thereupon  de 
claring  roundly  that  our  credit  was  at  an  end  &  that  no  further 
pecuniary  aids  were  to  be  expected  from  Europe.  Mr.  Rutledge 
denied  these  assertions,  &  expressed  some  indignation  at  them. 
Mr.  Bland  said  that  as  the  Sup*  was  of  this  opinion  it  would  be 
absurd  for  him  to  be  Minister  of  Finance  and  moved  that  the 
Com*  on  his  motion  for  arranging  the  department  might  be  in 
structed  to  report  without  loss  of  time.  This  motion  was 

1  This  was  meant  to  guard  ag?*  a  construction  that  they  were  to  take  effect 
when  peace  s"?  be  agreed  on  by  those  powers,  £  the  latter  be  ready  to  sign, 
altho'  the  former  s"?1  be  restrained  untill  the  other  parties  s<?  be  ready  for  sign 
ing.  [Note  in  MS.] 


1783]  JAMES  MADISON.  411 

negatived  as  censuring  the  Com6,  but  it  was  understood  to  be  the 
sense  of  Cong?  that  they  s?  report. 

The  order  of  the  day  viz  the  letter  from  the  Secretary  of  F.  A. 
was  taken  up. 

Mr.  Wolcot  conceived  it  unnecessary  to  waste  time  on  the  sub 
ject  as  he  presumed  Cong?  would  never  so  far  censure  the 
Ministers  who  had  obtained  such  terms  for  this  country  as  to 
disavow  their  conduct. 

Mr.  Clarke  was  decided  ag5'  communicating  the  separate  article, 
which  w'-1  be  sacrificing  meritorious  Ministers,  &  w?  rather  injure 
than  relieve  our  national  honor.  He  admitted  that  the  separate 
article  put  an  advantage  into  the  hands  of  the  Enemy,  but  did  not 
on  the  whole  deem  it  of  any  great  consequence.  He  thought 
Congress  ought  to  go  no  farther  than  to  inform  the  Ministers  that 
they  were  sorry  for  the  necessity  which  had  led  them  into  the  part 
they  had  taken,  &  to  leave  them  to  get  rid  of  the  embarrassm*  as 
to  the  separate  article  in  such  a  way  as  they  s*  judge  best.  This 
expedient  would  save  Congress  &  spare  our  Ministers  who  might 
have  been  governed  by  reasons  not  known  to  Congress. 

Mr.  Mercer  said  that  not  meaning  to  give  offence  any  where, 
he  should  speak  his  sentiments  freely.  He  gave  it  as  his  clear  & 
decided  opinion  that  the  Ministers  had  insulted  Congress  by 
sending  them  assertions  without  proof  as  reasons  for  violating 
their  instructions,  &  throwing  themselves  into  the  confidence  of 
G.  B.  He  observed  that  France  in  order  to  make  herself  equal 
to  the  Enemy  had  been  obliged  to  call  for  aid  &  had  drawn  Spain 
ag8'  her  interest  into  the  war  ;  that  it  was  not  improbable  that  she 
had  entered  into  some  specific  engagements  for  that  purpose; 
that  hence  might  be  deduced  the  perplexity  of  her  situation,  of 
which  advantage  had  been  taken  by  G.  B.  an  advantage  in  which 
our  Ministers  had  concurred  for  sowing  jealousies  between  F.  & 
U.  S.  &  of  which  further  advantage  w?  be  taken  to  alienate  the 
minds  of  the  people  of  this  Country  from  their  ally,  by  presenting 
him  as  the  obstacle  to  peace.  The  British  Court  he  said  hav? 
gained  this  point  may  easily  frustrate  the  negotiation  &  renew  the 
war  ag5-1  divided  enemies.  He  approved  of  the  conduct  of  the 
Count  de  Vergennes  in  promoting  a  treaty  under  the  is?  Comiss? 
to  Oswald  as  preferring  the  substance  to  the  shadow  &  proceeding 


4i2  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1783 

from  a  desire  of  peace.  The  conduct  of  our  Ministers  through 
out,  particularly  in  giving  in  writing  every  thing  called  for  by  the 
British  Minister  expressive  of  distrust  of  France  was  a  mixture 
of  follies  which  had  no  example  was  a  tragedy  to  America  &  a 
comedy  to  all  the  world  beside.  He  felt  inexpressible  indigna 
tion  at  their  meanly  stooping,  as  it  were  to  lick  the  dust  from  the 
feet  of  a  nation  whose  hands  were  still  dyed  with  the  blood  of 
their  fellow-citizens.  He  reprobated  the  chicane  &  low  cunning 
wc.h  marked  the  journals  transmitted  to  Congress,  and  contrasted 
them  with  the  honesty  &  good  faith  which  became  all  nations  & 
particularly  an  infant  republic.  They  proved  that  America  had 
at  once  all  the  follies  of  youth  and  all  the  vices  of  old  age  ;  thinks 
it  w^  be  necessary  to  recall  our  Ministers  ;  fears  that  France 
may  be  already  acquainted  with  all  the  transactions  of  our  Min 
isters,  even  with  the  separate  article,  &  may  be  only  waiting  the 
reception  given  to  it  by  Cong-  to  see  how  far  the  hopes  of  cutting 
off  the  right  arm  of  G.  B.  by  supporting  our  revolution  may  have 
been  well  founded  ;  and  in  case  of  our  basely  disappointing  her, 
may  league  with  our  Enemy  for  our  destruction  and  for  a  division 
of  the  Spoils.  He  was  aware  of  the  risks  to  which  such  a  league 
w?  expose  France,  of  finally  losing  her  share,  but  supposed  that 
the  British  Islands  might  be  made  hostages  for  her  security.  He 
said  America  was  too  prone  to  depreciate  political  merit,  &  to 
suspect  where  there  was  no  danger  ;  that  the  honor  of  the  King 
of  F.  was  dear  to  him,  that  he  never  w?  betray  or  injure  us  unless 
he  s*  be  provoked  &  justified  by  treachery  on  our  part.  For  the 
present  he  acquiesced  in  the  proposition  of  the  Sec?  of  F?  A?  But 
when  the  question  should  come  to  be  put,  he  s?  be  for  a  much 
more  decisive  resolution. 

Mr.  Rutledge  said  he  hoped  the  character  of  our  Ministers 
would  not  be  affected  much  less  their  recall  produced  by  decla 
mations  ags.1  them  ;  and  that  facts  would  be  ascertained  &  stated 
before  any  decision  s*  be  passed  ;  that  the  C  de  Vergennes  had 
expressly  declared  to  our  Ministers  his  desire  that  they  might 
treat  apart  alluded  to  &  animadverted  upon  the  instruction  which 
submitted  them  to  French  councils  ;  was  of  opinion  that  the 
separate  article  did  not  concern  France  &  therefore  there  was  no 
necessity  for  communicating  it  to  her  ;  &  that  as  to  Spain  she 


1783]  JAMES  MADISON.  413 

deserved  nothing  at  our  hands,  she  had  treated  us  in  a  manner  that 
forfeited  all  claim  to  our  good  offices  or  our  confidence.  She 
had  not  as  has  been  supposed  entered  into  the  present  war  as  an 
ally  to  our  Ally  for  our  support  ;  but  as  she  herself  had  declared, 
as  a  principal  &  on  her  own  account.  He  sd  he  was  for  adhering 
religiously  to  the  Spirit  &  letter  of  the  treaty  with  France,  that 
our  Ministers  had  done  so,  &  if  recalled  or  censured  for  the  part 
they  had  acted,  he  was  sure  no  man  of  spirit  would  take  their 
place.  He  concluded  with  moving  that  the  letter  from  the 
Sec^  of  F.  A.  might  be  referred  to  a  special  Comm?,  who  might 
inquire  into  all  the  facts  relative  to  the  subject  of  it,  Mr.  Holten 
2ded  the  motion. 

Mr.  Williamson  was  opposed  to  harsh  treatment  of  the  Minis 
ters  who  had  shown  great  ability.  He  said  they  had  not  infringed 
the  Treaty,  and  as  they  had  received  the  concurrence  of  the  C-  de 
Vergennes  for  treating  apart  they  had  not  in  that  respect  violated 
their  instructions.  He  proposed  that  Congress  sd  express  to  the 
Ministers  their  concern  at  the  separate  article  &  leave  them  to 
get  over  the  embarrassment  as  they  shd  find  best. 

Mr.  Mercer  in  answer  to  Mr.  Rutledge  said  that  his  language 
with  respect  to  the  Ministers  was  justified  by  their  refusal  to  obey 
instructions,  censured  w*  great  warmth  the  servile  confidence  of 
Mr.  Jay  in  particular  in  the  British  Ministers.  He  said  the  separate 
article  was  a  reproach  to  our  character,  and  that  if  Congress 
wd  not  themselves  disclose  it  he  would  disclose  to  his  Constitu 
ents  who  would  disdain  to  be  united  with  those  who  patronize 
such  dishonorable  proceedings.  He  was  called  to  order  by  the 
Presid1,  who  said  that  the  article  in  question  was  under  an  in 
junction  of  secrecy  &  he  could  not  permit  the  order  of  the  House 
to  be  trampled  upon. 

Mr.  Lee  took  notice  that  obligations  in  national  affairs  as  well 
as  others  ought  to  be  reciprocal  &  he  did  not  know  that  France 
had  ever  bound  herself  to  like  engagements  as  to  concert  of 
negotiation  with  those  into  which  America  had  at  different  times 
been  drawn.  He  thought  it  highly  improper  to  censure  Ministers 
who  had  negotiated  well,  said  that  it  was  agreeable  to  practice  & 
necessary  to  the  end  proposed,  for  Ministers  in  particular  emer 
gencies  to  swerve  from  strict  instructions.  France  he  said  wanted 


4i4  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1783 

to  sacrifice  our  interests  to  her  own  or  those  of  Spain,  that  the 
French  answer  to  the  British  Memorial  contained  a  passage 
which  deserved  attention  on  this  subject.  She  answered  the  re 
proaches  of  perfidy  contained  in  that  Memorial,  by  observing 
that  obligations  being  reciprocal,  a  breach  on  one  side  absolved 
the  other.  The  C  de  Vergennes  he  was  sure,  was  too  much  a 
Master  of  negotiation  not  to  approve  the  management  of  our 
Ministers  instead  of  condemning  it.  No  man  lamented  more 
than  he  did  any  diminution  of  the  confidence  between  this 
country  &  France,  but  if  the  misfortune  should  ensue  it  could 
not  be  denied  that  it  had  originated  with  France,  who  had 
endeavoured  to  sacrifice  our  territorial  rights,  those  very  rights 
which  by  the  Treaty  she  had  guarantied  to  us.  He  wished  the 
preliminary  articles  had  not  been  signed  without  the  knowledge 
of  France  but  was  persuaded  that  in  whatever  light  she  might 
view  it,  she  was  too  sensible  of  the  necessity  of  our  Independence 
to  her  safety  ever  to  abandon  it.  But  let  no  censure  fall  on  our 
Ministers  who  had  upon  the  whole  done  what  was  best.  He 
introduced  the  instruction  of  June  15  1781  proclaimed  it  to  be 
the  greatest  opprobrium  and  stain  to  this  country  which  it  had 
ever  exposed  itself  to,  and  that  it  was  in  his  judgment  the  true 
cause  of  that  distrust  &  coldness  which  prevailed  between  our 
Ministers  &  the  French  Court,  inasmuch  as  it  could  not  be 
viewed  by  the  former  without  irritation  &  disgust.  He  was  not 
surprised  that  those  who  considered  France  as  the  Patron  rather 
than  the  Ally  of  this  Country  should  be  disposed  to  be  obsequious 
to  her,  but  he  was  not  of  that  number. 

Mr.  Hamilton  urged  the  propriety  of  proceeding  with  coolness 
and  circumspection.  He  thought  it  proper  in  order  to  form  a 
right  judgment  of  the  conduct  of  our  Ministers,  that  the  views  of 
the  French  &  British  Courts  should  be  examined.  He  admitted 
it  as  not  improbable  that  it  had  been  the  policy  of  France  to  pro 
crastinate  the  definite  acknowledgm'  of  our  Independence  on  the 
part  of  G.  B.,  in  order  to  keep  us  more  knit  to  herself  &  untill 
her  own  interests  could  be  negotiated.  The  arguments  hower, 
urged  by  our  Ministers  on  this  subject,  although  strong,  were  not 
conclusive  ;  as  it  was  not  certain,  that  this  policy  &  not  a  desire 
of  excluding  obstacles  to  peace,  had  produced  y?  opposition  of 


1783]  JAMES  MADISON.  415 

the  French  Court  to  our  demands.  Caution  &  vigilance  he  thought 
were  justified  by  the  appearance  £  that  alone.  But  compare  this 
policy  with  that  of  G.  B.,  survey  the  past  cruelty  &  present 
duplicity  of  her  councils,  behold  her  watching  every  occasion  & 
trying  every  project  for  dissolving  the  honorable  ties  which  bind 
the  U.  S.  to  their  Ally,  &  then  say  on  which  side  our  resentments 
&  jealousies  ought  to  lie.  With  respect  to  the  instructions  sub 
mitting  our  Ministers  to  the  advice  of  France,  he  had  disapproved 
it  uniformly  since  it  had  come  to  his  knowledge,  but  he  had  al 
ways  judged  it  improper  to  repeal  it.  He  disapproved  highly  of 
the  conduct  of  our  Ministers  in  not  shewing  the  preliminary 
articles  to  our  Ally  before  they  signed  them,  and  still  more  so  of 
their  agreeing  to  the  separate  article.  This  conduct  gave  an  ad 
vantage  to  the  Enemy  which  they  would  not  fail  to  improve  for 
the  purpose  of  inspiring  France  with  indignation  &  distrust  of 
the  U.  S.  He  did  not  apprehend  (with  Mr.  Mercer)  any  danger 
of  a  coalition  between  F.  &  G.  B.  against  America,  but  foresaw 
the  destruction  of  mutual  Confidence  between  F.  &  the  U.  S., 
which  wl  be  likely  to  ensue,  £  the  danger  which  would  result 
from  it  in  case  the  war  should  be  continued.  He  observed  that 
Spain  was  an  unwise  nation,  her  policy  narrow  &  jealous,  her 
King  old  her  Court  divided  &  the  heir  apparent  notoriously 
attached  to  G.  B.  From  these  circumstances  he  inferred  an  ap 
prehension  that  when  Spain  sh?  come  to  know  the  part  taken  by 
America  with  respect  to  her  a  separate  treaty  of  peace  might  be 
resorted  to.  He  thought  a  middle  course  best  with  respect  to  our 
Ministers  ;  that  they  ought  to  be  commended  in  general  ;  but  that 
the  communication  of  the  separate  article  ought  to  take  place. 
He  observed  that  our  Ministers  were  divided  as  to  the  policy  of 
the  O  of  France,  but  that  they  all  were  agreed  in  the  necessity  of 
being  on  the  watch  against  G.  B.  He  apprehended  that  if  the 
Ministers  were  to  be  recalled  or  reprehended,  that  they  would  be 
disgusted  &  head  &  foment  parties  in  this  Country.  He  observed 
particularly  with  respect  to  Mr.  Jay  that,  altho'  he  was  a  man  of 
profound  sagacity  &  pure  integrity,  yet  he  was  of  a  suspicious 
temper,  &  that  this  trait  might  explain  the  extraordinary  jealousies 
which  he  professed.  He  finally  proposed  that  the  Ministers  sd  be 
commended  and  the  separate  article  communicated.  This  motion 


4i 6  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1783 

was  2dedby  Mr.  Osgood,  as  compared  however  with  the  proposition 
of  the  Seer?'  for  F.  A.,  and  so  far  only  as  to  be  referred  to  a 
Committee. 

Mr.  Peters  favored  a  moderate  course  as  most  advisable.  He 
thought  it  necessary  that  the  separate  article  should  be  commun 
icated,  but  that  it  wd  be  less  painful  to  the  feelings  of  the  Ministers 
if  the  doing  it  was  left  to  themselves  ;  and  was  also  in  favor  of 
giving  the  territory  annexed  by  the  Separate  art.  to  W.  Florida, 
to  such  power  as  might  be  vested  with  that  Colony  in  the  Treaty 
of  peace. 

Mr.  Bland  said  he  was  glad  that  every  one  seemed  at  length  to 
be  struck  with  the  impropriety  of  the  instruction  submitting  our 
Ministers  to  the  advice  of  the  French  Court.  He  represented  it 
as  the  cause  of  all  our  difficulties  &  moved  that  it  might  be  re 
ferred  to  the  Corn6,  with  the  several  propositions  which  had  been 
made.  Mr.  Lee  2ded  the  motion. 

Mr.  Wilson  objected  to  Mr.  Eland's  motion  as  not  being  in  order. 
When  moved  in  order  perhaps  he  might  not  oppose  the  substance  of 
it.  He  said  he  had  never  seen  nor  heard  of  the  instruction  it  referred 
to  until  this  morning;  and  that  it  had  really  astonished  him;  that  this 
Country  ought  to  maintain  an  upright  posture  between  all  nations. 
But  however  objectionable  this  step  might  have  been  in  Cong*, 
the  magnanimity  of  our  Ally  in  declining  to  obtrude  his  advice  on 
our  Ministers  ought  to  have  been  a  fresh  motive  to  their  confi 
dence  and  respect.  Altho'  they  deserved  commendation  in 
general  for  their  services  ;  in  this  respect  they  do  not.  He  was 
of  opinion  that  the  spirit  of  the  treaty  with  France  forbade 
the  signing  of  the  preliminary  articles  without  her  consent ;  and 
that  the  separate  article  ought  to  be  disclosed  ;  but  as  the  merits 
of  our  Ministers  entitled  them  to  the  mildest  &  most  delicate 
mode  in  which  it  cd  be  done,  he  wished  the  communication  to  be 
left  to  themselves  as  they  wd  be  the  best  judges  of  the  explanation 
which  ought  to  be  made  for  the  concealment ;  &  their  feelings 
wd  be  less  wounded  than  if  it  were  made  without  their  interven 
tion.  He  observed  that  the  separate  article  was  not  important  in 
itself  &  became  so  only  by  the  mysterious  silence  in  which  it  was 
wrapt  up.  A  candid  and  open  declaration  from  our  Ministers  of 
the  circumstances  under  which  they  acted  &  the  necessity 


1783]  JAMES  MADISON.  417 

produced  by  them  of  pursuing  the  course  marked  out  by  the  in 
terest  of  their  Country,  w?  have  been  satisfactory  to  our  Ally,  w? 
have  saved  their  own  honor,  and  Would  not  have  endangered  the 
objects  for  which  they  were  negotiating. 

Mr.  Higginson  contended  that  the  facts  stated  by  our  Ministers 
justified  the  part  they  had  taken. 

Mr.  Madison  expressed  his  surprise  at  the  attempts  made  to  fix 
the  blame  of  all  our  embarrassments  on  the  instruction  of  June 
15,  1781,  when  it  appeared  that  no  use  had  been  made  of  the 
power  given  by  it  to  the  C-  of  France,  that  our  Ministers  had  con 
strued  it  in  such  a  way  as  to  leave  them  at  full  liberty  ;  and  that 
no  one  in  Cong?  pretended  to  blame  them  on  that  ace'.  For 
himself  he  was  persuaded  that  their  construction  was  just  ;  the 
advice  of  France  having  been  made  a  guide  to  them  only  in  cases 
where  the  question  respected  the  concessions  of  the  U.  S.  to  G. 
B.  necessary  &  proper  for  obtaining  peace  &  an  acknowledg*  of 
Indep?  not  where  it  respected  concessions  to  other  powers  &  for 
other  purposes.  He  reminded  Congress  of  the  change  which  had 
taken  place  in  our  affairs  since  that  instruction  was  passed,1 
and  remarked  the  probability  that  many  who  were  now  perhaps 
the  loudest  in  disclaiming,  would  under  the  circumstances  of  that 
period  have  been  the  foremost  to  adopt  it.  He  admitted  that  the 
change  of  circumstances  had  rendered  it  inapplicable,  but  thought 
an  express  repeal  of  it  might  at  this  crisis  at  least  have  a  bad 
effect.  The  instructions  he  observed  for  disregarding  which  our 
Ministers  had  been  blamed,  and  which  if  obeyed  would  have  pre 
vented  the  dilemma  now  felt,  were  those  which  required  them  to 
Act  in  concert  &  in  confidence  with  our  Ally  ;  &  these  instructions 
he  said  had  been  repeatedly  confirmed  in  every  stage  of  the  Revo 
lution  by  unanimous  votes  of  Congress  ;  Several  of  the  Gentlemen 
present2  who  now  justified  our  Ministers  having  concurred  in 
them,  and  one  of  them 3  having  penned  two  of  the  Acts,  in  one  of 

1  The  Committee  who  reported  the  instruction  were,  Mr.  Carroll,  Mr.  Jones, 
Mr.  Witherspoon  Mr.  Sullivan  &  Mr.  Matthews.  Mr.  Witherspoon  was  par 
ticularly  prominent  throughout.  [Note  in  MS.] 

'-'  MT   Bland,  Lee  &  Rutledge.     [Note  in  MSS.] 

3  Mr.  Rutledge,  he  framed  in  the  Committee  the  first  draught  of  the  declara 
tion  made  in  Sep*.  last  &  the  instruction  abl.  the  same  time.  This  was  con- 

siderably  altered  but  not  in  that  respect.     [Note  in  MSS.] 
VOL.  i. — 27. 


4i8  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1783 

which  Cong5  went  farther  than  they  had  done  in  any  preceding 
act  ;  by  declaring  that  they  would  not  make  peace  until  the  in 
terests  of  our  allies  and  friends,  as  well  as  of  the  U.  S.  s?  be 
provided  for. 

As  to  the  propriety  of  communicating  to  our  Ally  the  separate 
article,  he  thought  it  resulted  clearly  from  considerations  both  of 
national  honor  &  national  security.  He  said  that  Congress  hav 
ing  repeatedly  assured  their  ally  that  they  would  take  no  step  in 
a  negotiation  but  in  concert  and  in  confidence  with  him,  and 
hav?  even  published  to  the  world  solemn  declarations  to  the  same 
effect,  would  if  they  abetted  this  concealment  of  their  Ministers 
be  considered  by  all  nations  as  devoid  of  all  Constancy  &  good 
faith  ;  unless  a  breach  of  these  assurances  and  declarations  c?  be 
justified  by  an  absolute  necessity  or  some  perfidy  on  the  part  of 
France  ;  that  it  was  manifest  no  such  necessity  could  be  pleaded, 
&  as  to  perfidy  on  the  part  of  France,  nothing  but  suspicions  & 
equivocal  circumstances  had  been  quoted  in  evidence  of  it,  and 
even  in  these  it  appeared  that  our  Ministers  were  divided  ;  that 
the  embarrassm*  in  which  France  was  placed  by  the  interfering 
claims  of  Spain  &  the  U.  S.  must  have  been  foreseen  by  our 
Ministers,  and  that  the  impartial  public  would  expect  that  in 
stead  of  co-operating  with  G.  B.  in  taking  advantage  of  this  em 
barrassment,  they  ought  to  have  made  every  allowance  &  given 
every  facility  to  it  consistent  with  a  regard  to  the  rights  of  their 
Constituents  ;  that  admitting  every  fact  alledged  by  our  Ministers 
to  be  true,  it  could  by  no  means  be  inferred  that  the  opposition 
made  by  France  to  our  claims  was  the  effect  of  any  hostile  or 
ambitious  designs  ags.1  them,  or  of  any  other  design  than  that  of 
reconciling  them  with  those  of  Spain  ;  that  the  hostile  aspect 
wc^  the  separate  art  :  as  well  as  the  concealment  of  it  bore  to 
Spain,  would  be  regarded  by  the  impartial  world  as  a  dishonor 
able  alliance  with  our  enemies  against  the  interests  of  our  friends  ; 
but  notwithstanding  the  disappointments  &  even  indignities 
which  the  U.  S.  had  rec?  from  Spain  it  could  neither  be  denied 
nor  concealed  that  the  former  had  derived  many  substantial  ad 
vantages,  from  her  taking  part  in  the  war  &  had  even  obtained 
some  pecuniary  aids  ;  that  the  U.  S.  had  made  professions 
corresponding  with  these  obligations  ;  that  they  had  testified  the 


1783]  JAMES  MADISON.  419 

important  light  in  which  they  considered  the  support  resulting  to 
their  cause  from  the  arms  of  Spain  by  the  importunity  with  which 
they  had  courted  her  alliance,  by  the  concessions  with  which  they 
had  offered  to  purchase  it,  and  by  the  anxiety  which  they 
expressed  at  every  appearance  of  her  separate  negotiations  for  a 
peace  with  the  common  Enemy. 

That  our  national  safety  would  be  endangered  by  Congress 
making  themselves  a  party  to  the  concealment  of  the  separate 
article,  he  thought  could  be  questioned  by  no  one.  No  definitive 
treaty  of  peace,  he  observed  had  as  yet  taken,  place,  the  impor 
tant  articles  between  some  of  the  belligerent  parties  had  not  even 
been  adjusted,  our  insidious  enemy  was  evidently  laboring  to  sow 
dissensions  among  them,  the  incaution  of  our  Ministers  had  but 
too  much  facilitated  them  between  the  U.  S.  and  France  ;  a  re 
newal  of  the  war  therefore  in  some  form  or  other  was  still  to  be 
apprehended  &  what  would  be  our  situation  if  France  &  Spain 
had  no  confidence  in  us  ;  and  what  confidence  could  they  have  if 
we  did  not  disclaim  the  policy  which  had  heen  followed  by  our 
Ministers. 

He  took  notice  of  the  intimation  given  by  the  British  Minister 
to  Mr.  Adams  of  an  intended  expedition  from  N.  York  ag5.*  W. 
Florida,  as  a  proof  of  the  illicit  confidence  into  which  our  Minis 
ters  had  been  drawn,  &  urged  the  indispensable  duty  of  Cong?  to 
communicate  it  to  those  concerned  in  it.  He  hoped  that  if  a 
Com?  s?  be  app?  for  wc.h  however  he  saw  no  necessity  that  this 
w?  be  included  in  their  report  &  that  their  report  w?  be  made 
with  as  little  delay  as  possible. 

In  the  event  the  lett'  from  the  Sec.y  of  F.  A.,  with  all  the 
despatches  &  the  several  propositions  which  had  been  made, 
were  committed  to  Mr.  Wilson,  Mr.  Gh'oram,  Mr.  Rutledge,  Mr. 
Clarke  £  Mr.  Hamilton. 


THURSDAY    MARCH    2O. 

An  instruction  from  the  Legislature  of  Virg?  to  their  Delegates 
ag^  admitting  into  the  Treaty  of  Peace  any  stipulation  for 
restoring  confiscated  property  was  laid  before  Congress. 

Also  resolutions  of  the  Executive  Council  of  Penn?  requesting 


420  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1783 

the  Delegates  of  that  State  to  endeavour  to  obtain  at  least  a  rea 
sonable  term  for  making  the  payment  of  British  debts  stipulated 
in  the  preliminary  articles  lately  recd. 

These  papers  were  committed  to  Mr.  Osgood,  Mr.  Mercer  & 
Mr.  Fitzsimmons. 

Mr.  Dyer  whose  vote  on  the  [tenth]  day  of  [March]  frustrated 
the  commutation  of  the  half  pay  made  a  proposition  substantially 
the  same  wch  was  committed.  This  seemed  to  be  extorted  from 
him  by  the  critical  state  of  our  affairs,  himself  personally  &  his 
State  being  opposed  to  it. 

The  Motion  of  Mr.  Hamilton  on  the  Journals,1  was  meant  as  a 
testimony  on  his  part  of  the  insufficiency  of  the  report  of  the 
Com?  as  to  the  establishm*  of  revenues,  and  as  a  final  trial  of  the 
sense  of  Cong5  with  respect  to  the  practicability  &  necessity  of  a 
general  revenue  equal  to  the  public  wants.  The  debates  on  it 
were  chiefly  a  repetition  of  those  used  on  former  questions 
relative  to  that  subject. 

Mr.  Fitzsimmons  on  this  occasion  declared  that  on  mature 
reflection  he  was  convinced  that  a  complete  general  revenue  was 
unattainable  from  the  States,  was  impracticable  in  the  hands  of 
Congress,  and  that  the  modified  provision  reported  by  the  Com? 
if  established  by  the  States  wd  restore  public  credit  among  our 
selves.  He  apprehended  however  that  no  limited  funds  wd  procure 
loans  abroad,  which  wd  require  funds  commensurate  to  their 
duration. 

Mr.  Higginson  described  all  attempts  of  Cong5  to  provide  for 
the  public  debts  out  of  the  mode  prescribed  by  the  Confederation, 
as  nugatory  ;  sd  that  the  States  wd  disregard  them  that  the  impost 
of  5  Pe  C-  had  passed  in  Massts  by  2  voices  only  in  the  lower,  & 
one  in  the  upper  house  ;  and  that  the  Gov'  had  never  formally 
assented  to  the  law  ;  that  it  was  probable  this  law  wd  be  repealed, 

1  It  provided  that  the  States  be  recommended  to  provide  funds  to  be  gathered 
from  the  five  per  cent,  ad  valorem  on  importations,  except  on  rum,  etc.,  on 
which  a  specific  duty  should  be  charged  ;  also  five  per  cent,  ad  valorem  on 

prizes  and  prize  goods  ;  also  a  land  tax  of ninetieths  of  a  dollar  on  every 

hundred  acres  of  land  ;  also  a  house-tax  of  half  a  dollar  on  each  dwelling- 
house  (cottages  excepted),  and  two  and  a-half  per  cent,  on  rent  above  $20. 
—Journals  of  Congress,  iv.,  177. 


1783]  JAMES  MADISON.  421 

&  almost  certain  that  the  extensive  plans  of  Congress  would  be 
reprobated. 


FRIDAY    MARCH    21. 

The  Report  on  Revenue  was  taken  into  consideration  ;  and  the 
5  and  6  paragraphs  after  discussion  being  judged  not  sufficiently 
explicit  were  recommitted  to  be  made  more  so. 

A  motion  was  made  by  Mr.  Clarke,  2ded  by  Mr.  Bland  to  com 
plete  so  much  of  the  Report  as  related  to  an  impost  on  Trade  & 
send  it  to  the  States  immediately  apart  from  the  residue. 

In  support  of  this  motion  it  was  urged  that  the  Impost  was  dis 
tinct  in  its  nature  was  more  likely  to  be  adopted  &  ought  not 
therefore  to  be  delayed  or  hazarded  by  a  connection  with  the 
other  parts  of  the  Report.  On  the  other  side  it  was  contended 
that  it  was  the  duty  of  Cong5  to  provide  a  system  adequate  to  the 
public  exigencies  ;  &  that  such  a  system  wd  be  more  likely  to  be 
adopted  by  the  States  than  any  partial  or  detached  provision,  as 
it  would  comprise  objects  agreeable  as  well  as  disagreeable  to  each 
of  the  States,  and  as  all  of  them  wd  feel  a  greater  readiness  to 
make  mutual  concessions  &  to  disregard  local  considerations  in 
proportion  to  the  magnitude  of  the  object  held  out  to  them. 

The  motion  was  disagreed  to,  N.  J.  being  in  favor  of  it  &  sev 
eral  other  States  divided. 


SATURDAY    22.    MARCH 

A  letter  was  recd  from  Gen1  Washington  inclosing  his  address 
to  the  convention  of  Officers  with  the  result  of  their  consultations. 
The  dissipation  of  the  cloud  which  seemed  to  have  been  gathering 
afforded  great  pleasure  on  the  whole  to  Congress  ;  but  it  was  ob 
servable  that  the  part  which  the  Gen1  had  found  it  necessary  & 
thought  it  his  duty,  to  take,  would  give  birth  to  events  much  more 
serious  if  they  sd  not  be  obviated  by  the  establishment  of  such 
funds  as  the  Gen1,  as  well  as  the  army  had  declared  to  be  neces 
sary.1 

The   report  of  the  come  on   Mr.    Dyer's   motion,  in  favor  of 

1  See  note,  p.  407. 


422  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1783 

a  commutation  for  the  half  pay  was  agreed  to.  The  preamble 
was  objected  to,  but  admitted  at  the  entreaty  of  Mr.  Dyer  who 
supposed  the  considerations  recited  in  it  wd  tend  to  reconcile  the 
State  of  Con*  to  the  measure. 

An  order  passed  for  granting  35  licenses  for  vessels  belong 
ing  to  Nantucket,  to  secure  the  Whaling  vessels  agst  the  penalty 
for  double  papers.  This  order  was  in  consequence  of  a  deputa 
tion  to  Cong5  representing  the  exposed  situation  of  that  island, 
the  importance  of  the  Whale  fishery  to  the  U.  S.,  the  danger  of 
its  being  usurped  by  other  nations  &  the  concurrence  of  the 
Enemy  in  neutralizing  such  a  number  of  Vessels  as  wd  carry  on 
the  fisheries  to  an  extent  necessary  for  the  support  of  the  in 
habitants. 

The  Com6,  to  whom  was  referred  the  letter  from  the  Secy  of 
F.  A.,  with  the  foreign  despatches  &c  reported 

1.  That  our  Ministers  be  thanked  for  their  zeal  &  services  in 
negotiating  the  preliminary  articles. 

2.  that  they  be  instructed  to  make  a  communication  of  the 
separate  article  to  the  Court  of  France,  in  such  way  as  would  best 
get  over  the  concealment. 

3.  that  the  Secy  of  F.  A.  inform  them  that  it  is  the  wish  of  Con 
gress  that  preliminary  articles  had  been  communicated  to  the 
Court  of  France  before  they  had  been  executed. 

Mr.  Dyer  said  he  was  opposed  to  the  whole  report  ;  that  he 
fully  approved  of  every  step  taken  by  our  Ministers  as  well  to 
wards  G.  B.  as  towards  France  ;  that  the  separate  article  did  not 
concern  the  interests  of  France  &  therefore  could  not  involve  the 
good  faith  of  the  U.  S. 

Mr.  Lee  agreed  fully  with  Mr.  Dyer,  said  that  the  special  report 
of  facts  ought  to  have  been  made  necessary  for  enabling  Cong5  to 
form  a  just  opinion  of  the  Conduct  of  the  Ministers,  and  moved 
that  the  report  might  be  recommitted.  Mr.  Wolcott  2d?d  the  mo 
tion  which  was  evidently  made  for  the  sole  purpose  of  delay.  It 
was  opposed  by  Mr.  Clarke,  Mr.  Wilson  &  Mr.  Ghoram  the  i5t  & 
last  of  whom  had  however  no  objection  to  postponing  ;  by  Mr. 
Mercer  who  repeated  his  abhorrence  of  the  confidence  shewn  by 
our  Ministers  to  those  of  G.  B.  said  that  it  was  about  to  realize 
the  case  of  those  who  kicked  down  the  ladder  by  wch  they  had 


1783]  JAMES  MADISON.  423 

been  elevated,  &  of  the  viper  which  was  ready  to  destroy  the 
family  of  the  man  in  whose  bosom  it  had  been  restored  to  life, 
observed  that  it  was  unwise  to  prefer  G.  B.  to  Spain  as  our  neigh 
bours  in  W.  Florida. 

Mr.  Higginson  supported  the  sentiments  of  Mr.  Lee,  s?  that  the 
C*  de  V.  had  released  our  Ministers  &  that  he  agreed  with  those 
who  thought  the  instruction  of  June  15.  c?  relate  only  to  questions 
directly  between  G.  B.  &  U.  S. 

Mr.  Holten  thought  there  was  no  sufficient  evidence  for  praise 
or  blame  ;  and  that  both  ought  to  be  suspended  untill  the  true 
reasons  s?  be  stated  by  the  Ministers.  He  supposed  that  the 
separate  article  had  been  made  an  ultimatum  of  the  preliminaries 
by  G.  B.  &  that  there  might  also  be  secret  art?  between  G.  B.  & 
F.  If  the  latter  were  displeased  he  conceived  that  she  w?  officially 
notify  it.  Mr.  Rutledge  was  ag5.1  recommitting  but  for  post 
poning.  The  motion  for  recomm?  was  disagreed  to,  but  several 
States  being  for  postponing,  the  vote  was  no  index  as  to  the 
main  question. 

It  had  been  talked  of  among  sundry  members  as  very  singular 
that  the  British  Minister  should  have  confided  to  Mr.  Adams  an 
intended  expedition  from  N.  Y.  ags*  W.  Florida  ;  as  very  repre 
hensible  in  the  latter  to  become  the  depository  of  secrets  hostile 
to  the  Friends  of  his  Country,  and  that  every  motive  of  honor  & 
prudence  made  it  the  duty  of  Cong?  to  impart  the  matter  to  the 
Spaniards.  To  this  effect  a  motion  was  made  by  Mr.  Mercer 
2de.d  by  Mr.  Madison.  But  it  being  near  the  usual  hour  of  ad 
journment,  the  house  being  agitated  by  the  debates  on  the 
separate  article  ;  and  a  large  proportion  of  members  pre 
determined  ags.1  every  measure  w*  seemed  in  any  manner  to 
blame  y?  Ministers  &  the  Eastern  delegates  in  general  extremely 
jealous  of  the  honor  of  Mr.  Adams,  an  adjournment  was  pressed 
&  carried  without  any  vote  on  the  motion. 


MONDAY    MARCH    24-TH. 

On  the  day  preceding  this,  intelligence  arrived  which  was  this 
day  laid  before  Cong?,  that  the  Preliminaries  for  a  general  peace 
had  been  signed  on  the  20*  of  Jan?'.  This  intelligence  was 


424  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1783 

brought,  by  a  French  Cutter  from  Cadiz  despatched  by  C* 
d'Estaing  to  notify  the  event  to  all  vessels  at  sea,  and  engaged  by 
the  zeal  of  the  Marquis  de  la  Fayette  to  convey  it  to  Congress.1 
This  confirmation  of  peace  produced  the  greater  joy,  as  the  preced 
ing  delay,  the  cautions  of  Mr.  Lauren's  Letter  of  the  24  of  Dec' 
and  the  general  suspicions  of  L?  Shelburne's  sincerity  had  rendered 
an  immediate  &  general  peace  extremely  problematical  in  the 
minds  of  many. 

A  letter  was  rec?  from  Gen?  Carleton  thro  Gen!  Washington  in 
closing  a  copy  of  the  Preliminary  articles  between  G.  B.  &  the 
U.  S.,  with  the  separate  article  annexed. 

Mr.  Carroll  after  taking  notice  of  the  embarrassment  under 
which  Cong?  was  placed  by  the  injunction  of  secrecy  as  to  the 
separate  article  after  it  had  probably  been  disclosed  in  Europe 
&  it  now  appeared  was  known  at  N.  York,  called  the  attention 
of  Cong?  again  to  that  subject. 

Mr.  Wolcot  still  contended  that  it  would  be  premature  to  take 
any  step  relative  to  it,  until  further  communications  should  be 
rec?  from  our  Ministers. 

Mr.  Gilman  being  of  the  same  opinion,  moved  that  the 
business  be  postponed.  Mr.  Lee  2de.d  it. 

Mr.  Wilson  conceived  it  indispensably  necessary  that  some 
thing  should  be  done  ;  that  Cong5  deceived  themselves  if  they 
supposed  that  the  separate  art:  was  any  secret  at  N.  York  after  it 
had  been  announced  to  them  from  S-  Guy  Carleton.  He  pro 
fessed  a  high  respect  for  the  character  of  the  Ministers  which  had 
received  fresh  honor  from  the  remarkable  steadiness  and  great 
abilities  displayed  in  the  negotiations,  but  that  their  conduct 
with  respect  to  the  separate  article  could  not  be  justified.  He 

1  "  Philada   March  24.  1783. 
"  Dear  Sir 

"  The  express  by  whom  I  send  this  conveys  to  the  Governor  the  wellcome 
event  of  a  general  peace.  The  preliminary  articles  were  signed  on  the  20*  of 
Jany.  The  day  to  which  hostilities  are  limited  is  omitted  in  the  abstract  of  the 
preliminaries  transmitted  to  Cong!  This  intelligence  altho'  not  from  our 
Ministers  is  authenticated  beyond  all  possibility  of  doubt.  For  the  outlines  of 
the  articles  I  refer  to  the  letter  to  the  Gov!  &  for  the  articles  themselves  as 
re"? by  Cong!  to  my  letter  by  tomorrows  post." — Madison  to  Edmund  Ran 
dolph.  Mad.  MSS. 


1783]  JAMES  MADISON.  425 

did  not  consider  it  as  any  violation  of  the  instructions  of  June 
i5l.h  1781,  the  C-  de  Vergennes  having  happily  released  them 
from  the  obligation  of  it.  But  he  considered  it  with  the  signing 
of  the  preliminaries  secretly  as  a  violation  of  the  spirit  of 
the  Treaty  of  Alliance  as  well  as  of  the  unanimous  professions  to 
the  Court  of  France,  unanimous  instructions  to  our  Ministers,  & 
unanimous  declarations  to  the  world,  that  nothing  should  be  dis 
cussed  towards  peace  but  in  confidence  and  in  concert  with  our 
Ally.  He  made  great  allowance  for  the  Ministers,  saw  how  they 
were  affected  and  the  reasons  of  it,  but  could  not  subscribe  to 
the  Opinion  that  Cong?  ought  to  pass  over  the  separate  article  in 
the  manner  that  had  been  urged  ;  Cong?  ought  he  said  to  dis 
approve  of  it  in  the  softest  terms  that  could  be  devised  &  at  all 
events  not  to  take  part  in  its  concealment. 

Mr,  Bland  treated  the  separate  article  with  levity  and  ridicule  ; 
as  in  no  respect  concerning  France,  but  Spain  with  whom  we  had 
nothing  to  do. 

Mr.  Carroll  thought  that,  unless  something  expressive  of  our 
disapprobation  of  the  article  &  of  its  concealment,  was  done, 
that  it  would  be  an  indelible  stain  on  our  character. 

Mr.  Clarke  contended  that  it  was  still  improper  to  take  any  step, 
either  for  communicating  officially,  or  for  taking  off  the  injunction 
of  secrecy,  that  the  article  concerned  Spain,  and  not  France,  but 
that  if  it  sd  be  communicated  to  the  latter  she  would  hold  herself 
bound  to  communicate  it  to  the  former  that  hence  an  embarrass 
ment  might  ensue  ;  that  it  was  probably  this  consideration  which 
led  the  Ministers  to  the  concealment,  and  he  thought  they  had 
acted  right.  He  described  the  awkwardness  attending  a  communi 
cation  of  it  under  present  circumstances  ;  remarking,  finally  that 
nothing  had  been  done  contrary  to  the  Treaty,  and  that  we  were 
in  possession  of  sufficient  materials  '  to  justify  the  suspicions  wc? 
had  been  manifested. 

Mr.  Rutledge  was  strenuous  for  postponing  the  subject,  said 
that  Cong-5  had  no  occasion  to  meddle  with  it  that  the  Ministers 
had  done  right,  that  they  had  maintained  the  honor  of  the  U.  S. 
after  Congress  had  given  it  up  ;  that  the  manoeuvre  practiced  by 

1  Alluding  probably  to  the  intercepted  letter  from  M.  de  Marbois.  [Note  in 
MS.] 


426  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1783 

them  was  common  in  all  courts  &  was  justifiable  ag5.*  Spain  who 
alone  was  affected  by  it ;  that  instructions  ought  to  be  disregarded 
whenever  the  public  good  required  it ;  arid  that  he  himself  would 
never  be  bound  by  them  when  he  thought  them  improper. 

Mr.  Mercer  combatted  the  dangerous  tendency  of  the  Doctrine 
maintained  by  Mr.  Rutledge  with  regard  to  instructions  ;  and  ob 
served  that  the  Delegates  of  Virg?  hav?  been  unanimously 
instructed  not  to  conclude  or  discuss  any  Treaty  of  Peace  but  in 
confidence  &  in  concert  with  his  M.  C.  M.  he  conceived  himself 
as  much  bound  as  he  was  of  himself  inclined  to  disapprove  every 
other  mode  of  proceeding,  and  that  he  should  call  for  the  yeas  & 
nays  on  the  question  for  his  justification  to  his  constituents. 

Mr.  Bland  tartly  said  that  he  of  course  was  instructed  as  well 
as  his  colleague  &  s?  himself  require  the  yeas  and  nays  to  justify 
an  opposite  conduct,  that  the  instructions  from  his  constituents 
went  no  farther  than  to  prohibit  any  Treaty  without  the  concur 
rence  of  our  Ally ; l  which  prohibition  had  not  been  violated  in 
the  case  before  Congress. 

Mr.  Lee  was  for  postponing  &  burying  in  oblivion  the  whole 
transaction  ;  he  s?  that  delicacy  to  France  required  this  ;  since  if 
any  thing  should  be  done  implying  censure  on  our  Ministers,  it  must 
&  ought  to  be  done  in  such  a  way  as  to  fall  ultimately  on  France 
whose  unfaithful  conduct  had  produced  &  justified  that  of  our 
Ministers.  In  all  national  intercourse  he  said  a  reciprocity  was 
to  be  understood  ;  and  as  France  had  not  communicated  her  views 
&  proceedings  to  the  American  Plenipotentiaries,  the  latter  were 
not  bound  to  communicate  theirs.  All  instructions  he  conceived 
to  be  conditional  in  favor  of  the  public  good  ;  and  he  cited  the 
case  mentioned  by  Sr  W™  Temple  in  which  the  Dutch  Ministers 
concluded  of  themselves  an  Act  which  required  the  previous 
sanction  of  all  the  members  of  the  Republic. 

Mr.  Hamilton  said  that  whilst  he  despised  the  man  who  w-d  en 
slave  himself  to  the  policy  even  of  our  Friends  he  could  not  but 
lament  the  overweening  readiness  which  appeared  in  many  to 
suspect  everything  on  that  side  &  to  throw  themselves  into  the 
bosom  of  our  enemies.  He  urged  the  necessity  of  vindicating 

1  This  construction  of  the  instructions  was  palpably  wrong.      [Note  in  MS.] 


1783]  JAMES  MADISON.  427 

our  public  honor  by  renouncing  that  concealment  to  which  it  was 
the  wish  of  so  many  to  make  us  parties. 

Mr.  Wilson  in  answer  to  Mr.  Lee  observed  that  the  case 
mentioned  by  Sr  W™  T.  was  utterly  inapplicable  to  the  case  in 
question  ;  adding  that  the  conduct  of  France  had  not  on  the 
principle  of  reciprocity,  justified  our  Ministers  in  signing  the  pro 
visional  preliminaries  without  her  knowledge,  no  such  steps 
having  been  taken  on  her  part.  But  whilst  he  found  it  to  be  his 
duty  thus  to  note  the  faults  of  these  gentlemen,  he  with  much 
greater  pleasure  gave  them  praise  for  their  firmness  in  refusing  to 
treat  with  the  British  Negotiator  until  he  had  produced  a  proper 
commission,  in  contending  for  the  fisheries,  and  in  adhering  to  our 
Western  claims. 

Congress  adjourned  without  any  question. 


TUESDAY    NO    CONGRESS. 


WEDNESDAY     MARCH     26. 

Communication  was  made,  thro'  the  Seer?'  of  F.  A.,  by  the 
Minister  of  France,  as  to  the  late  negotiation,  from  letters  rec?  by 
him  from  the  C*  de  Vergennes,  dated  in  Dec-r  last  &  brought  by 
the  Washington  Packet.  This  communication  shewed,  though 
delicately  that  France  was  displeased  with  our  Ministers  for  sign 
ing  the  preF  art?  separately  ;  that  she  had  labored  by  recommend 
ing  mutual  concessions  to  compromise  disputes  between  Spain  & 
the  U.  S.,  and  that  she  was  apprehensive  that  G.  B.  would  here 
after  as  they  already  had  endeavored  to  sow  discords  between 
them.  It  signified  that  the  "  intimacy  between  our  Ministers  &: 
those  of  G.  B."  furnished  a  handle  for  this  purpose. 

Besides  the  public  communication  to  Congress  other  parts  of 
letters  from  the  C  de  Vergennes  were  privately  communicated  to 
the  Presid*  of  Cong?  &  to  sundry  members,  expressing  more 
particularly  the  dissatisfaction  of  the  C  of  F.  at  the  conduct  of 
our  Ministers  ;  and  urging  the  necessity  of  establishing  permanent 
revenues  for  paying  our  debts  &  supporting  a  national  character. 
The  substance  of  these  private  communications,  as  taken  on  the 
23.  instant  by  the  President,  is  as  follows  ; 


428  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1783 


FINANCE. 

"  That  the  C*  de  Vergennes  was  alarmed  at  the  extravagant  de 
mands  of  Doc'  Franklin  in  behalf  of  the  U.  S.;  that  he  was  sur 
prised  at  the  same  time  that  the  inhabitants  paid  so  little  attention 
to  doing  something  for  themselves.  If  they  could  not  be  brought 
to  give  adequate  funds  for  their  defence  during  a  dangerous  war, 
it  was  not  likely  that  so  desirable  an  end  could  be  accomplished 
when  their  fears  were  allayed  by  a  general  peace  that  this  reason 
ing  affected  the  credit  of  the  U.  S.,  and  no  one  could  be  found 
who  would  risque  their  money  under  such  circumstances  ;  that 
the  King  would  be  glad  to  know  what  funds  were  provided  for 
the  security  and  payment  of  the  TO  Millions  borrowed  by  him  in 
Holland,  that  the  Count  de  Vergennes  hardly  dared  to  report  in 
favor  of  the  U.  S.  to  the  King  &  Council,  as  money  was  so  scarce 
that  it  would  be  with  the  greatest  difficulty  that  even  a  small  part  of 
the  requisition  could  be  complied  with.  The  causes  of  this  scarcity 
were  a  five  years'  war  which  had  increased  the  expenses  of  Gov 
ernment  to  an  enormous  amount  —  the  exportation  of  large  sums 
of  specie  to  America  for  the  support  and  pay  of  both  French  and 
English  armies  —  the  loans  to  America — the  stoppage  of  Bullion 
in  S.  America,  which  prevented  its  flowing  in  the  usual  channels."  l 
A  letter  of  a  later  date  added 

"  That  he  had  received  the  Chevr.s  letter  of  Od"  and  rejoiced  to 
find  that  Congress  had  provided  funds  for  their  debts,  which  gave 
him  great  encouragem1,  and  he  had  prevailed  on  the  Comptroller 
General  to  join  him  in  a  report  to  his  Majesty  &  Council  for  6 
Millions  of  livres  for  the  U.  S.  to  support  the  war,  but  assures  the 
Chevalier  de  la  Luzerne,  that  he  must  never  again  consent  to  a 
further  application." 

NEGOTIATIONS. 

"  He  complains  of  being  treated  with  great  indelicacy  by  the 
American  Commiss",  they  having  signed  the  Treaty  without  any 
confidential  communication,  that  had  France  treated  America 

1  Another  cause  mentioned  was  the  large  balance  of  specie  in  favor  of  the  N. 
Powers  during  the  war.  [Note  in  MS.] 


1783]  JAMES  MADISON. 


429 


with  the  same  indelicacy  she  might  have  signed  her  Treaty  first 
as  every  thing  between  France  &  England  was  settled,  but  the 
King  chose  to  keep  faith  with  his  allies,  and  therefore  always 
refused  to  do  any  thing  definitively,  till  all  his  allies  were  ready  ; 
that  this  conduct  had  delayed  the  definitive  Treaty,  England  hav 
ing  considered  herself  as  greatly  strengthened  by  America  ;  that 
Doc'  Franklin  waited  on  the  C  de  Vergennes  &  acknowledged 
the  indelicacy  of  their  behavior  &  had  prevailed  on  him  to  bury 
it  in  oblivion  ;  that  the  English  were  endeavouring  all  in  their 
power  to  sow  seeds  of  discords  between  our  Commissrs.  &  the 
Court  of  Spain,  representing  our  claims  to  the  Westward  as  ex 
travagant  and  inadmissible,  that  it  became  Congress  to  be  atten 
tive  to  this  business,  &  to  prevent  the  ill  effects  that  it  might  be 
attended  with,  that  the  King  had  informed  the  Court  of  Spain, 
that  tho'  he  heartily  wished  that  the  U.  S.  might  enjoy  a  cordial 
coalition  with  his  Cat1?  Majesty,  yet  he  should  leave  the  whole 
affair  entirely  to  the  two  States  and  not  interfere  otherwise  than 
as  by  his  counsel  &  advice  when  asked,  that  altho'  the  U.  S.  had 
not  been  so  well  treated  by  Spain  as  might  have  been  expected, 
yet  that  his  Majesty  wished  that  America  might  reap  the  advan 
tage  of  a  beneficial  Treaty  with  Spain.  That  as  the  peace  was 
not  yet  certain,  it  became  all  the  powers  at  war,  to  be  ready  for  a 
vigorous  campaign,  and  hoped  Cong5:  would  exert  themselves  to 
aid  the  common  cause  by  some  offensive  operations  against  the 
Enemy,  but  if  the  British  should  evacuate  the  U.  S.,  the  King 
earnestly  hoped  Cong5,  would  take  the  most  decided  measures  to 
prevent  any  intercourse  with  the  British,  and  particularly  in  the 
way  of  merchandize  or  supplying  them  with  provisions,  wc.h  would 
prove  of  the  most  dangerous  tendency  to  the  campaign  in  the  W. 
Indies,  that  the  British  now  had  hopes  of  opening  an  extensive 
trade  with  America,  tho'  the  war  should  continue,  which,  if  they 
should  be  disappointed  in,  might  hasten  the  definitive  Treaty,  as 
it  would  raise  a  clamor  among  the  people  of  England. 

The  Chev*  added  that  as  he  had  misinformed  his  Court  with  re 
gard  to  Cong5  having  funded  their  debts,  on  which  presumption 
the  6  Mil0"  had  been  granted,  he  hoped  Cong5,  would  enable  him 
in  his  next  despatches  to  give  some  satisfactory  account  to  his 
Court  on  this  head." 


430  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1783 

THURSDAY,  MARCH  27.  THIS  DAY  NOT  NOTED  IN  THE 
JOURNAL  AS  IN  SOME  OTHER  INSTANCES. 

Revenues  taken  up  as  reported  Mar.  y.1 

The  5  paragraph  in  the  Report  on  Revenue  hav^  been  judged 
not  sufficiently  explicit,  and  recommitted  to  be  made  more  so,  the 
following  paragraph  was  rec^  in  its  place  viz  "That  it  be  further 
recommended  to  the  several  States,  to  establish  for  a  term  limited 
to  25  years,  and  to  appropriate  "  &c  (to  the  word  2  Million  of 
dollars  annually)  which  proportions  shall  be  fixed  and  equalized 
from  time  to  time  according  to  such  rule  as  is  or  may  be  prescribed 
by  the  Articles  of  Confederation  ;  and  in  case  the  revenues  so 
established  and  appropriated  by  any  State  shall  at  any  time  yield 
a  sum  exceeding  its  proportion,  the  excess  shall  be  refunded  to 
it,  and  in  case  the  same  shall  be  found  to  be  defective  the  im 
mediate  deficiency  shall  be  made  good  as  soon  as  possible,  and  a 
future  deficiency  guarded  against  by  an  enlargement  of  the  Rev 
enues  established  provided  that  untill  the  rule  of  the  Confedera 
tion  can  be  applied,  the  proportions  of  the  2,000,000  of  dollars 
aforesaid  shall  be  as  follows,  viz 

This  amendment  was  accepted  ;  a  motion  of  Mr.  Clarke  to  re 
strain  this  apportioning  in  the  first  instance,  to  the  term  of  2 
years,  being  first  negatived.  He  contended  that  a  valuation  of 
land  would  probably  never  take  place,  and  that  it  was  uncertain 

1  "  The  pecuniary  aid  of  France  for  the  year  1783,  had  been  unalterably  limited 
to  6  Millions  of  livres.  The  greatest  part  of  this  sum  had  been  anticipated  and 
how  our  army  could  have  been  kept  together  for  three  months  is  utterly  beyond 
my  solution.  As  it  is,  God  only  knows  how  the  plans  in  agitation  for  satisfying 
their  just  expectations  will  terminate  ;  or  what  will  be  the  issue  in  case  they 
should  be  abortive.  The  effects  of  the  anonymous  addresses  mentioned  in  my 
last  on  the  irritable  state  of  their  minds,  have  been  effectually  obviated  by  the 
seasonable  &  judicious  steps  taken  by  the  Commander-in-Chief.  The  manner 
however  in  which  he  found  it  necessary,  and  indeed  felt  it  to  be  his  duty,  to 
espouse  their  interest  enforces  in  the  highest  degree  the  establishment  of  ade 
quate  and  certain  revenues.  The  provision  reported  by  a  com^e  on  this  subject 
and  of  which  I  sketched  you  the  import,  is  still  before  Congress.  The  past 
deliberations  upon  it  do  not  with  certainty  prognosticate  its  fate.  I  fear  it 
calls  for  more  liberality  &  greater  mutual  confidence  than  will  be  found  in  the 
American  Councils." — Madison  to  Edmund  Randolph,  Marsh  25,  1783.  Mad. 
MSS. 


1783]  JAMES  MADISON.  431 

whether  the  rule  of  numbers  wd  be  substituted  and  therefore  that 
the  first  apportionment  might  be  continued  throughout  the  25 
years,  altho  it  must  be  founded  on  the  present  relative  wealth  of 
the  States,  which  would  vary  every  year,  in  favor  of  those  which 
are  the  least  populous. 

This  reasoning  was  not  denied,  but  it  was  thought  that  such  a 
limitation  might  leave  an  interval  in  which  no  apportionment  wd 
exist,  whence  confusion  would  proceed,  &  that  an  apprehension 
of  it  would  destroy  public  Credit. 

A  motion  was  made  by  Mr.  Bland,  2d.ed  by  Mr.  Lee  to  go  back 
to  the  first  part  of  the  report  &  instead  of  the  word  "levy"  an  im 
post  of  5  Per  C.,  to  substitute  the  word  "collect"  an  impost 
&c.  It  was  urged  in  favor  of  this  motion  that  the  first  word 
imported  a  legislative  idea,  &  the  latter  an  executive  only,  and 
consequently  the  latter  might  be  less  obnoxious  to  the  States.  On 
the  other  side  it  was  said  that  the  States  would  be  governed  more 
by  things  than  by  terms  ;  that  if  the  meaning  of  both  was  the 
same,  an  alteration  was  unnecessary  ;  that  if  not,  as  seemed  to  be 
the  case,  an  alteration  would  be  improper.  It  was  particularly 
apprehended,  that  if  the  term  "  collect  "  were  to  be  used,  the 
States  might  themselves  fix  the  mode  of  collection  ;  whereas  it  was 
indispensable  that  Cong?  sd  have  that  power  as  well  as  that  it 
might  be  varied  from  time  to  time  as  circumstances  or  experience 
sd  dictate,  as  that  a  uniformity  might  be  observed  throughout  the 
States.  On  the  motion  of  Mr.  Clarke,  the  negative  was  voted  by 
a  large  Majority,  there  being  4  ays  only. 

On  the  (8)  parag.  there  was  no  arg*  or  opposition. 

The  (9)  paragraph  being  considered  by  several  as  inaccurate  in 
point  of  phraseology,  a  motion  was  made  by  Mr.  Madison  to  post 
pone  it,  to  take  into  consideration  the  following  to  wit  "  That  in 
order  to  remove  all  objections  against  a  retrospective  application 
of  the  constitutional  rule  to  the  final  apportionment  on  the  several 
States,  of  the  monies  &  supplies  actually  contributed  in  pursuance 
of  requisitions  of  Congress,  it  be  recommended  to  the  States  to 
enable  the  U.  S.,  in  Cong*  assembld  to  make  such  equitable 
abatements  &  alterations  as  the  particular  circumstances  of  the 
States  from  time  to  time  during  the  war  may  require,  and  as  will 
divide  the  burden  of  such  actual  contributions  among  them  in 


432  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1783 

proportion  to  their  respective  abilities  at  the  periods  at  which  they 
were  made."  On  a  question  of  striking  out,  the  original  para 
graph  was  agreed  to  without  opposition.  On  the  question  to 
insert  the  amendment  of  Mr.  M.,  the  votes  of  the  States  were, 
5  ays,  6  noes,  viz  N.  H.  no — Con*  no — N.  J.  no. — Delr.e  no. — 
Maryld  no. — S.  C.  no.  the  rest  ay. 

On  the  (10)  paragraph  relative  to  expences  incurred  by  the 
States  without  the  sanction  of  Cong?,  Mr.  Clarke  exclaimed  ag5.* 
the  unreasonableness  of  burdening  the  Union  with  all  the  extra 
vagant  expenditures  of  particular  States  ;  and  moved  that  it  might 
be  struck  out  of  the  Report.  Mr.  Helmsly  2d?d  the  motion. 

Mr.  Madison  said  that  the  effects  of  rejecting  this  paragraph 
wd  be  so  extensive  that  a  full  consideration  of  it  ought  at  least  to 
precede  such  a  step  that  the  expences  referred  to  in  the  para 
graph  were,  in  part  such  as  would  have  been  previously  sanctioned 
by  Cong?,  if  application  cd  have  been  made  ;  since  similar  ones 
had  been  so  with  respect  to  States  within  the  vicinity  of  Cong?  and 
therefore  complaints  of  injustice  would  follow  a  refusal  ;  that 
another  part  of  the  expences  had  been  incurred  in  support  of 
claims  to  the  territory  of  which  cessions  were  asked  by  Congf,  and 
therefore  these  cd  not  be  expected,  if  the  expences  incident  to 
them  should  be  rejected  ;  that  it  was  probable  if  no  previous  as 
surance  were  given  on  this  point,  it  would  be  made  a  condition 
by  the  States  ceding,  as  the  Cessions  of  territory  would  be  made  a 
condition  by  the  States  most  anxious  to  obtain  them  ;  that  by 
these  means  the  whole  plan  would  be  either  defeated,  or  the  part 
thereof  in  question  be  ultimately  forced  on  Cong5,  whilst  they 
might  with  a  good  grace  yield  it  in  the  first  instance  ;  not  to  men 
tion  that  these  unliquidated  &  unallowed  claims  would  produce 
hereafter  such  contests  &  heats  among  the  States  as  wd  probably 
destroy  the  plan  even  if  it  sd  be  acceded  to  by  the  States  without 
this  paragraph. 

Mr.  Dyer  was  in  favor  of  the  paragraph. 

Mr.  Rutledge  opposed  it  as  letting  in  a  flood  of  claims  which 
were  founded  on  extravagant  projects  of  the  States. 

Mr.  Higginson  and  Mr.  Ghorham  were  earnest  in  favor  of  it, 
remarking  that  the  distance  of  Massachusetts  from  Cong?  had  de 
nied  a  previous  sanction  to  the  Militia  operations  ag5.*  General 


1783]  JAMES  MADISON.  433 

Burgoyne  &c.  The  Penobscot  expedition,  also,  had  great  weight 
with  them. 

Mr.  Williamson  was  in  favor  of  it. 

Mr.  Wilson  said  he  had  always  considered  this  Country  with 
respect  to  the  war  as  forming  one  community  ;  and  that  the  States 
which  by  their  remoteness  from  Cong5,  had  been  obliged  to  incur 
expences  for  their  defence  without  previous  sanction,  ought  to  be 
placed  on  the  same  footing  with  those  which  had  obtained  this 
security  ;  but  he  could  not  agree  to  put  them  on  a  better  which 
wd  be  the  case  if  their  expenses  should  be  sanctioned  in  the  lump  ; 
he  proposed  therefore  that  these  expences  sd  be  limited  to  such  as 
had  been  incurred  in  a  necessary  defence  ;  and  of  which  the  object 
in  each  case  should  be  approved  by  Congress. 

Mr.  Madison  agreed  that  the  expressions  in  the  paragh  were 
very  loose,  &  that  it  wd  be  proper  to  make  them  as  definite  as  the 
case  wd  admit  ;  he  supposed  however  that  all  operations  agst  the 
enemy  within  the  limits  assigned  to  the  U.  S.  might  be  considered 
as  defensive,  &  in  that  view  the  expedition  agst  Penobscot  might 
be  so  called.  He  observed  that  the  term  necessary  left  a  discre 
tion  in  the  Judge  as  well  as  the  term  reasonable  ;  and  that  it  vvd  be 
best  perhaps  for  Congress  to  determine  &  declare  that  they 
wd  constitute  a  tribunal  of  impartial  persons  to  decide  on  oath  as 
to  the  propriety  of  claims  of  States  not  authorized  heretofore 
by  Cong5.  He  sd  this  wd  be  a  better  security  to  the  States  & 
wd  be  more  satisfactory  than  the  decisions  of  Cong5,  the  members 
of  wch  did  not  act  on  oath,  &  brought  with  them  the  Spirit  of  ad 
vocates  for  their  respective  States  rather  than  of  impartial  judges 
between  them.  He  moved  that  the  clause  with  Mr.  Wilson's 
proposition  be  recommitted  ;  which  was  agreed  to  without 
opposition. 

(n  &  12  Parag1?3)  Mr.  Bland  opposed  it  :  sd  that  the  value 
of  land  was  the  best  rule,  and  that  at  any  rate  no  change  sd  be  at 
tempted  untill  its  practicability  sd  be  tried. 

Mr.  Madison  thought  the  value  of  land,  could  never  be  justly 
or  satisfactorily  obtained  ;  that  it  wd  ever  be  a  source  of  conten 
tions  among  the  States,  and  that  as  a  repetition  of  the  valuation 
would  be  within  the  course  of  the  25  years,  it  wd  unless  exchanged 
for  a  more  simple  rule  mar  the  whole  plan. 

VOL.  I.— 28. 


434  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1783 

Mr.  Ghorham  was  in  favr  of  the  paraghs.  He  represented  in 
strong  terms  the  inequality  &  clamors  produced  by  valuations  of 
land  in  the  State  of  Mass*5  &  the  probability  of  the  evils  being  in 
creased  among  the  States  themselves  which  were  less  tied  together 
&  more  likely  to  be  jealous  of  each  other. 

Mr.  Williamson  was  in  favr  of  the  paraghs. 

Mr.  Wilson  was  strenuous  in  favor  of  it,  sd  he  was  in  Cong3 
when  the  Articles  of  Confederation  directing  a  valuation  of  land 
were  agreed  to,  that  it  was  the  effect  of  the  impossibility  of  com 
promising  the  different  ideas  of  the  Eastern  &  Southern  States  as 
to  the  value  of  Slaves  compared  with  the  Whites,  the  alternative 
in  question. 

Mr.  Clarke  was  in  favor  of  them.  He  said  that  he  was  also  in 
Cong5  when  this  article  was  decided  that  the  Southern  States 
wd  have  agreed  to  numbers,  in  preference  to  the  value  of  land  if 
\  their  Slaves  only  sd  be  included  ;  but  that  the  Eastern  States 
would  not  concur  in  that  proposition. 

It  was  agreed  on  all  sides  that,  instead  of  fixing  the  proportion 
by  ages,  as  the  report  proposed  it  would  be  best  to  fix  the  propor 
tion  in  absolute  numbers.  With  this  view  &  that  the  blank  might 
be  filled  up,  the  clause  was  recommitted. 


FRIDAY  MARCH   28. 

The  Com?  last  mentd,  reported  that  two  blacks  be  rated  as  one 
freeman. 

Mr.  Wolcott  was  for  rating  them  as  4  to  3. 

Mr.  Carrol  as  4  to  i. 

Mr.  Williamson  sd  he  was  principled  ag51  slavery  ;  &  that  he 
thought  slaves  an  incumbrance  to  Society  instead  of  increasing 
its  ability  to  pay  taxes. 

Mr.  Higginson  as  4  to  3. 

Mr.  Rutledge  sd,  for  the  sake  of  the  object  he  wd  agree  to  rate 
Slaves  as  2  to  i,  but  he  sincerely  thought  3  to  i  would  be  a  juster 
proportion. 

Mr.  Holten  as  4  to  3. 

Mr.  Osgood  sd  he  cd  not  go  beyond  4  to  3. 


1783]  JAMES  MADISON.  435 

On  a  question  for  rating  them  as  3  to  2  the  votes  were  N.  H., 
ay.  Mas.,  no.  R.  I.,  divd.  Con1,  ay.  N.  J.,  ay.  Pa,  ay.  Del',  ay. 
Maryd,  no.  Virga,  no.  N.  C.,  no.  S.  C.,  no. 

The  Paragraph  was  then  postponed  by  general  consent,  some 
wishing  for  further  time  to  deliberate  on  it  ;  but  it  appearing  to 
be  the  general  opinion  that  no  compromise  wd  be  agreed  to. 

After  some  further  discussions  on  the  report  in  which  the  ne 
cessity  of  some  simple  &  practicable  rule  of  apportionment  came 
fully  into  view,  Mr.  Madison  said  that  in  order  to  give  a  proof  of 
the  sincerity  of  his  professions  of  liberality,  he  wd  propose  that 
Slaves  should  be  rated  as  5  to  3.  Mr.  Rutledge  2d?d  the  motion. 
Mr.  Wilson  sd  he  would  sacrifice  his  opinion  on  this  compromise. 

Mr.  Lee  was  ag5'  changing  the  rule,  but  gave  it  as  his  opinion 
that  2  slaves  were  not  equal  to  i  freeman. 

On  the  question  for  5  to  3  it  passed  in  the  affirmative  N.  H. 
ay.  Mass.  divd  R.  I.,  no.  Con*  no.  N.  J.  ay.  Pa,  ay  Maryd,  ay  Va, 
ay  N.  C.  ay.  S.  C.  ay. 

A  motion  was  then  made  by  Mr.  Bland,  2d(rd  by  Mr.  Lee  to 
strike  out  the  clause  so  amended  and  on  the  question  "  shall  it 
stand  "  it  passed  in  the  negative  ;  N.  H.  ay.  Mas  :  no.  R.  I.  no. 
Conn.  no.  N.  J.,  ay.  Pa,  ay.  Del.  no.  Mar.  ay.  Virga,  ay.  N.  C.,  ay. 
S,  C.,  no  ;  so  the  clause  was  struck  out. 

The  arguments  used  by  those  who  were  for  rating  slaves  high 
were,  that  the  expence  of  feeding  &  clothing  them  was  as  far 
below  that  incident  to  freemen  as  their  industry  &  ingenuity 
were  below  those  of  freemen  ;  and  that  the  warm  climate  within 
wc.h  the  States  having  slaves  lay,  compared  w^  the  rigorous  cli 
mate  &  inferior  fertility  of  the  others,  ought  to  have  great  weight 
in  the  case  &  that  the  exports  of  the  former  States  were  greater 
than  of  the  latter.  On  the  other  side  it  was  said  that  Slaves  were 
not  put  to  labor  as  young  as  the  children  of  laboring  families — 
that,  having  no  interest  in  their  labor,  they  did  as  little  as  possi 
ble,  &  omitted  every  exertion  of  thought  requisite  to  facilitate  & 
expedite  it ;  that  if  the  exports  of  the  States  having  slaves  ex 
ceeded  those  of  the  others,  their  imports  were  in  proportion, 
slaves  being  employed  wholly  in  agriculture,  not  in  manufactures; 
&  that  in  fact  the  balance  of  trade  formerly  was  much  more  ag31 
the  S°  States  than  the  others. 


436  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1783 

On  the  main  question  see  Journals.1 

SATURDAY    MARCH    2QTH. 

The  objections  urged  agst  the  motion  of  Mr.  Lee  on  the  Jour 
nal  calling  for  a  specific  Report  of  the  Sup*  of  Finance  as  to  mon 
ies  passing  thro'  his  hands  were  that  the  information  demanded 
from  the  Office  of  Finance  had  during  a  great  part  of  the  period, 
been  laid  before  Congress  &  was  then  actually  on  the  Table — 
that  the  term  application  of  money  was  too  indefinite  no  two 
friends  of  the  motion  agreeing  in  the  meaning  of  it  and  tfrat  if  it 
meant  no  more  than  immediate  payments  under  the  warrants  of 
the  Superintend*  to  those  who  were  to  expend  the  money,  it  was 
unnecessary,  the  Superintend*  being  already  impressed  with  his 
duty  on  that  subject  ;  that  if  it  meant  the  ultimate  payment  for 
articles  or  service  for  the  public,  it  imposed  a  task  that  w'?  be 
impracticable  to  the  Superin*,  and  useless  to  Congress,  who  could 
no  otherwise  examine  them  than  through  the  department  of  Ac 
counts  &  the  Committees  appd  half  yearly  for  enquiring  into  the 
whole  proceedings  ;  &  that  if  the  motion  were  free  from  those 
objections,  it  ought  to  be  so  varied  as  to  oblige  the  office  of  Fi 
nance  to  report  the  information  periodically  ;  since  it  would 
otherwise  depend  on  the  memory  or  vigilance  of  members,  and  w<? 
moreover  have  the  aspect  of  suspicion  towards  the  Officer  called 
upon.  N.  B.  As  the  motion  was  made  at  first,  the  word  "imme 
diately  "  was  used  ;  which  was  changed  for  the  words  "  as  soon 
as  may  be,"  at  the  instance  of  Mr.  Holten. 

The  object  of  the  motion  of  Mr.  Madison  was  to  define  &  com 
prehend  every  information  practicable  &  necessary  for  Cong?  to 
know,  &  to  enable  them  to  judge  of  the  fidelity  of  their  Minister, 
and  to  make  it  a  permanent  part  of  his  duty  to  afford  it.  The 
clause  respecting  copies  of  receipts  was  found  on  discussion  not 
to  accord  with  the  mode  of  conducting  business,  &  to  be  too 
voluminous  a  task  ;  but  the  question  was  taken  without  a  con 
venient  opportunity  of  correcting  it.  The  motion  was  negatived. 
See  the  Journal.8 

1  New  Hampshire,  aye  ;  Massachusetts,  no  ;  Rhode  Island,  no  ;  Connecticut, 
no ;  New  York  (Mr.   Floyd,  aye)  ;    New  Jersey,  aye  ;    Delaware,  no  ;  Mary 
land,  aye  ;  Virginia,  aye  ;  North  Carolina,  aye  ;  South  Carolina,  no. 

2  Six  noes  and  four  ayes.     Journals  of  Congress,  iv.,  182. 


1783]  JAMES  MADISON.  437 


MONDAY    MARCH    31. 

A  letter  was  recd  from  the  Govr  of  R.  Island  with  resolutions 
of  the  Legislature  of  that  State  justifying  the  conduct  of  Mr. 
Howell. 

On  the  arrival  of  the  French  Cutter  with  the  ace*  of  the  sign 
ing  of  the  general  preliminaries,  it  was  thought  fit  by  Congress  to 
hasten  the  effect  of  them  by  calling  in  the  American  Cruisers.  It 
was  also  thought  by  all  not  amiss  to  notify  simply  the  Intelligence 
to  the  British  Commanders  at  N.  Y.  In  addition  to  this  it  was 
proposed  by  the  Secy  of  F.  A.  and  urged  by  the  Delegates  of  Pa, 
by  Mr.  Lee,  Mr.  Rutledge  &  others,  that  Congress  should  signify 
their  desire  &  expectation  that  hostilities  shd  be  suspended  at  sea 
on  the  part  of  the  Enemy.  The  arguments  urged  were  that  the 
effusion  of  blood  might  be  immediately  stopped  &  the  trade 
of  the  Country  rescued  from  depredation.  It  was  observed  on 
the  other  side  that  such  a  proposition  derogated  from  the  dignity 
of  Cong5 ;  shewed  an  undue  precipitancy  ;  that  the  intelligence 
was  not  authentic  enough  to  justify  the  British  comanders  in 
complying  with  such  an  overture,  and  therefore  that  Cong5  would 
be  exposed  to  the  mortification  of  a  refusal.  The  former  consid 
eration  prevailed  &  a  verbal  sanction  was  given  to  Mr.  Livings 
ton's  expressing  to  the  sd  comanders  the  expectation  of  Cong5. 
This  day  their  answers  were  recd  addressed  to  Rob1  R.  Livings 
ton,  Esq*  &c  &c  &c  declining  to  accede  to  the  stopping  of  hostil 
ities  at  sea  &  urging  the  necessity  of  authentic  orders  from  G.  B. 
for  that  purpose.  With  their  letters  Mr.  Livingston  communi 
cated  resolutions  proposed  from  his  office,  "  that  in  consequence 
of  these  letters  the  orders  to  the  American  Cruisers  sd  be  re 
voked  :  and  that  the  Executives  sd  be  requested  to  embargo  all 
vessels.  Cong5  were  generally  sensible  after  the  re*  of  these 
papers  that  they  had  committed  themselves  in  proposing  to  the 
British  Commanders  at  N.  Y.,  a  stop  to  naval  hostilities,  &  were 
exceedingly  at  a  loss  to  extricate  themselves.  On  one  side  they 
were  unwilling  to  publish  to  the  world  the  affront  they  had  recd, 
especially  as  no  written  order  had  been  given  for  the  correspond 
ence  and  on  the  other  it  was  necessary  y*  the  continuance  of  hos 
tilities  at  sea  should  be  made  known  to  American  Citizens.  Some 


438  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1783 

were  in  favor  of  the  revocation  of  hostilities,  others  proposed  as 
Col:  Bland,  &  Gen1  Mifflin,  that  the  Secy  of  F.  A.  should  be  di 
rected  verbally  to  publish  the  letters  from  Carleton  &  Digby. 
This  was  negatived.  The  superscription  was  animadverted  upon, 
particularly  by  Mr.  Mercer,  who  said,  that  the  letters  ought  to 
have  been  sent  back  unopened.  Finally  it  was  agreed  that  any 
member  might  take  copies  &  send  them  to  the  press  &  that  the 
subject  should  lie  over  for  further  consideration. 


TUESDAY  APRIL   I. 

Mr.  Ghorham  called  for  the  order  of  the  day  to  wit  the  Report 
on  Revenue  &c  and  observed  as  a  cogent  reason  for  hastening 
that  business  that  the  Eastern  States  at  the  invitation  of  the  Legis 
lature  of  Mass1.3,  were  with  N.  Y.  about  to  form  a  convention  for 
regulating  matters  of  common  concern,  &  that  if  any  plan  should 
be  sent  out  by  Congf  during  their  session,  they  would  probably 
co-operate  with  Cong*  in  giving  effect  to  it. 

Mr.  Mercer  expressed  great  disquietude  at  this  information, 
considered  it  as  a  dangerous  precedent,  &  that  it  behoved  the 
Gentleman  to  explain  fully  the  objects  of  the  Convention,  as  it 
would  be  necessary  for  the  S.  States  to  be  otherwise  very  circum 
spect  in  agreeing  to  any  plans  on  a  supposition  that  the  general 
confederacy  was  to  continue. 

Mr.  Osgood  said  that  the  sole  object  was  to  guard  ag-'  an  inter 
ference  of  taxes  among  States,  whose  local  situation  required  such 
precautions  ;  and  that  if  nothing  was  definitively  concluded  without 
the  previous  communication  to  &  sanction  of  Cong*,  the  Confed 
eration  could  not  be  said  to  be  in  any  manner  departed  from  ; 
but  that  in  fact  nothing  was  intended  that  could  be  drawn  within 
the  purview  of  the  federal  articles. 

Mr.  Bland  said  he  had  always  considered  those  Conventions  as 
improper  &  contravening  the  spirit  of  the  federal  Governm'  He 
said  they  had  the  appearance  of  young  Congresses. 

Mr.  Ghorham  explains  as  Mr.  Osgood. 

Mr.  Madison  &  Mr.  Hamilton  disapproved  of  these  partial  con 
ventions,  not  as  absolute  violations  of  the  Confederacy,  but  as 
ultimately  leading  to  them  &  in  the  mean  time  exciting  pernicious 


1783]  JAMES  MADISON.  439 

jealousies  ;  the  latter  observing  that  he  wished  instead  of  them 
to  see  a  General  Convention  take  place  &  that  he  s*  soon  in  pur 
suance  of  instructions  from  his  Constituents  propose  to  Cong5,  a 
plan  for  that  purpose,  the  object  w^  be  to  strengthen  the  federal 
Constitution. 

Mr.  White  informed  Cong5,  that  N.  Hampshire  had  declined  to 
accede  to  a  plan  of  a  Convention  on  foot. 

Mr.  Higginson  said  that  no  Gentleman  need  be  alarmed  at  any 
rate  for  it  was  pretty  certain  that  the  Convention  would  not  take 
place.  He  wished  with  Mr.  Hamilton  to  see  a  General  Conven 
tion  for  the  purpose  of  revising  and  amending  the  federal 
Government. 

These  observations  having  put  an  end  to  the  subject,  Cong5  re 
sumed  the  Report  on  Revenue  &c.  Mr.  Hamilton  who  had  been 
absent  when  the  last  question  was  taken  for  substituting  numbers 
in  place  of  the  value  of  land,  moved  to  reconsider  that  vote.  He 
was  2ded.  by  Mr.  Osgood.  (See  the  Journal.)  Those  who  voted 
differently  from  their  former  votes  were  influenced  by  the  con 
viction  of  the  necessity  of  the  change  &  despair  on  both  sides  of 
a  more  favorable  rate  of  the  slaves.  The  rate  of  f  was  agreed  to 
without  opposition.  On  a  preliminary  question,  the  apportionm* 
of  the  sum  &  revision  of  the  same  ref^  to  Grand  Com? ' 

1  Madison  had  for  some  time  past  been  urging  Randolph  to  go  into  the  State 
Legislature  where  his  influence  on  the  side  of  adequate  provisions  for  general 
funds  would  be  most  efficacious.  He  wrote  to  him  April  I,  1783  : 

"  MY  DEAR  FRIEND  :  Your  favor  of  the  22  Ult°  verifies  my  fears  that  some 
disappointment  would  defeat  your  plan  of  going  into  the  Legislature.  I  regret 
it  the  more,  as  every  day  teaches  me  more  &  more  the  necessity  of  such 
measures  as  I  know  you  would  have  patronized  ;  and  as  are  losing  ground  so 
fast  in  the  temper  of  the  States  as  to  require  every  possible  support.  Unless 
some  speedy  &  adequate  provision  be  made  beyond  that  of  the  Confederation, 
the  most  dismal  alternative  stares  me  in  the  face.  And  yesterday's  post  brought 
us  information  that  a  bill  repealing  the  impost  had  passed  the  lower  house  of 
Mass1?  and  one  of  a  like  import  had  made  equal  progress  in  the  Legislature  of 
S.  Carolina.  These  defections  are  alarming  but  if  a  few  enlightened  &  disin 
terested  members  would  step  forward  in  each  Legislature  to  advocate  for  the 
necessary  plans,  I  see  with  so  much  force  the  considerations  that  might  be 
urged,  that  my  hopes  would  still  prevail.  If  advantage  should  be  taken  of 
popular  prepossessions  on  one  side  without  counter-efforts  there  is,  to  be  sure, 
room  for  nothing  but  despair. 


440  THE   WRITINGS  OF  [1783 

The  Report  as  to  the  Resignation  of  Foreign  Ministers  was 
taken  up  &  in  the  case  of  Mr.  Jefferson  see  Journal.1  The  East 
ern  delegates  were  averse  to  doing  anything  as  to  Mr.  Adams 
untill  further  advices  sd.  be  received.  Mr.  Laurens  was  indulged 
not  without  some  opposition.  The  acceptance  of  his  resignation 
was  particularly  enforced  by  Mr.  Izard. 

WEDNESDAY     APL     3.— THURSDAY     APl^     4. FRIDAY    AP^ 

5. — SATURDAY   AP^   6.2      See  Journals. 

The  Grand  Com?  appointed  to  consider  the  proportions  for  the 
blanks  in  the  Rep*  on  Revenue  &c,  reported  the  following, 

"  The  extract  from  —  — 's  [Adams'  ?]  letter  recited  in  yours  aston 

ishes  me  more  than  it  would  do  you,  because  I  must  be  more  sensible  of  its 
contrast  to  truth.  High  as  my  opinion  of  the  object  [Franklin]  of  it  was,  the 
judgment,  acuteness  &  patriotism  displayed  in  the  last  despatches  from  him 
have  really  enhanced  it.  So  far  are  they  in  particular  from  studiously  leaving 
us  in  the  dark,  that  some  of  them  are  of  as  late  date  as  any  if  not  later  than 
those  from  several  &  perhaps  as  voluminous  as  all  the  rest  put  together. 

"The  zeal  of  Cong5  to  hasten  the  effect  of  the  general  preliminaries  led 
them  (precipitately  as  I  conceive)  to  authorize  the  Sec^  of  F.  A.  to  notify  to  Sir 
G.  Carleton  &  Adm1  Digby  the  intelligence  received  by  the  French  Cutter  on 
that  subject,  with  their  recall  of  American  Cruizers,  in  order  that  correspondent 
measures  might  be  taken  at  N.  Y.  The  answers  from  these  Commanders  were 
addressed  to  Rob1  R.  Livingston,  Esq^e,  &c  &c  &c,  and  imported  that  they 
could  not  suspend  hostilities  at  sea  without  proper  authority  from  their  Sov 
ereign  ;  but  as  Congress  placed  full  reliance  on  the  authenticity  of  the  intelli 
gence  they  supposed  no  objection  cd  lie  on  their  part  agst  releasing  all  prisoners 
&c.  A  letter  from  Digby  to  the  French  Minister  is  I  am  told  remarkably  surly 
&  indecent  even  for  a  British  Admiral.  We  have  received  no  official  report 
of  the  signing  of  the  General  Preliminaries,  nor  any  further  particulars  relative 
to  them.  Your  surmise  as  to  the  dangerous  phraseology  which  may  be  used  in 
designating  our  limits,  may  be  realized,  if  our  Ministers  are  not  cautious,  or 
sd  yield  to  improper  considerations.  But  I  trust  that  no  such  defaults  will 
happen  on  that  side  :  &  that  even  if  they  should,  the  language  used  by  Con 
gress  in  all  their  own  acts  on  that  head  Will  overpower  any  arguments  that 
may  be  drawn  from  acts  of  their  Ministers." — Mad.  MSS. 

1  His  mission  was  dispensed  \vith  and  he  was  thanked  for  the  readiness  he 
had  shown  in  undertaking  the  service.     Dana's  desire  to  return  from  St.  Peters 
burg  was  approved  of,  unless  he  was  engaged  in  any  negotiations,  in  which 
event  he  might  remain. — Journals  of  Congress,  iv.,  184. 

2  The  dates  are  so  given  in  the  MS.  but  should  read,  Wednesday,  April  2, 
Thursday,  April  3,  Friday,  April  4,  and  Saturday,  April  5.     The  proceedings 
on  April  4  are  the  only  ones  recorded  in  the  printed  journals. 


1783] 


JAMES  MADISON. 


441 


grounded  on  the  number  of  Inhabitants  in  each  State  ;  observing 
that  N.  H.,  R.  I.,  Con*,  &  Mar?  had  produced  authentic  docu 
ments  of  their  numbers  ;  &  that  in  fixing  the  numbers  of  other 
States,  they  had  been  governed  by  such  information  as  they 
could  obtain.  They  also  reduced  the  interest  of  aggregate  debt 
to  2,  500,000  Dr.s 


N.  H. 

Mas: 

R.  I. 

Cont 

N.  Y. 

N.  J. 

Pen? 

Del. 

Mar<? 

Virg? 

N.  C. 

s.  c.- 

Georg? 


2,359>3OO  i  ,000  1,500,000 

annual  int?1  of  debt  after  deducting  1,000,000  D^s  expected  from  Impost  on 
Trade. 

A  Com?,  consisting  of  Mr.  Hamilton,  Mr.  Madison  & 

was  appointed  to  report  the  proper  arrangements  to  be  taken  in 
consequence  of  peace.  The  object  was  to  provide  a  system  for 
foreign  affairs,  for  Indian  affairs,  for  military  .&  naval  establish 
ments  ;  and  also  to  carry  into  execution  the  regulation  of  weights 
&  measures  &  other  articles  of  the  Confederation  not  attended  to 
during  the  war.  To  the  same  Com?  was  referred  a  resolution  of 
the  Executive  Council  of  P?,  requesting  the  delegates  of  that 
State  to  urge  Cong?  to  establish  a  general  peace  with  the  Indians. 


f°    of  Inhabts 

proportions  of 

proportions  of 

1,000. 

T\  Mil? 

82,2OO 

35 

52,500 

350,000 

148 

222.OOO 

50,400 

21 

31,500 

206,000 

87 

130,500 

2OO,OOO 

85 

127,500 

I3O,OOO 

55 

82,500 

32O,OOO 

136 

204,000 

35,ooo 

15 

22,500 

220,700 

94 

141,000 

400,000 

169 

253,500 

170,000 

72 

108,000 

170,000 

72 

108,000 

25,000 

ii 

16,500 

MONDAY    APRIL    7. 

The  sense  of  Cong?  having  been  taken  on  the  truth  of  the 
numbers  reported  by  the  Grand  Committee,  the  n?  allotted  to  S. 
C.  was  reduced  to  150,000,  on  the  representation  of  the  Delegates 


442  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1783 

of  that  State.  The  Delegates  of  N.  J.  contended  also  for  a 
reduction,  but  were  unsuccessful.  Those  of  Virg?  also,  on  the 
principle  that  Cong?  ought  not  to  depart  from  the  relative  num 
bers  given  in  1775,  without  being  required  by  actual  returns  which 
had  not  been  obtained  either  from  that  State  or  others  whose 
relation  w?  be  varied.  To  this  reasoning  were  opposed  the  verbal 
&  credible  information  rec?  from  different  persons  &  particularly 
Mr.  Mercer,  which  made  the  n?  of  Inhabitants  in  V?,  after  deduct 
ing  |  of  the  Slaves,  exceed  the  number  allotted  to  that  State. 
Cong?  were  almost  unanimous  ags.1  the  reduction.  A  motion  was 
made  by  Mr.  Gervais,  2?  by  Mr.  Madison  to  reduce  the  n?  of 
Georgia  to  15,000.,  on  the  probability  that  their  real  n?  did  not 
exceed  it,  &  the  cruelty  of  overloading  a  State  which  had  been  so 
much  torn  &  exhausted  by  the  war.  The  motion  met  with  little 
support  &  was  almost  unanimously  negatived. 

A  letter  was  rec?  from  Gen!  Washington  expressing  the  joy  of 
the  army  at  the  signing  of  the  general  preliminaries  notified  to 
him  &  their  satisfaction  at  the  commutation  of  half  pay  agreed  to 
by  Cong5 1 

1  "Your  favor  of  the  29^  ult :  was  duly  rec"?  yesterday.  Your  apprehensions 
from  the  article  in  favor  of  British  Creditors  correspond  with  those  entertained 
by  all  whose  remarks  I  have  heard  upon  it.  My  hope  is  that  in  the  definitive 
treaty  the  danger  may  be  removed  by  a  suspension  of  their  demands  for  a 
reasonable  term  after  peace. 

"  The  publication  of  Mr.  Morris's  letters  was  neither  previously  assented  to  nor 
known  by  Congress.  Whether  it  was  the  act  of  Mr.  M  himself  is  even  un 
known  to  them.  After  the  injunction  of  secrecy  was  taken  off,  the  curiosity  of 
any  individual,  or  the  interest  of  the  printer  might  obtain  copies  for  the  press. 

"  The  imperfect  information  brought  by  the  French  Cutter  is  all  that  we 
have  yet  rec?  relative  to  peace.  It  is  reported  from  N.  York  that  similar  intelli 
gence  had  been  brought  thither  by  a  Vessel  from  Lisbon.  Hostilities  however 
continue  to  devour  our  commerce. 

"  The  report  on  revenue  of  which  I  gave  you  the  outlines  is  still  in  an  un 
finished  state  ;  but  in  a  way  I  flatter  myself  of  being  ultimately  &  substantially 
adopted.  The  admission  into  the  common  mass,  of  all  expenses  of  the  war 
not  authorized  by  Congress,  is  the  remaining  article  of  difficulty.  Even  this 
however  under  some  qualifications  is  so  respectably  patronized  &  so  intimately 
linked  with  the  article  concerning  the  back  lands  that  I  do  not  despair  altogether 
of  seeing  that  also  finally  comprehended.  A  change  of  the  valuation  of  Lands 
for  the  number  of  Inhabitants  deducting  f  of  the  Slaves,  has  rec?  a  tacit  sanction 
&  unless  hereafter  expunged  will  go  forth  in  the  general  recommendation,  as 


1783] 


JAMES  MADISON. 


443 


TUESDAY    APRIL    8TH. 

Estimate  of   the  debt  of  the  U.  S.,  reported   by   the   Grand 
Committee. 

FOREIGN  DEBT. 

To  the  Farmers  General  of  France  .         .  Liv?s       1,000,000 

To  Beaumarchais     .....  3,000,000 

To  the  King  of  France,  to  the  end  of  1782  28,000,000 

To  d?  for  1783 6,000,000 

Liv!s     38,000,000  =  $7,037,037 
Rec<?  on  loan  in  Holland,  1,678,000  florins  .....  671,200 

Borrowed  in  Spain  by  Mr.  Jay     .......  150,000 

In1,    on  Dutch  one  year,  at  4  PT.   C*. 26,848 

Total  for.  debt $7,885,085 


DOMESTIC  DEBT. 

Loan  Office         .......  $11,463,802 

Interest  unpaid  for  1781 190,000 

Do                        1782 687,828 

Credit  to  sundry  persons  on  Treasury  books         .  638,042 

Army  debt  to  31  D?    1782 5,635,618 

Unliquidated  d? 8,000,000 

Deficiencies  in  1783    ......  2,000,000 

Total  dom.  debt $28,615,290 

Aggregate  debt $36,500,375 

INTEREST. 

On  for  debt,  7,885,085,  at  4  Per  C* $315,403 

On  domestic  debt,  28,615,290,  at  6  do 1,716,917 

On  commutation  of  half-pay,  estimated  at  5,000,000  at  6  do         .  300,000 

Bounty  to  be  pd,  estim?  at  500,000,  at  6  do          .         .         .         .  30,000 

Aggreg  of  In1. $2,362,320 

material  to  future  harmony  &  justice  among  the  members  of  the  Confederacy. 
The  deduction  of  f  was  a  compromise  between  the  wide  opinions  &  demands  of 
the  Southern  &  other  States. 

"  A  letter  was  rec?  yesterday  from  Gen1.  Washington  in  answer  to  a  notifica 
tion  from  the  Presid1.  of  the  signing  of  the  Gen1,  preliminaries  on  the  20  Jan? , 
expressing  the  joy  of  the  army  at  the  glorious  event,  and  the  satisfaction  they 
had  rec"?  from  the  Act  of  Cong?  commuting  the  half-pay  &c. " — Madison  to 
Edmund  Randolph,  April  6,  1783.  Mad.  MSB. 


444  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1783 

A  motion  was  made  by  Mr.  Hamilton  who  had  been  absent  on 
the  question  on  the  9*h  paragraph  of  the  Report  on  Revenue 
assessing  quotas,  to  reconsider  the  same.  Mr.  Floyd  who,  being 
the  only  delegate  from  N.  Y.  then  present  on  that  question  cd  not 
vote,  2d?d  the  motion.  For  the  arg1?  repeated  see  the  former 
remarks  on  the  7*  of  Ap! 

On  the  question  the  votes  were  Mas  :  no.  R.  I.  no.  Con*  no. 
N.  Y.  ay.  N.  J.  no.  Pf  ay.  Mary?,  no.  Virga  ay.  S.  C.  no. 


WEDNESDAY     APRIL    9. 

A  memorial  was  recd  from  Gen*  Hazen  in  behalf  of  the 
Canadians  who  had  engaged  in  the  cause  of  the  U.  S.,  praying 
that  a  tract  of  vacant  land  on  L.  Erie  might  be  allotted  to  them. 

Mr.  Wilson  thereupon  moved  that  a  Com?  be  appointed  to  con 
sider  and  report  to  Congress  the  measures  proper  to  be  taken  with 
respect  to  the  Western  Country.  In  support  of  his  motion  he 
observed  on  the  importance  of  that  Country,  the  danger  from 
immediate  emigrations  of  its  being  lost  to  the  public  ;  &  the 
necessity  on  the  part  of  Congress  of  taking  care  of  the  federal 
interests  in  the  formation  of  new  States  which  could  not  take 
place  by  the  authority  of  any  particular  States. 

Mr.  Madison  observed  that  the  appointment  of  such  a  Com? 
could  not  be  necessary  at  this  juncture  &  might  be  injurious  that 
Cong?  were  about  to  take  in  the  report  on  Revenue  &c  the  only 
step  that  could  now  be  properly  taken  viz  to  call  again  on  the 
States  claiming  the  W.  Territory  to  cede  the  same  ;  that  until  the 
result  sd  be  known  every  thing  wd  be  premature  &  wd  excite  in 
the  States  irritations  &  jealousies  that  might  frustate  the  Cessions  ; 
that  it  was  indispensable  to  obtain  these  Cessions,  in  order  to 
compromise  the  disputes,  &  to  derive  advantage  from  the  territory 
to  the  U.  S.  ;  that  if  the  motion  meant  merely  to  prevent  irregular 
settlements,  the  recommendation  to  that  effect  ought  to  be  made 
to  the  States — that  if  ascertaining  &  disposing  of  garrisons  proper 
to  be  kept  up  in  that  Country  was  the  object  it  was  already  in  the 
hands  of  the  Com?  on  peace  arrangements,  but  might  be  expressly 
referred  to  them. 


1783]  JAMES  MADISON.  445 

Mr.  Mercer  supported  the  same  ideas. 

Mr.  Clarke  considered  the  motion  as  nowise  connected  with 
the  peace  arrangements  ;  his  object  was  to  define  the  western 
limits  of  the  States  which  Cong?  alone  cd  do,  and  which  it  was 
necessary  they  sd  do  in  order  to  know  what  territory  properly  be 
longed  to  the  U.  S.,  and  what  steps  ought  to  be  taken  relative  to 
it.  He  disapproved  of  repeatedly  courting  the  States  to  make 
Cessions  wc-h  Cong?  stood  in  no  need  of. 

Mr.  Wilson  seemed  to  consider  as  the  property  of  the  U.  S.  all 
territory  over  which  particular  States  had  not  exercised  jurisdiction 
particularly  N.  W.  of  Ohio,  &  said  that  within  the  Country  con 
firmed  to  the  U.  S.  by  the  Provisional  articles,  there  must  be  a 
large  Country  over  which  no  particular  claims  extended. 

He  was  answered  that  the  exercise  of  jurisdiction  was  not  the 
criterion  of  territorial  rights  of  the  States  ;  that  Pen*  had  main 
tained  always  a  Contrary  Doctrine  ;  that  if  it  were  a  criterion 
V.a  had  exercised  jurisdiction  over  the  Illinois  &  other  places  con 
quered  N.  W.  of  the  Ohio  ;  that  it  was  uncertain  whether  the 
limits  of  the  U.  S.,  as  fixed  by  the  Prov!  Art?,  did  comprehend 
any  territory  out  of  the  claims  of  the  individual  States  ;  that 
s?  it  be  the  case  a  decision  or  examination  of  the  point  had  best 
be  put  off  till  it  sd  be  seen  whether  Cessions  of  the  States  wd  not 
render  it  unnecessary  ;  that  it  cd  not  be  immediately  necessary  for 
the  purpose  of  preventing  settlem*.5  on  such  extra  lands,  since 
they  must  lie  too  remote  to  be  in  danger  of  it.  Congress  refused 
to  refer  the  motion  to  the  Com?  on  peace  arrangents,  and  by  a 
large  majority  referred  it  to  a  Special  Com?,  viz  M«"  Osgood, 
Wilson  Madison,  Carrol  &  Williamson ;  to  whom  was  also 
referred  the  Mem!  of  Gen!  Hazen. 

On  the  preceding  question,  Con*  was  strenuous  in  fav?  of  Mr. 
Wilson's  motion. 

A  motion  was  made  by  Mr.  Dyer  to  strike  out  the  drawback  on 
salt  fish  &c.  Mr.  Ghorham  protested  in  the  most  solemn  manner 
that  Mass-5  wd  never  accede  to  the  plan  without  the  drawback. 
The  motion  was  very  little  supported. 


446  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1783 

THURSDAY    AP1:    IO. 

Letters  recd  from  Gen1  Carleton  &  Admiral  Digby  inclosing 
British  proclamation1  of  cessation  of  arms  &  also  letters  from 
Doer  Franklin  &  Mr.  Adams  notifying  the  conclusion  of  Pre 
liminaries  between  G.  B.  &  F.  &  Spain,  with  a  declaration 
entered  into  with  Mr.  Fitzherbert  applying  the  epochs  of  cessa 
tion  to  the  case  of  G.  B.  &  the  U.  S.  These  papers  were  referred 
to  the  Secy  of  F.  A.  to  report  a  proclamation  for  Cong5  at  6 
O'Clock,  at  which  time  Cong5  met  &  recd  report  nearly  as  it 
stands  on  the  Journal  of  Friday  Ap1  n.a  After  some  considera 
tion  of  the  Report  as  to  the  accuracy  &  propriety  of  which  a 
diversity  of  sentiments  prevailed,  they  postponed  it  till  next  day. 
The  Secy  also  reported  a  Resolution  directing  the  Secy  at  War 
and  Agent  of  Marine  to  discharge  all  prisoners  of  war. 


FRIDAY    APL    II. 

This  day  was  spent  in  discussing  the  Proclamation  which 
passed.  Mr.  Wilson  proposed  an  abbreviation  of  it  which  was 
disagreed  to.  The  difficultys  attending  it  were  that  is.1  the  Agree 
ment  of  our  Ministers  with  Fitzherbert  that  the  Epochs  with 
Spain  as  well  as  France  sd  be  applied  to  the  U.  S.  to  be  com 
puted  from  the  ratifications  which  happened  at  different  times, 
the  former  on  the  3d,  the  latter  on  the  9th,  of  Febj: ;  2d  the  cir 
cumstance  of  the  Epochs  having  passed  at  wch  the  Cessation  of 
hostilities  was  to  be  enjoined.  The  impatience  of  Cong5  did  not 

1  ' '  The  important  contents  of  the  inclosed  paper  were  brought  hither  yester 
day  by  a  British  officer  sent  for  that  purpose  by  Sr  G.  Carleton.  To-day 
Congr5  recd  letters  from  Dr.  F.  &  Mr.  Adams,  inclosing  a  declaration  entered 
into  by  them  &  the  British  Plenip^ ,  by  which  the  epochs  at  which  hostilities 
are  to  cease  between  France  &  G.  B.  are  adopted  between  the  latter  &  America. 
A  great  diversity  of  opinion  prevails  as  to  the  time  at  which  they  were  to  cease 
on  this  Coast.  The  Merchants  &  the  lawyers  are  most  affected  by  the  ques 
tion." — Madison  to  Edmund  Randolph,  April  10,  1783.  Mad.  MSS. 

*  This  was  the  proclamation  "  Declaring  the  cessation  of  arms,  as  well  by  sea 
as  by  land,  agreed  upon  between  the  United  States  of  America  and  his  Britannic 
majesty  ;  and  enjoining  the  observance  thereof." — Journals  of  Congress,  iv., 
186,  187. 


1783]  JAMES  MADISON.  447 

admit  of  proper  attention  to  these  &  some  other  points  of  the 
Proclamation  ;  particularly  the  authoritative  style  of  enjoining  an 
observance  on  the  U.  S.,  the  Govrs  &c.  It  was  agst  these  ab 
surdities  &  improprieties  that  the  solitary  no  of  Mr.  Mercer  was 
pointed.  See  the  Journal. 


SATURDAY    APL    12. 

A  letter  of  the  16*  of  Dec'  O.  S.  was  recd  from  Mr.  Dana,  in 
which  he  intimates  that  in  consequence  of  the  news  of  peace 
taking  place  &  independence  being  acknowledged  by  G.  B.  he 
expected  soon  to  take  his  proper  station  at  the  C*  of  St.  Peters 
burg  &  to  be  engaged  in  forming  a  Commercial  Treaty  with  her 
Imperial  Majesty. 

Mr.  Madison  observed  that  as  no  powers  or  instructions  had 
been  given  to  Mr.  Dana  relative  to  a  Treaty  of  Comerce,  he  appre 
hended  there  must  be  some  mistake  on  the  part  of  Mr.  Dana  ; 
that  it  wd  be  proper  to  inquire  into  the  matter  &  let  him  know  the 
intentions  of  Cong3  on  this  subject.  The  letter  was  committed 
to  Mr.  Madison  Mr.  Ghorham  &  Mr.  Fitzsimmons. 

Mr.  Rutledge  observed  that  as  y?  instructions  to  Foreign  Min 
isters  now  stood  it  was  conceived  they  had  no  powers  for  com 
mercial  stipulations  other  than  such  as  might  be  comprehended  in 
a  definitive  Treaty  of  Peace  with  G.  B.  He  said  he  did  not  pre 
tend  to  commercial  knowledge  but  thought  it  wd  be  well  for  the 
U.  S.  to  enter  into  commercial  Treaties  with  all  nations  &  par 
ticularly  with  G.  B.  He  moved  therefore  that  the  Com6  sd  be 
instructed  to  prepare  a  General  Report  for  that  purpose. 

Mr.  Madison  &  Mr.  Fitzsimmons  thought  it  wd  be  proper  to  be 
very  circumspect  in  fettering  our  trade  with  stipulations  to  for 
eigners,  that  as  our  stipulations  wd  extend  to  all  the  possessions 
of  the  U.  S.  necessarily — &  those  of  foreign  Nations  havg  colonies 
to  part  of  their  possessions  only  ;  and  as  the  most  favd  nations  en 
joyed  greater  privileges  in  the  U.  S.  than  elsewhere.  The  U.  S. 
gave  an  advantage  in  Treaties  on  this  subject,  &  finally  that  nego 
tiations  ought  to  be  carried  on  here,  or  our  Ministers  directed  to 
conclude  nothing  without  previously  reporting  every  thing  for  the 


448  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1783 

sanction  of  Cong5.  It  was  at  length  agreed  that  the  Come  sd  re 
port  the  general  state  of  instructions  existing  on  the  subject  of 
Commercial  Treaties. 

Congress  took  into  consideration  the  report  of  the  Secy  for 
F.  A.  for  immediately  setting  at  liberty  all  the  Prisoners  of  war  & 
ratifying  the  provisional  articles.  Several  members  were  ex 
tremely  urgent  on  this  point  from  motives  of  Oeconomy.  Others 
doubted  whether  Cong5  were  bound  thereto,  &  if  not  bound 
whether  it  would  be  proper.  The  first  question  depended  on  the 
import  of  the  provisional  articles,  which  were  very  differently  in 
terpreted  by  different  members.  After  much  discussion  from 
which  a  general  opinion  arose  of  extreme  inaccuracy  &  ambiguity 
as  to  the  force  of  these  articles,  the  business  was  committed  to 
Mr.  Madison,  Mr.  Peters,  &  Mr.  Hamilton  who  were  also  to  report 
on  the  expediency  of  ratifying  the  said  articles  immediately. 


MONDAY    APRIL    14. 

The  Committee  on  the  report  of  the  Secretary  of  foreign 
Affr.s  reported  as  follows.  Mr.  Hamilton  dissenting. 

i.  That  it  does  not  appear  that  Congress  are  any  wise  bound 
to  go  into  the  ratification  proposed.  "  The  Treaty  "  of  which  a  rat 
ification  is  to  take  place,  as  mentioned  in  the  6*  of  the  Provisional 
articles,  is  described  in  the  title  of  those  articles  to  be  "  a  Treaty  of 
Peace  proposed  to  be  concluded  between  the  Crown  of  G.  B.  and 
the  said  U.  S.,  but  which  is  not  to  be  concluded  until  terms  of 
Peace  shall  be  agreed  upon  between  G.  B.  &  France."  The  Act 
to  be  ratified  therefore  is  not  the  Prov!  articles  themselves,  but 
an  Act  distinct, — future, —  and  even  contingent.  Again  altho'  the 
Declaratory  Act  entered  into  on  the  20*  of  Jan?  last,  between  the 
American  &  British  Plenipotentiaries  relative  to  a  cessation  of 
hostilities,  seems  to  consider  the  contingency  on  which  the 
Provl  articles  were  suspended  as  having  taken  place,  yet  that  act 
cannot  itself  be  considered  as  the  Treaty  of  Peace  meant  to  be 
concluded  ;  nor  does  it  stipulate  that  either  the  Prov!  articles,  or 
the  act  itself  should  be  ratified  in  America  ;  it  only  engages  that 
the  U.  S.  shall  cause  hostilities  to  cease  on  their  part,  an 


1783]  JAMES  MADISON.  449 


engagement  which  was  duly  fulfilled  by  the  Proclamation  issued  on 
the  1 1*.11  instant  ;  lastly  it  does  not  appear  from  the  correspondence 
of  the  American  Ministers,  or  from  any  other  information,  either 
that  such  ratification  was  expected  from  the  U.  S.  or  intended  on 
the  part  of  G.  B  ;  still  less  that  any  exchange  of  mutual 
ratifications  has  been  in  contemplation. 

2.  If  Congress  are  not  bound  to  ratify  the  articles  in  question, 
the  Com6  are  of  opinion  that  it  is  inexpedient  for  them  to  go  im 
mediately  into  such  an  Act ;  inasmuch  as  it  might  be  thought  to 
argue  that  Congress  meant  to  give  to  those  articles  the  quality 
&  effect  of  a  definitive  Treaty  of  Peace  with  G.  B.,  tho'  neither 
their  allies  nor  friends  have  as  yet  proceeded  farther  than  to  sign 
preliminary  articles  ;  and  inasmuch  as  it  may  oblige  Cong8  to  ful 
fil  immediately  all  the  stipulations  contained  in  the  prov1  articles, 
tho'  they  have  no  evidence  that  a  correspondent  obligation  will 
be  assumed  by  the  other  party. 

3.  If  the  ratification  in  question  be  neither  obligatory  nor  ex 
pedient,  the  Com6  are  of  opinion,  that  an  immediate  discharge  of 
all  prisoners  of  war,1  on  the  part  of  the  U.  S.,  is  premature  and 
unadvisable  ;  especially  as  such  a  step  may  possibly  lessen  the 

1  "  Gen1  Carleton  is  very  importunate  for  an  immediate  execution  of  the 
provisional  articles  on  the  part  of  Congress  in  the  points  of  liberating  the 
prisoners,  and  recommending  restitution  to  the  Loyalists.  On  his  part  he  has 
set  the  example  on  the  first  point  but  says  nothing  of  executing  the  other  im 
portant  conditions  which  are  in  our  favor.  This  proposition  has  led  Cong5  into 
a  critical  discussion  of  the  import  of  the  Prov1  Articles,  in  which  the  opinions 
are  almost  as  numerous  as  the  articles  themselves.  Some  think  that  the  instru 
ment  was  converted  by  the  signature  of  preliminary  articles  between  F.  &  G. 
B.  into  the  Treaty  of  Peace,  of  which  a  ratification  in  America  is  alluded  to  in 
the  6  art.  Others  think  that  it  was  conditioned  no  otherwise  on  terms  of  peace 
between  these  powers,  than  that  such  an  agreement  rendered  it  a  lawful  & 
necessary  foundation  for  a  Treaty  of  peace  between  the  U.  S.  &  G.  B.  Some 
again  suppose  that  the  provi.  art :  need  no  ratification  from  Cong5  but  that  they 
ought  to  wait  for  a  Treaty  to  be  grounded  on  them.  Others  suppose  that  a 
ratification  is  essential  or  at  least  proper.  The  latter  description  again  are 
divided — some  proposing  to  ratify  them  as  articles  still  contingent,  others  to 
ratify  them  as  having  taken  effect  in  consequence  of  the  preliminary  Articles 
between  G.  B.  &  F.  This  variety  &  contrariety  of  interpretation  arise  in  a 
great  measure  from  the  obscurity  &  even  contrariety  of  the  articles  themselves." 
— Madison  to  Edmund  Randolph,  April  15,  1783.  Mad.  MSS. 

VOL.  J. — 29. 


45o  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1783 

force  of  demands  for  a  reimbursement  of  the  sums  expended  in 
the  subsistence  of  the  prisoners. 

Upon  these  considerations  the  Com*  recommend  that  a 
decision  of  Cong5  on  the  papers  referred  to  them  be  postponed. 

On  this  subject  a  variety  of  sentiments  prevailed. 

Mr.  Dyer,  on  a  principle  of  frugality  was  strenuous  for  a 
liberation  of  the  prisoners. 

Mr.  Williamson  thought  Cong5  not  obliged  to  discharge  the 
Prisoners  previous  to  a  definitive  treaty,  but  was  willing  to  go  into 
the  measure  as  soon  as  that  public  honor  would  permit.  He 
wished  us  to  move  pari  passu,  with  the  British  Comander  at  New 
York.  He  suspected  that  the  place  would  be  held  till  the 
interests  of  the  Tories  should  be  provided  for. 

Mr.  Hamilton  contended  that  Congress  were  bound,  by  the 
tenor  of  the  ProvJ  Treaty  immediately  to  Ratify  it,  and  to 
execute  the  several  stipulations  inserted  in  it ;  particularly  that 
relating  to  a  discharge  of  Prisoners. 

Mr.  Bland  thought  Cong?  not  bound. 

Mr.  Elseworth  was  strenuous  for  the  obligation  and  policy  of 
going  into  an  immediate  execution  of  the  treaty.  He  supposed 
that  a  read)''  &  generous  execution  on  our  part  w^  accelerate  the 
like  on  the  other  part. 

Mr.  Wilson  was  not  surprised  that  the  obscurity  of  the  Treaty 
s^  produce  a  variety  of  ideas.  He  thought  upon  the  whole  that 
the  Treaty  was  to  be  regarded  as  "  contingently  definitive." 

The  Report  of  the  Com*  being  not  consonant  to  the  prevailing 
sense  of  Cong5,  it  was  laid  aside. 


TUESDAY  APRIL   15. 

The  ratification  of  the  Treaty  &  discharge  of  prisoners  were 
again  agitated.  For  the  result  in  a  unanimous  ratification  see  the 
secret  Journal  of  this  day  ;  the  urgency  of  the  majority  pro 
ducing  an  acquiescence  of  most  of  the  opponents  to  the  measure. 


WEDNESDAY  APRIL   1 6. 

Mr.  Hamilton  acknowledged  that  he  began  to  view  the  obliga 
tion  of  the  pro!  Treaty  in  a  different  light  and  in  consequence 


1783]  JAMES  MADISON.  45 1 

wished  to  vary  the  direction  of    the  Comander  in  chief  from  a 
positive  to  a  preparatory  one  as  his  motion  on  the  Journal  states.1 


THURSDAY  APRIL   17. 

Mr.  Madison  with  fat  permission  of  the  Com*:  on  Revenue  re 
ported  the  following  clause  to  be  added  to  the  10^  paragraph  in 
the  first  report  viz 

"  And  to  the  end  that  convenient  provision  may  be  made  for 
determining  in  all  such  cases  how  far  the  expences  may  have  been 
reasonable  as  well  with  respect  to  the  object  thereof  as  the  means 
for  accomplishing  it,  thirteen  comisr"  namely  one  out  of  each  State 
shall  be  appointed  by  Congress,  any  seven  of  whom  (having  first 
taken  an  oath  for  the  faithful  &  impartial  execution  of  their  trust) 
who  shall  concur  in  the  same  opinion,  shall  be  empowered  to  de 
termine  finally  on  the  reasonableness  of  the  claims  for  expences 
incurred  by  particular  States  as  aforesaid  ;  And  in  order  that 
such  determinations  may  be  expedited  as  much  as  possible,  the 
Coinis"  now  in  appointment  for  adjusting  acc^  between  the  U. 
S.  and  individual  States,  shall  be  instructed  to  examine  all  such 
claims  &  report  to  Cong5,  such  of  them  as  shall  be  supported  by 
satisfactory  proofs,  distinguishing  in  their  reports  the  objects  and 
measures  in  which  the  expences  shall  have  been  incurred  ;  pro 
vided  that  no  balances  which  may  be  found  due  under  this  regu 
lation,  or  the  Resolutions  of  the day  of ,  shall  be 

deducted  out  of  the  preceding  Revenues  ;  but  shall  be  discharged 
by  separate  requisitions  to  be  made  on  the  States  for  that  pur 
pose." 

In  support  of  this  proposition  it  was  argued  that  in  a  general 
provision  for  public  debts  and  public  tranquillity  satisfactory 
measures  ought  to  be  taken  on  a  point  wc^  many  of  the  States 
had  so  much  at  heart,  &  which  they  w?  not  separate  from  y^ 
other  matters  proposed  by  Congress  ;  that  the  nature  of  the  busi 
ness  was  unfit  for  the  decision  of  Cong?,  who  brought  with  them 

1  "  That  the  commander  in  chief  be  directed  to  enter  into  preparatory  ar 
rangements,  relative  to  the  7l.h  article  of  the  said  treaty,  with  the  commanders 
in  chief  of  the  British  land  and  naval  forces  in  America." — Journals  of  Con 
gress,  iv.,  1 88 


452  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1783 

y*  spirit  of  advocates  rather  than  of  Judges,  and  besides  required 
more  time  than  could  be  spared  for  it. 

On  the  opposite  side  some  contended  that  the  Ace1*  between 
the  U.  S.  &  particular  States  sd  not  be  made  in  any  manner  to 
encumber  those  between  the  former  and  private  persons.  Others 
thought  that  Cong5!  could  not  delegate  to  Com"  a  power  of  allow 
ing  claims  for  which  the  Confed0"  reqd.  nine  States.  Others  were 
unwilling  to  open  so  wide  a  door  for  claims  on  the  Common 
Treasury. 

On  the  question,  Mas1?  divided.  Con?  ay.  R.  Id  no.  N.  Y. 
no.  N.  J.  no.  Pa  no.  Maryd  no.  VI  ay.  N.  C.  no.  S.  C.  no. 


FRIDAY  APRIL   I  8. 

Application  was  made  from  the  Council  of  P*  for  the  determi 
nation  of  Cong?  as  to  the  effect  of  y^  acts  terminating  hostilities, 
on  Acts  to  be  inforced  during  the  war.  Cong?  declined  giving 
any  opinion. 

The  motion  of  Mr.  Bland  for  striking  out  the  recommendation 
to  the  States  which  had  agreed  to  cede  territory,  to  revise  &  corn- 
pleat  their  Cessions,  raised  a  long  debate.  In  favor  of  the  motion 
it  was  urged  by  Mr.  Rutledge  that  the  proposed  Cession  of  Va 
ought  to  be  previously  considered  &  disallowed  ;  that  otherwise 
a  renewal  of  the  recommendation  wd  be  offensive  ;  that  it  was 
possible  the  Cession  might  be  accepted  in  which  case  the  renewal 
wd  be  improper.  Virg*,  he  observed  alone  could  be  alluded  to  as 
having  complied  in  part  only. 

Mr.  Wilson  went  largely  into  the  subject.  He  said,  If  the  in 
vestigation  of  right  was  to  be  considered,  the  U.  S.  ought  rather 
to  make  cessions  to  individual  States  than  receive  Cessions  from 
them,  the  extent  of  y*  Territory  ceded  by  the  Treaty  being  larger 
than  all  the  States  put  together  ;  that  when  the  claims  of  the 
States  came  to  be  limited  on  principles  of  right,  the  Alleghany 
Mountains  would  appear  to  be  the  true  boundary  ;  this  could  be 
established  without  difficulty  before  any  Court,  or  the  Tribunal 
of  the  World.  He  thought  however  policy  reqd  that  such  a 
boundary  sd  be  established  as  wd  give  to  the  Atlantic  States  access 
to  the  Western  Waters.  If  accommodation  was  the  object,  the 


1783]  JAMES  MADISON.  453 

clause  ought  by  no  means  to  :be  struck  out.  The  Cession  of 
Virga  would  never  be  accepted  because  it  guarantied  to  her  the 
Country  as  far  as  the  Ohio,  which  never  belonged  to  Virg*  (Here 
he  was  called  to  order  by  Mr.  Jones.)  The  question  he  sd.  must 
be  decided.  The  Indecision  of  Cong5!  had  been  hurtful  to  the 
interests  of  the  U.  S.  If  the  compliance  of  V*  was  to  be  sought 
she  ought  to  be  urged  to  comply  fully. 

For  the  vote  in  the  affirmative,  with  the  exception  of  Virg*  & 
S.  Carol,  see  Journal. 

The  plan  of  Revenue  was  then  passed  as  it  had  been  amended, 
all  the  States  present  concurring  except  R.  I.,  wc*  was  in  the  neg 
ative  &  N.  Y.,  wc*  was  divided  Mr.  Floyd  ay  &  Mr.  Hamilton  no.1 


MONDAY  APRIL  21. 

A  motion  was  made  by  Mr.  Hamilton,  2dec?  by  Mr.  Madison,  to 
annex,  to  the  plan  of  the  i8tl?  instant,  the  part  omitted  relating  to 

1  "  The  report  on  funds  &c,  passed  Congress  on  Saturday  last  with  the  dissent 
of  R.  Island,  and  the  division  of  N.  York  only.  The  latter  vote  was  lost  by 
the  rigid  adherence  of  Mr.  Hamilton  to  a  plan  which  he  supposed  more  per 
fect.  The  clause  providing  for  unauthorized  expenditures  could  not  be  rein 
stated,  and,  consequently  no  attempt  was  made  to  link  all  the  parts  of  the  acts 
inseparably  together.  As  it  now  stands  it  has  I  fear  no  bait  for  Virg?  ,  which 
is  not  particularly  interested  either  in  the  object  or  the  mode  of  the  revenues 
recommended,  nor  in  the  territorial  Cessions,  nor  in  the  change  of  the  consti 
tutional  rule  of  dividing  the  Public  burdens.  A  respect  for  justice,  good  faith 
&  national  honor  is  the  only  consideration  which  can  obtain  her  compliance. 

"  We  have  rec1?  no  intelligence  from  abroad  which  deserves  to  be  noted,  since 
your  departure.  The  interval  between  the  preliminary  &  definitive  Treaties  has 
produced  several  new  &  interesting  questions.  One  is  whether  laws  prohibi- 
ing  commerce  with  British  Ports  during  the  war,  have  expired  with  the  cessation 
of  hostilities  ?  A  similar  one  is,  whether  the  Soldiers  enlisted  for  the  war  are 
entitled  to  a  discharge.  At  least  half  of  the  army  under  Gen l  Washington  are 
under  this  description  and  are  urgent  for  such  a  construction  of  their  engage 
ments,  A  third  question  is  whether  the  preliminary  treaty  between  F.  &  G. 
B.  has  given  such  effect  to  the  provisional  articles  between  the  latter  &  the 
U.  S.  as  to  require  an  execution  of  the  stipulations  in  the  6  &  7th  artis-  or 
whether  a  definitive  Treaty  only  can  produce  this  effect, 

"  The  system  for  foreign  affairs  is  not  yet  digested,  and  I  apprehend  will  be 
long  on  the  anvil,  unless  the  actual  return  of  our  Ministers  from  Europe  should 
Stimulate  Cong5  on  the  subject." — Madison  to  Thomas  Jefferson,  April  22, 
1783.  Mad.  MSS. 


454  THE   WRITINGS  OF  [1783 

expences  incurred  by  individual  States.  On  the  question,  N. 
York,  Pen*  &  Virg*  alone  were  in  the  affirmative,  Con*  &  Georgia 
not  present. 

Tuesday  Ap1  22.     See  Journal.1 


WEDNESDAY  APRIL  23. 

The  resolution  permitting  the  soldiers  to  retain  their  arms  was 
passed  at  the  recommendation  of  Gen1  Washington.  See  his  letter 
on  the  files. 

The  resolution  for  granting  furloughs  or  discharges  was  a  com 
promise  between  those  who  wished  to  get  rid  of  the  expence  of 
keeping  the  men  in  the  field,  and  those  who  thought  it  impolitic 
to  disband  the  army  whilst  the  British  remained  in  the  United 
States. 

Ap1  24,  Friday,  25  Ap1.     See  Journal.2 


SATURDAY  APRIL  26. 

Address  to  the  States  passed  nem.  con.  It  was  drawn  up  by 
Mr.  Madison.3  The  address  to  Rh.  1^  referred  to  as  No.  2,  had 
been  drawn  up  by  Mr.  Hamilton. 

1  Several  unimportant  private  measures  were  under  consideration. 

2  According  to  the  Journal  (IV.  194.)  the  address  to  the  States  was  agreed  to 
April  24. 

3  "Address  to  the  States,  to  accompany  the  Recommendations  of  the  i8t]? 

"  The  prospect  which  has  for  some  time  existed,  and  which  is  now  happily 
realized,  of  a  successful  termination  of  the  war,  together  with  the  critical  ex 
igencies  of  public  affairs  have  made  it  the  duty  of  Congress  to  review  and 
provide  for  the  debts  which  the  war  has  left  upon  the  United  States  and  to 
look  forward  to  the  means  of  obviating  dangers,  which  may  interrupt  the  har 
mony  and  tranquillity  of  the  Confederacy.  The  result  of  their  mature  &  solemn 
deliberations  on  these  great  Objects  is  contained  in  their  several  recommenda 
tions  of  the  i8th  instant,  herewith  transmitted.  Although  these  recommen 
dations,  speak  themselves  the  principles  on  which  they  are  founded,  as  well  as 
the  ends  which  they  propose,  it  will  not  be  improper  to  enter  into  a  few  expla 
nations  and  remarks  in  order  to  place  in  a  stronger  view  the  necessity  of 
complying  with  them. 

"  The  first  measure  recommended  is  effectual  provision  for  the  debts  of  the 
United  States.  The  amount  of  these  debts,  as  far  as  they  can  now  be  ascer- 


1783]  JAMES  MADISON.  455 

The  writer  of  these  notes  absent  till  Monday  May  5^ ' 
MONDAY,   MAY  5TH. 

Mr.  Bland  &  Mr.  Mercer  moved  to  erase  from  the  Journal  the 
resolution  of  Friday,  the  2d.  ins'  applying  for  an  addition  of  three 

tained  is  forty-two  millions  three  hundred  and  seventy-five  dollars  as  will  appear 
by  the  schedule  N.  i.  To  discharge  the  principle  of  this  aggregate  debt  at 
once  or  in  any  short  period  is  evidently  not  within  the  compass  of  our  resources  ; 
and  even  if  it  could  be  accomplished  the  ease  of  the  community  would  require 
that  the  debt  itself  should  be  left  to  a  course  of  gradual  extinguishment  and 
certain  funds  be  provided  for  paying  in  the  meantime  the  annual  Interest.  The 
amount  of  the  annual  interest  as  will  appear  by  the  paper  last  referred  to  is 
computed  to  be  two  millions  four  hundred  and  fifteen  thousand  nine  hundred 
and  fifty-six  dollars.  Funds,  therefore,  which  will  certainly  &  punctually 
produce  this  annual  sum  at  least,  must  be  provided. 

"  In  devising  these  funds  Congress  did  not  overlook  the  mode  of  supplying  the 
common  treasury  provided  by  the  Articles  of  Confederation.  But  after  the 
most  respectful  consideration  of  that  mode,  they  were  constrained  to  regard  it 
as  inadequate  &  inapplicable  to  the  form  into  which  the  public  debt  must  be 
thrown.  The  delays  &  uncertainties  incident  to  a  revenue  to  be  established  & 
collected  from  time  to  time  by  thirteen  independent  authorities  is  at  first  view 
irreconcilable  with  the  punctuality  essential  in  the  discharge  of  the  interest  of  a 
national  debt.  Our  own  experience,  after  making  every  allowance  for  transient 
impediments  has  been  a  sufficient  illustration  of  this  truth.  Some  departure 
therefore  in  the  recommendation  of  Congress  from  the  federal  constitution  was 
unavoidable  ;  but  it  will  be  found  to  be  as  small  as  could  be  reconciled  with  the 
object  in  view  and  to  be  supported  besides  by  solid  considerations  of  interest 
and  sound  policy. 

"  The  fund  which  first  presented  itself  on  this  as  it  did  on  a  former  occasion, 
was  a  tax  on  imports.  The  reasons  which  recommended  this  branch  of  revenue 
have  heretofore  been  stated  in  an  Act,  of  which  a  copy,  N.  2  is  now  forwarded 
&  need  not  be  here  repeated.  It  will  suffice  to  recapitulate  that  taxes  on  con 
sumption  are  always  least  burdensome  because  they  are  least  felt  and  are  borne 
too  by  those  who  are  both  willing  and  able  to  pay  them  ;  that  of  all  taxes  on 
consumption  those  on  foreign  commerce  are  most  compatible  with  the  genius 
and  policy  of  free  states  ;  that  from  the  relative  positions  of  some  of  the  more 
commercial  States  it  will  be  impossible  to  bring  this  essential  resource  into  use 
without  a  concerted  uniformity  ;  that  this  uniformity  cannot  be  concerted 
through  any  channel  so  properly  as  through  Congress,  nor  for  any  purpose  so 

1  He  accompanied  the  family  of  James  Floyd  on  their  journey  back  to  New 
York  as  far  as  Brunswick,  sixty  miles  from  Philadelphia,  returning  to  Philadel 
phia  Friday  evening.  He  was  then  paying  his  addresses  to  Miss  Floyd,  who 
soon  afterwards  rejected  him. 


456  THE   WRITINGS  OF  [1783 

Millions  to  the  grant  of  six  millions,  by  H.  M.  X*  Majesty,  as  in 
part  of  the  loan  of  four  Millions  requested  by  the  Resolution  of 

aptly  as  for  paying  the  debts  of  a  revolution  from  which  an  unbounded  freedom 
has  accrued  to  Commerce. 

"  In  renewing  this  proposition  to  the  states  we  have  not  been  unmindful  of  the 
objections  which  heretofore  frustrated  the  unanimous  adoption  of  it.  We  have 
limited  the  duration  of  the  revenue  to  the  term  of  twenty  five  years  and  we 
have  left  to  the  States  themselves  the  appointment  of  the  officers  who  are  to 
collect  it.  If  the  strict  maxims  of  national  credit  alone  were  to  be  consulted, 
the  revenue  ought  manifestly  to  be  co-existent  with  the  object  of  it ;  and  the 
collection  placed  in  every  respect  under  that  authority,  which  is  to  dispense  the 
former  and  is  responsible  for  the  latter.  These  relaxations  will,  we  trust,  be 
regarded,  on  one  hand  as  the  effect  of  a  disposition  in  Congress  to  attend  at  all 
times  to  the  sentiments  of  those  whom  they  serve,  and  on  the  other  hand,  as  a 
proof  of  their  anxious  desire  that  provision  may  be  made  in  some  way  or  other 
for  an  honorable  and  just  fulfilment  of  the  engagements  which  they  have  formed. 

"  To  render  this  fund  as  productive  as  possible  and  at  the  same  time  to  narrow 
the  room  for  collusions  and  frauds,  it  has  been  judged  an  improvement  of  the  plan 
to  recommend  a  liberal  duty  on  such  articles  as  are  most  susceptible  of  a  tax  ac 
cording  to  their  quantity  and  are  of  most  equal  and  general  consumption,  leaving 
all  other  articles,  as  heretofore  proposed,  to  be  taxed  according  to  their  value. 

"  The  amount  of  this  fund  is  computed  to  be  915,956  dollars.  The  estimates 
on  which  the  computation  is  made  are  detailed  in  paper  N?  3.  Accuracy  in  the 
first  essay  on  so  complex  and  fluctuating  a  subject  is  not  to  be  expected.  It  is 
presumed  to  be  as  near  the  truth  as  the  defect  of  proper  materials  would  admit. 

"  The  residue  of  the  computed  interest  is  1,500,000  dollars  &  is  referred  to  the 
States  to  be  provided  for  by  such  funds  as  they  may  judge  most  convenient. 
Here  again  the  strict  maxims  of  public  credit  gave  way  to  the  desire  of  Con 
gress  to  conform  to  the  sentiments  of  their  constituents.  Tt  ought  not  to  be 
omitted  however  with  respect  to  this  portion  of  the  revenue  that  the  mode  in 
which  it  is  to  be  supplied  varies  so  little  from  that  pointed  out  in  the  articles  of 
Confederation  and  the  variations  are  so  conducive  to  the  great  object  proposed, 
that  a  ready  &  unqualified  compliance  on  the  part  of  the  States  may  be  the 
more  justly  expected.  In  fixing  the  quotas  of  this  sum,  Congress,  as  may  be 
well  imagined,  were  guided  by  very  imperfect  lights,  and  some  inequalities  may 
consequently  have  ensued.  These  however  can  be  but  temporary  ;  and  as  far 
as  they  may  exist  at  all,  will  be  redressed  by  a  retrospective  adjustment  as  soon 
as  a  constitutional  rule  can  be  applied. 

The  necessity  of  making  the  two  foregoing  provisions  one  indivisible  & 
irrevocable  act  is  apparent.  Without  the  first  quality,  partial  provision  only 
might  be  made,  where  complete  provision  is  essential  ;  nay  as  some  states 
might  prefer  and  adopt  one  of  the  funds  only,  and  the  other  States  the  other 
fund  only,  it  might  happen  that  no  provision  at  all  would  be  made.  Without 
the  second,  a  single  state  out  of  the  thirteen  might  at  any  time  involve  the 


1783]  JAMES  MADISON.  457 

September  the  14,  1782.  As  the  resolution  of  the  2d.  had  been 
passed  by  fewer  than  nine  States,  they  contended  that  it  was 

nation  in  bankruptcy  ;  the  mere  practicability  of  which  would  be  a  fatal  bar  to 
the  establishment  of  national  credit.  Instead  of  enlarging  on  these  topics,  two 
observations  are  submitted  to  the  justice  and  wisdom  of  the  legislatures.  First, 
the  present  creditors  or  rather  the  domestic  part  of  them  having  either  made 
their  loans  for  a  period  which  has  expired  or  having  become  creditors  in  the 
first  instance  involuntarily,  are  entitled  on  the  clear  principles  of  justice  and 
good  faith  to  demand  the  principal  of  their  credits  instead  of  accepting  the 
annual  interest.  It  is  necessary  therefore  as  the  principal  cannot  be  paid  to 
them  on  demand,  that  the  interest  should  be  so  effectually  &  satisfactorily 
secured  as  to  enable  them,  if  they  incline  to  transfer  the  stock  at  its  full  value. 
Secondly  if  the  funds  be  so  firmly  constituted  as  to  inspire  a  thorough  &  uni 
versal  confidence,  may  it  not  be  hoped  that  the  capital  of  the  domestic  debt, 
which  bears  the  high  interest  of  6  per  cent,  may  be  cancelled  by  other  loans 
obtained  at  a  more  moderate  interest  ?  The.  saving  by  such  an  Operation  would 
be  a  clear  one,  and  might  be  a  considerable  one.  As  a  proof  of  the  necessity  of 
substantial  funds  for  the  support  of  our  credit  abroad  we  refer  to  paper  N  4. 

"  Thus  much  for  the  interest  of  the  national  debt.  For  the  discharge  of  the 
principal,  within  the  term  limited,  we  rely  on  the  natural  increase  of  the  revenue 
from  commerce,  on  requisitions  to  be  made  from  time  to  time  for  that  purpose 
as  circumstances  may  dictate,  and  on  the  prospect  of  vacant  territory.  If  these 
resources  should  prove  inadequate  it  will  be  necessary  at  the  expiration  of  25 
years  to  continue  the  funds  now  recommended  or  to  establish  such  others  as  may 
then  be  found  more  convenient. 

' '  With  a  view  to  the  resource  last  mentioned,  as  well  as  to  obviate  disagreeable 
controversies  and  confusions,  Congress  have  included  in  their  present  recom 
mendations  a  renewal  of  those  of  the  6  day  of  Septr  and  of  the  10  day  of 
October  1780.  In  both  these  respects  a  liberal  and  final  accommodation  of  all 
interfering  claims  of  vacant  territory  is  an  object,  which  cannot  be  pressed  with 
too  much  solicitude. 

"  The  last  object  recommended  is  a  constitutional  change  of  the  rule  by  which 
a  partition  of  the  common  burthens  is  to  be  made.  The  expediency  and  even 
necessity  of  such  a  change,  has  been  sufficiently  enforced  by  the  local  injustice 
and  discontents  which  have  proceeded  from  valuations  of  the  soil  in  every  state 
where  the  experiment  has  been  made.  But  how  infinitely  must  these  evils  be 
increased  on  a  comparison  of  such  valuations  among  the  States  themselves  !  On 
whatever  side  indeed  this  rule  be  surveyed  the  execution  of  it  must  be  attended 
with  the  most  serious  difficulties.  If  the  valuations  be  referred  to  the  authori 
ties  of  the  several  states,  a  general  satisfaction  is  not  to  be  hoped  for.  If  they 
be  executed  by  Officers  of  the  United  States  traversing  the  country  for  that 
purpose,  besides  the  inequalities  against  which  this  mode  would  be  no  security, 
the  expense  would  be  both  enormous  and  obnoxious.  If  the  mode  taken  in  the 
act  of  the  17th  day  of  february  last,  which  was  deemed  on  the  whole  least  objec- 


458  THE   WRITINGS  OF  [1783 

unconstitutional.  The  reply  was  that  as  the  three  Millions  were  to 
be  part  of  a  loan  heretofore  authorized,  the  sanction  of  nine  States 

tionable,  be  adhered  to,  Still  the  insufficiency  of  the  data  to  the  purpose  to 
which  they  are  to  be  applied  must  greatly  impair,  if  not  utterly  destroy  all  con 
fidence  in  the  accuracy  of  the  result  ;  not  to  mention  that  as  far  as  the  result 
can  be  at  all  a  just  one,  it  will  be  indebted  for  the  advantage  to  the  principle 
on  which  the  rule  proposed  to  be  substituted  is  founded.  This  rule,  although 
not  free  from  objections,  is  liable  to  fewer  than  any  other  that  could  be  devised. 
The  only  material  difficulty,  which  attended  it  in  the  deliberations  of  Congress 
was  to  fix  the  proper  difference  between  the  labour  and  industry  of  free  inhabi 
tants  and  of  all  other  inhabitants.  The  ratio  ultimately  agreed  on  was  the 
effect  of  mutual  concessions,  and  if  it  should  be  supposed  not  to  correspond 
precisely  with  the  fact,  no  doubt  ought  to  be  entertained  that  an  equal  spirit  of 
accommodation  among  the  several  legislatures  will  prevail  against  little  inequal 
ities  which  maybe  calculated  on  one  side  or  on  the  other.  But  notwithstanding 
the  confidence  of  Congress  as  to  the  success  of  this  proposition,  it  is  their  duty  to 
recollect  that  the  event  may  possibly  disappoint  them,  and  to  request  that  meas 
ures  may  still  be  pursued  for  obtaining  and  transmitting  the  information  called 
for  in  the  act  of  the  17  of  february  last,  which  in  such  event  will  be  essential. 

"  The  plan  thus  communicated  &  explained  by  Congress  must  now  receive  its 
fate  from  their  constituents.  All  the  objects  comprised  in  it  are  conceived  to 
be  of  great  importance  to  the  happiness  of  this  confederated  Republic  ;  are 
necessary  to  render  the  fruits  of  the  Revolution  a  full  reward  for  the  blood,  the 
toils,  the  cares,  and  the  calamities  which  have  purchased  it.  But  the  object,  of 
which  the  necessity  will  be  peculiarly  felt,  and  which  it  is  peculiarly  the  duty 
of  Congress  to  inculcate,  is  the  provision  recommended  for  the  national  debt. 
Although  this  debt  is  greater  than  could  have  been  wished,  it  is  still  less  on  the 
whole  than  could  have  been  expected  :  and  when  referred  to  the  cause  in  which 
it  has  been  incurred  and  compared  with  the  burthens  which  wars  of  ambition 
and  of  vain  glory  have  entailed  on  other  nations  ought  to  be  borne  not  only  with 
cheerfulness  but  with  pride.  But  the  magnitude  of  the  debt  makes  no  part  of 
the  question.  It  is  sufficient  that  the  debt  has  been  fairly  contracted  and  that 
justice  and  good  faith  demand  that  it  should  be  fully  discharged.  Congress  had 
no  option  but  between  different  modes  of  discharging  it.  The  same  option  is 
the  only  one  that  can  exist  with  the  states.  The  mode  which  has  after  long  and 
elaborate  discussion  been  preferred  is  we  are  persuaded,  the  least  objectionable 
of  any  that  would  have  been  equal  to  the  purpose.  Under  this  persuasion  we 
call  upon  the  justice  and  plighted  faith  of  the  several  states  to  give  it  its  proper 
effect,  to  reflect  on  the  consequences  of  rejecting  it  ;  and  to  remember  that 
Congress  will  not  be  answerable  for  them. 

44  If  other  motives  than  that  of  justice  could  be  requisite  on  this  occasion,  no 
nation  could  ever  feel  stronger.  For  to  whom  are  the  debts  to  be  paid  ? 

"  To  AN  ALLY,  in  the  first  place,  who,  to  the  exertion  of  his  arms  in  support  of 
our  cause  has  added  the  succours  of  his  treasure  ;  who  to  his  important  loans 


1783]  JAMES  MADISON.  459 

was  not  necessary.  The  motion  was  negatived  The  two  movers 
alone  voting  in  the  Affirmative. 

has  added  liberal  donations,  and  whose  loans  themselves  carry  the  impression 
of  his  magnanimity  and  friendship.  For  more  exact  information  on  this  point 
we  refer  to  paper  no.  5. 

"  To  individuals  in  a  foreign  country,  in  the  next  place,  who  were  the  first  to 
give  so  precious  a  token  of  their  confidence  in  our  justice,  &  of  their  friendship 
for  our  cause  ;  and  who  are  members  of  a  republic,  which  was  second  in 
espousing  our  rank  among  nations.  For  the  claims  and  expectations  of  this 
class  of  creditors  we  refer  to  paper  N?  6. 

"Another  class  of  creditors  is  that  illustrious  &  patriotic  band  of  fellow- 
citizens,  whose  blood  and  whose  bravery  have  defended  the  liberties  of  their 
country,  who  have  patiently  borne,  among  other  distresses,  the  privation  of 
their  stipends,  whilst  the  distresses  of  their  country  disabled  it  from  bestowing 
them  ;  and  who  even  now  ask  for  no  more  than  such  a  portion  of  their  dues  as 
will  enable  them  to  retire  from  the  field  of  victory  and  glory  into  the  bosom  of 
peace  and  private  citizenship,  and  for  such  effectual  security  for  the  residue  of 
their  claims  as  their  country  is  now  unquestionably  able  to  provide.  For  a  full 
view  of  their  sentiments  &  wishes  on  this  subject  we  transmit  the  paper  n  7, 
and  as  a  fresh  &  lively  instance  of  their  superiority  to  every  species  of  seduction 
from  the  paths  of  virtue  and  of  honor  we  add  the  paper  N°  8. 

"  The  remaining  class  of  creditors  is  composed  partly  of  such  of  our  fellow 
citizens  as  originally  lent  to  the  public  the  use  of  their  funds,  or  have  since  man 
ifested  most  confidence  in  their  country  by  receiving  transfers  from  the  lenders  ; 
and  partly  of  those,  whose  property  has  been  either  advanced  or  assumed  for 
the  public  service.  To  discriminate  the  merits  of  these  several  descriptions 
of  creditors  would  be  a  task  equally  unnecessary  &  invidious.  If  the  voice  of 
humanity  plead  more  loudly  in  favour  of  some  than  of  others  ;  the  voice  of 
policy  no  less  than  of  justice  pleads  in  favour  of  all.  A  wise  nation  will  never 
permit  those  who  relieve  the  wants  of  their  country,  or  who  rely  most  on  its 
faith,  its  firmness  and  its  resources,  when  either  of  them  is  distrusted,  to  suffer 
by  the  event. 

"  Let  it  be  remembered  finally  that  it  has  ever  been  the  pride  and  boast  of 
America,  that  the  rights  for  which  she  contended  were  the  rights  of  human 
nature.  By  the  blessing  of  the  Author  of  these  rights  on  the  means  exerted 
for  their  defence  they  have  prevailed  against  all  opposition  and  form  the  basis 
of  thirteen  independent  States.  No  instance  has  heretofore  occurred,  nor  can 
any  instance  be  expected  hereafter  to  occur,  in  which  the  unadulterated  forms 
of  Republican  government  can  pretend  to  so  fair  an  opportunity  of  justifying 
themselves  by  their  fruits.  In  this  view  the  citizens  of  the  United  States  are 
responsible  for  the  greatest  trust  ever  confided  to  a  political  society.  If  justice, 
good  faith,  honor,  gratitude  and  all  the  other  qualities  which  enoble  the  char 
acter  of  a  nation  &  fulfil  the  ends  of  government,  be  the  fruits  of  our  establish 
ments,  the  cause  of  liberty  will  acquire  a  dignity  and  lustre,  which  it  has  never 


460  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1783 

TUESDAY    MAY    6.1 

A  motion  was  made  by  Mr.  Lee  to  recommend  to  the  several 
States  to  pass  laws  indemnifying  Officers  of  the  Army  for  damages 

yet  enjoyed,  and  an  example  will  be  set,  which  cannot  but  have  the  most 
favourable  influence  on  the  rights  of  Mankind.  If  on  the  other  side,  our  gov 
ernments  should  be  unfortunately  blotted  with  the  reverse  of  these  cardinal  and 
essential  virtues,  the  great  cause  which  we  have  engaged  to  vindicate,  will  be 
dishonored  and  betrayed  ;  the  last  and  fairest  experiment  in  favor  of  the  rights 
of  human  nature  will  be  turned  against  them  ;  and  their  patrons  and  friends 
exposed  to  be  insulted  and  silenced  by  the  votaries  of  tyranny  and  usurpation." 
— Cont.  Cong. 

Paper  No.  I  referred  to  in  the  address  was  an  estimate  of  the  national  debt. 
As  to  the  foreign  debt  the  figures  are  the  same  as  in  the  estimate  of  April  8 
(p.  443) ;  as  to  the  domestic  debt  they  are  the  same  with  the  addition  of  "  Com 
mutation  to  the  army  "  (Act  of  March  22)  5,000,000  livres  and  "  Bounty  due  to 
privates"  500,000  livres,  making  the  total  domestic  debt  $34,115,290  and  the 
total  debt  $42,000,375,  the  aggregate  of  interest  being  $2,415,956.  For  Paper 
No.  2,  the  letter  of  December  16  to  Rhode  Island  on  the  subject  of  the  import 
duties,  see  p.  288  n.  Paper  No.  3  was  an  estimate  of  the  revenue  that  the  import 
duties  would  produce.  All  goods  from  Europe,  exclusive  of  tea,  brandy  and 
wine  were  estimated  at  a  value  of  ^3,000,000  sterling,  which  at  45.  6d.  per  dol 
lar  would  make  $15,555,554,  giving,  at  five  per  cent.,  $777,773.  From  spirits, 
wines,  teas,  sugar,  coffee  and  cocoa,  and  molasses  the  revenue  would  be  $217,- 
777,  making  a  total  of  $995,550.  Deducting  8  per  cent,  for  collection,  the  net 
estimated  revenue  would  be  $915,956.  Paper  No.  4  was  a  copy  of  Franklin's 
letter  from  Passy,  December  23, 1782,  stating  that  a  knowledge  that  the  states  had 
not  agreed  to  the  impost  had  hurt  the  credit  of  the  United  States  in  France  and 
Holland,  and  of  the  French  Minister's  letter  to  Congress,  March  15,  1783, 
stating  that  no  further  assistance  could  be  expected  from  France,  or  from  any 
other  source  abroad,  unless  measures  for  securing  regular  revenue  should  be  con 
certed.  Papers  No.  5  and  6  gave  the  contracts  between  the  United  States  and 
France  and  Holland,  respectively,  for  the  repayment  of  the  loans  made  by  those 
governments.  Paper  No.  7  was  the  address  of  the  army  dated  "  Cantonments, 
Hudson's  River,  December,  1782,"  setting  forth  the  unendurable  distress  caused 
by  a  want  of  funds.  Paper  No.  8  was  a  copy  of  Washington's  letter  giving  the 
anomynous  communications  to  the  army  and  his  orders  for  the  meeting  of  the 
officers,  the  results  of  the  meeting  and  all  the  correspondence.  All  the  papers 
may  be  found  in  extenso  in  Journals  of  Congress,  iv,  197,  et  seq. 

1  Madison  related  the  march  of  events  outside  of  Congress  in  the  two 
following  letters : 

TO    EDMUND    RANDOLPH. 

Philada  6  May,   1783 

After  a  silence  of  4  weeks  your  favor  of  the  26  Ult,  was  particularly  welcome. 
Your  conjecture  was  but  too  well  founded  as  to  the  compiler  of  the  Proclama- 


1783]  JAMES  MADISON.  461 

sustained  by  individuals  from  Acts  of  such  officers  rendered 
necessary  in  the  execution  of  their  military  functions.  It  was 
referred  to  Mr.  Lee,  Mr.  Williamson  &  Mr.  Clarke. 

tion.  The  offensive  passages  were  adverted  to  by  some,  but  the  general 
eagerness  on  the  occasion,  increased  by  some  unavoidable  delays,  rendered  all 
attempts  to  draw  the  attention  of  Congress  to  smaller  inaccuracies  unacceptable. 

We  have  no  late  despatches  from  Paris,  except  a  letter  from  Mr.  Adams 
which  affords  a  new  &  signal  exemplification  of  those  qualities  which  have  so 
much  distinguished  his  correspondence  with  Congress.  We  are  informed  from 
Madrid  by  Mr.  Carmichael  &  the  Marquis  de  la  Fayette,  that  that  Court  since 
the  British  acknowledgm*  of  our  Independence  has  dismissed  its  hauteur  &  re 
serve  towards  the  U.  S.  has  treated  the  American  Charge  d' Affaires  with  due 
attention  &  has  signified  its  acquiescence  in  the  limits  fixed  by  the  provisional 
articles  between  the  U.  S.  &  G.  B.  The  navigation  of  the  Mississippi  remains 
to  be  discussed. 

Yesterday  was  fixed  for  an  interview  between  Gen1  W.  and  Sr  G.  Carleton 
for  the  purpose  of  taking  arrangements  for  carrying  the  stipulations  of  the  pro 
visional  articles  into  effect.  The  interview  was  proposed  by  the  former,  who 
intimated  that  as  the  evacuation  of  the  Post  of  N.  Y.  was  particularly  interest 
ing  to  the  State  of  N.  Y.  Govr  Clinton  would  accompany  him  on  the  interview. 
The  answer  of  Carleton  imported  that  he  did  not  decline  the  proposition,  but  sug 
gested  that  as  Gen1  Gray  was  expected  with  final  orders  it  might  be  best  to 
postpone  the  conference,  adding  that  he  should  be  attended  by  U  -  Goif  Elliott 
and  Chief -Justice  Smith.— Mad.  MSS. 

TO    THOMAS   JEFFERSON. 

Philad*  May  6,  1783 

Your  favor  cf  the  21.  Ult  :  written  at  Col :  Pendleton's  was  brought  to  hand 
by  the  Post  of  last  week  Col :  Floyd's  family  did  not  set  out  untill  the  day 
after  it  was  received.  I  accompanied  them  as  far  as  Brunswick,  about  60 
miles  from  this  and  returned  hither  on  friday  evening.  .  .  .  Congress  have 
recd  a  long  and  curious  letter  from  Mr.  Adams,  dated  in  Feb.  addressed  to  the 
president  not  to  the  Secretary  for  foreign  affairs.  He  animadverts  on  the  revoca 
tion  of  his  commn  for  a  treaty  of  commerce  with  great  Britain  presses  the 
appointment  cf  a  minister  to  that  Court  with  such  a  commn  draws  the  picture 
of  a  fit  character  in  which  his  own  likeness  is  rediculously  6°  palpably  studied 
finally  praising  and  recommending  Mr  Jay  for  the  appointment  provided 
injustice  must  be  done  an  older  servant. 

Letters  from  the  Marquis  de  la  Fayette  and  Mr.  Carmichael  that  the  Court 
of  Spain  has  become  pretty  tractable  since  the  acknowledgment  of  our  Inde 
pendence  by  G.  B.  The  latter  has  been  treated  with  due  respect,  and  the 
Court  has  agreed  to  accede  to  the  territorial  line  it  fixed  for  W.  Florida  in  the 
provisional  Articles.  The  navigation  of  the  Mississippi  remains  to  be  settled. 
My  absence  from  Cong5  the  past  week  disables  me  from  giving  you  exact 


* 

* 


462  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1783 

He  proposed  also  that  an  Equestrian  statue  should  be  erected 
to  General  Washington. 

A  report  from  the  Secy  of  For:  Affairs  of  a  Treaty  of  Commerce 
to  be  entered  into  with  G.  Britain,  was  referred  to  Mr.  Fitz- 
simmons,  Mr.  Higginson,  Mr.  Rutledge,  Mr.  Helmsley  &  Mr. 
Madison. 


WEDNESDAY  MAY   7. 

The  Resolution  moved  yesterday  by  Mr.  Lee  for  indemnifying 
military  Officers,  being  reported  by  the  Committee  was  agreed  to. 

The  Committee  on  a  motion  of  Mr.  Dyer,  reported  "that  the 
States  which  had  settled  with  their  respective  lines  of  the  Army 
for  their  pay  since  Aug  i.  1780,  should  receive  the  securities 
which  would  otherwise  be  due  to  such  lines." 

The  Report  was  opposed  on  the  ground  that  the  settlements 
had  not  been  discharged  in  the  value  due.  The  Notes  issued  in 
payment  by  Connecticut  were  complained  of,  as  being  of  little 
value. 

The  Report  was  disagreed  to.     See  Journal. 


THURSDAY  MAY  8. 

Mr.  Bland  suggested  that  the  Prisoners  of  War  should  be  de 
tained,  until  an  answer  be  given  as  to  the  delivery  of  slaves, 
represented  in  a  letter  to  Mr.  Thomas  Walke  to  be  refused  on  the 
part  of  S'  Guy  Carleton. 

On  his  motion  seconded  by  Mr.  Williamson  it  was  ordered  that 
the  letter  be  sent  to  Gen  Washington  for  his  information,  in 
carrying  into  effect  the  Resolution  of  Ap1  15.  touching  arrange 
ments  with  the  British  Commander  for  delivery  of  the  Posts, 
Negroes  &c. 

A  Portrait  of  Don  Galvez  was  presented  to  Congress  by  Oliver 
Pollock. 

information  of  their  latest  proceedings.  I  am  told  that  in  consequence  of 
Mr.  Adams's  letter  the  secretary  of  foreign  affairs  has  been  instructed  to  project 
a  treaty  of  commerce  with  great  Britain,  which  will  probably  bring  the  attention 
of  Congress  to  the  general  department  of  foreign  affairs.  (Italics  for  cypher.) — 
Mad.  MSS. 


1783]  JAMES  MADISON.  463 

FRIDAY     MAY    9. 

A  question  on  a  Report  relating  to  the  occupying  the  Posts 
when  evacuated  by  the  British  was  postponed  by  Virginia  in  right 
of  a  State. 

Mr.  Dyer  moved  a  recommendation  to  the  States  to  restore 
confiscated  property  conformably  to  the  Provisional  Articles. 
The  motion  produced  a  debate  which  went  off  without  any  posi 
tive  result. 

Adjourned  to  Monday. 

MONDAY    MAY    12. 
See  Journal.1 

TUESDAY    MAY    13. 

No  Congress.2  

WEDNESDAY    MAY    14. 

Mr.  Hamilton  &  Mr.  Elseworth  moved  a  call  on  the  States,  to 
fulfil  the  recommendation  relative  to  the  Tories.  After  some 
remarks  on  the  subject,  the  House  adjourned. 

1  The  Commander  in  Chief  was  directed  to  place  in  the  frontier  posts,  when 
ever  they  should  be  evacuated  in  pursuance  of  the  articles  of  the  treaty  of 
peace,  troops  whose  service  had  not  expired,  until  further  measures  should  be 
decided  upon.     The  Superintendent  of  Finance  was  ordered  to  pay  the  officers 
deputed  by  the  army  to  present  their  memorial  to  Congress  on  January  8th 
their  reasonable  expenses  during  their  stay  in  town. — Journals  of  Congress,  iv., 

221. 

2  The  project  for  a  treaty  of  commerce  with  great  Britain  was  brought  for 
ward  by  Livingston  at  this  time.     It  prompted  Madison  to  write  the  two  fol 
lowing  letters  : 

TO   THOMAS    JEFFERSON. 

DEAR  SIR  Philad»  ,  May  ,3,  1783. 

Marbois  lately  took  occasion  in  our  family  to  complain  of  ungenerous  proceed 
ings  of  the  British  against  individuals,  as  well  as  against  their  enemies  at  large, 
and  finally  signified  that  he  was  no  stranger  to  the  letter  transmitted  to  Congress 
which  he  roundly  averred  to  be  spurious.  His  information  came  from  Boston, 
where  the  incident  is  said  to  be  no  secret ;  but  whether  it  be  the  echo  of  letters 
from  Philad?  or  has  transpired  from  the  correspondence  of  Mr.  Adams  to  his 
private  friends  is  uncertain.  This  conversation  passed  during  my  absence  in 
new  Jersey,  but  was  related  to  me  by  Mr.  Carroll. 

A  project  for  a  treaty  of  commerce  with  Britain  has  been  reported  by  the  Sec 
retary  of  foreign  affairs  and  is  now  in  the  hands  of  a  commee.  The  objects  most 


464  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1783 

Thursday,  May  15.  See  Journal.1  The  Report  relating  to  the 
Dep-  of  For.  Affairs  taken  up,  and,  after  some  discussion  of  the 
expediency  of  raising  the  salary  of  the  Sec?  Congress  adjourned. 

at  heart  are  first  a  direct  trade  between  this  country  &•>  the  West  Indies.  Second 
a  right  of  carrying  between  the  latter  6°  other  parts  of  the  British  empire. 
Thirdly  a  right  of  carrying  from  the  West  Indies  to  all  other  parts  of  the  world. 
As  the  price  of  these  advantages  it  is  proposed  that  we  shall  admit  British  sub 
jects  to  equal  privileges  with  our  own  citizens.  As  to  the  first  object  it  may  be 
observed  that  the  bill  lately  brought  into  the  British  Parliament  renders  it  prob 
able  that  it  may  be  obtained  without  such  a  cession,  as  to  the  second  that  it  con 
cerns  the  Eastern  States  chiefly  &  as  to  the  third  that  it  concerns  them  alone, 
whilst  the  privilege  to  be  conceded  will  chiefly  if  not  alone  affect  the  Southern 
States.  The  interest  of  these  seems  to  require  that  they  should  retain  at  least 
the  faculty  of  giving  any  encouragement  to  their  own  merchants'  ships  or  mar 
iners,  which  may  be  necessary  to  prevent  a  relapse  under  scotch  monopoly,  or  to 
acquire  a  maritime  importance.  The  Eastern  States  need  no  such  precaution. 

Gen!  Washington  &  Gen!  Carleton  have  had  an  interview  on  the  subject  of 
arrangements  for  executing  the  provisional  Treaty.  It  was  interrupted  by  the 
sudden  indisposition  of  the  latter.  In  the  conversation  which  took  place,  he 
professed  intentions  of  evacuating  New  York  &  all  the  posts  in  the  U.  S.  held 
by  British  Garrisons  as  soon  as  possible,  but  did  not  authorize  any  determinate 
or  speedy  expectations.  (Illegible)  that  a  number  of  Negroes  had  gone  off 
with  the  Refugees  since  the  arrival  of  the  Treaty,  and  undertook  to  justify  the 
permission  by  a  palpable  &  scandalous  misconstruction  of  the  Treaty,  and  by 
the  necessity  of  adhering  to  the  proclamations  under  the  faith  of  which  the 
Negroes  had  eloped  into  their  service.  He  said  that  if  the  Treaty  should  be 
otherwise  explained,  compensation  would  be  made  to  the  owners  and  to  make 
this  the  more  easy,  a  register  had  been  &  would  be  kept  of  all  Negroes  leaving 
N.  Y  before  the  surrender  of  it  by  the  British  Garrison.  This  information  has 
been  referred  by  Cong?  to  a  Committee.  But  the  progress  already  made  in  the 
discharge  of  the  prisoners,  the  only  convenient  pledge  by  which  fair  dealing,  on 
the  other  side,  could  be  enforced,  makes  it  probable  that  no  remedy  will  be 
applied  to  the  evil.  (Italics  for  cypher.)  Mad.  MSS. 

TO    EDMUND    RANDOLPH. 

Philad?  May  —  1783. 
MY  DEAR  SIR, 

Your  favor  of  the  gth  inst.  was  duly  brought  by  yesterday's  Mail.  My  impa 
tience  is  great  to  know  the  reception  given  to  the  propositions  of  Congress  by 

1  The  committee  to  whom  was  referred  a  claim  of  the  officers  of  a  brigade 
raised  in  Rhode  Island  in  1779  for  one  year  for  depreciation  of  their  pay 
reported  against  an  allowance,  since  none  had  thus  far  been  made  to  any  offi 
cers  or  soldiers  discharged  before  April  10,  1780. — Journals  of  Congress, 
iv.,  222. 


1 7 83]  JAMES  MADISON.  465 

FRIDAY    MAY    1 6. 
See  Journal.1 

SATURDAY   MAY    17. 

No  Congress. 

MONDAY  MAY    19. 

Spent  in  debating  the  Report  recommending  provision  for 
the  Tories  according  to  the  Provisional  Artie,  of  peace. 

the  Assembly.  I  foresaw  some  of  the  topics  which  are  employed  against  them, 
&  I  dread  their  effect  from  the  eloquent  mouths  which  will  probably  enforce 
them  ;  but  I  do  not  despair.  Until  those  who  oppose  the  plan,  can  substitute 
some  other  equally  consistent  with  public  justice  &  honor,  and  more  con 
formable  to  the  doctrines  of  the  Confederation,  all  those  who  love  justice  and 
aim  at  the  public  good  will  be  advocates  for  the  plan.  The  greatest  danger  is 
to  be  apprehended  from  the  difficulty  of  making  the  latter  class  sensible  of  the 
impracticability  or  incompetency  of  any  plan  short  of  the  one  recommended  ; 
the  arguments  necessary  for  that  purpose  being  drawn  from  a  general  survey  of 
the  federal  system,  and  not  from  the  interior  polity  of  the  States  singly. 

The  letter  from  the  Delegation  by  the  last  post  to  the  Gov!  appr  the  Leg 
islature,  thro  him  that  negotiations  for  a  Treaty  of  Commerce  with  G.  B. 
might  be  expected  soon  to  take  place  ;  and  that  if  any  instructions  should  be 
deemed  proper  no  time  ought  to  be  lost  in  giving  the  subject  a  legislative  dis 
cussion.  For  my  own  part  I  wish  sincerely  that  the  commercial  interests  of 
Virginia  were  thoroughly  investigated  &  the  final  sense  of  the  State  expressed 
to  its  representatives  in  Congress. 

The  power  of  forming  Treaties  of  Commerce  with  foreign  nations  is  among 
the  most  delicate  with  which  Cong5  are  entrusted  and  ought  to  be  exercised 
with  all  possible  circumspection.  Whilst  an  influence  might  be  expected  from 
them  on  the  event  or  duration  of  the  war,  the  public  interest  required  that  they 
should  be  courted  with  all  the  respectable  nations  of  Europe,  and  that  nice  cal 
culations  of  their  tendency  should  be  dismissed.  The  attainment  of  the  object 
of  the  war  has  happily  reversed  our  situation  and  we  ought  no  longer  to  enslave 
ourselves  to  the  policy  of  the  moment.  The  state  of  this  Country  in  relation 
to  the  Countries  of  Europe  it  ought  to  be  observed,  will  be  continually  chang 
ing,  and  regulations  adapted  to  its  commercial  &  general  interests  at  present 
may  hereafter  be  directly  opposed  to  them.  The  general  policy  of  America  is 
at  present  pointed  at  the  encouragement  of  Agriculture,  and  the  importation  of 
the  objects  of  consumption.  The  wider  therefore  our  ports  are  opened,  and 
the  more  extensive  the  privileges  of  all  competitors  in  our  commerce,  the  more 
likely  we  shall  be  to  buy  at  cheap  &  sell  at  profitable  rates.  But  in  proportion 

1  The  pay  for  Chaplains  and  for  couriers  and  postage  for  our  missions  abroad 
was  under  consideration.  —  Journals  of  Congress,  iv.,  222. 

VOL.   I.—  30. 


466  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1783 

TUESDAY    MAY    2O. 

On  the  proposal  to  discharge  the  troops  who  had  been  enlisted 
for  the  war  (amounting  to  ten  thousand  men,)  from  the  want  of 
means  to  support  them. 

Mr.  Carroll  urged  the  expediency  of  caution,  the  possibility  that 
advantage  might  be  taken  by  G.  B.  of  a  discharge  both  of  prisoners 

as  our  lands  become  settled,  and  spare  hands  for  manufactures  &  navigation 
multiply,  it  may  become  our  policy  to  favor  those  objects  by  peculiar  privileges 
bestowed  on  our  citizens  ;  or  at  least  to  introduce  regulations  [not]  inconsistent 
with  foreign  engagements  suited  to  the  present  state  of  things. 

The  relative  situation  of  the  different  States  in  this  respect  is  another  motive 
to  circumspection.  The  variance  of  their  policy  &  interests,  in  the  article  of 
Commerce  strikes  the  first  view,  and  it  may  with  great  truth  be  noted  that  as 
far  as  any  concessions  may  be  stipulated  in  favor  of  foreign  nations  they  will 
chiefly  be  at  the  expense  of  those  States  which  will  share  least  in  the  compen 
sations  obtained  for  them.  If,  for  example,  restrictions  be  laid  on  the  legisla 
tive  rights  of  the  States  to  prohibit,  to  regulate  or  to  tax  as  they  please  their 
imports  &  exports,  &  to  give  such  preferences  as  they  please  to  the  persons  or 
vessels  employed  in  them,  it  is  evident  that  such  restrictions  will  be  most  felt 
by  those  States  who  have  the  greatest  interest  in  exports  &  imports.  If  on  the 
other  side  the  Citizens  of  the  U.  S.  should  in  return  for  such  a  stipulation  be 
allowed  to  navigate  &  carry,  in  forbidden  channels,  is  it  not  equally  evident 
that  the  benefit  must  fall  to  the  share  of  those  States  which  export  &  consume 
least,  and  abound  most  in  resources  of  ships  &  seamen. 

Nor  should  it  be  overlooked  that  as  uniform  regulations  of  the  Commerce  of 
the  different  States  will  so  differently  affect  their  several  interests,  such  regula 
tions  must  be  a  strong  temptation  to  measures  in  the  aggrieved  States  which 
may  first  involve  the  whole  confederacy  in  controversies  with  foreign  nations, 
and  then  in  contests  with  one  another.  I  may  safely  suggest  also  to  your  ear, 
that  a  variety  of  circumstances  make  it  proper  to  recollect  that  permanent 
engagements,  entered  into  by  the  Confederacy  with  foreign  powers,  may  sur 
vive  the  Confederacy  itself  ;  that  a  question  must  then  arise  how  far  such  en 
gagements  formed  by  the  States  in  their  federal  character,  are  binding  on  each 
of  them  separately  and  that  they  may  become  pretexts  for  quarrels  with  partic 
ular  States,  very  inconvenient  to  the  latter,  or  for  a  general  intrusion  into 
American  disputes.  On  the  other  hand  candor  suggests  that  foreign  connec 
tions,  if  founded  on  principles  equally  corresponding  with  the  policy  &  interests 
of  the  several  States  might  be  a  new  bond  to  the  federal  compact. 

Upon  these  considerations  I  think  it  would  be  advisable  to  form  all  our  com 
mercial  Treaties  in  future  with  great  deliberation,  to  limit  their  duration  to 
moderate  periods,  &  to  restrain  our  Ministers  from  acceding  finally  to  them 
till  they  have  previously  transmitted  them  in  the  terms  adjusted,  for  the  revi 
sion  and  express  sanction  of  Congress.  In  a  Treaty  of  Commerce  with  G.  B., 


1783]  JAMES  MADISON.  46 7 

and  of  the  army,  and  suggested  the  middle  course,  of  furloughing 
the  troops. 

Mr.  Dyer  was  strenuous  for  getting  rid  of  expence  ;  considered 
the  war  at  an  end  ;  that  G.  B.  might  as  well  renew  the  war  after 
the  definitive  Treaty  as  now  ;  that  not  a  moment  ought  to  be  lost 
in  disburdening  the  public  of  needless  expence. 

Mr.  Rutledge  viewed  the  conduct  of  G.  B.  in  so  serious  a  light 
that  he  almost  regretted  having  voted  for  a  discharge  of  Prisoners. 
He  urged  the  expediency  of  caution,  and  of  consulting  the  Com 
mander  chief.  He  accordingly  moved  that  the  Report  be  referred 
to  him  for  his  opinion  &  advice.  The  motion  was  seconded  by 
Mr.  Izard. 

Mr.  Clarke  asked  whether  any  military  Operation  was  on  foot 
that  the  Commander  in  Chief  was  to  be  consulted.  This  was  a 

it  may  be  the  policy  of  Virga  ,  in  Particular,  to  reserve  her  right  as  unfettered 
as  possible  over  her  own  commerce.  The  monopoly  which  formerly  tyrannized 
over  it  has  left  wounds  which  are  not  yet  healed,  &  the  numerous  debts  due 
from  the  people,  &  which  by  the  provisional  articles  they  are  immediately  liable 
for,  may  possibly  be  made  instruments  for  re-establishing  their  dependence. 
It  cannot  therefore  be  for  the  interest  of  the  State  to  preclude  it  from  any  reg 
ulations  which  experience  may  recommend  for  its  thorough  emancipation.  It 
is  possible  that  experience  may  never  recommend  an  exercise  of  this  right,  nor 
do  my  own  sentiments  favor,  in  general,  any  restrictions  or  preferences  in  mat 
ters  of  commerce  but  those  who  succeed  us  will  have  an  equal  claim  to  judge 
for  themselves,  and  will  have  further  lights  to  direct  their  judgments.  Nor 
ought  the  example  of  old  &  intelligent  nations  to  be  too  far  or  too  hastily  con 
demned  by  an  infant  and  inexperienced  one.  That  of  G.  B.  is  in  the  science 
of  commerce,  particularly  worthy  of  our  attention  ;  And  did  she  not  originally 
redeem  the  management  of  her  Commerce  from  the  monopoly  of  the  Hanse 
towns  by  peculiar  exemptions  to  her  own  subjects  ?  Did  she  not  dispossess  the 
Dutch  by  a  like  policy  ?  And  does  she  not  still  make  a  preference  of  her  own 
Vessels  and  her  own  mariners  the  basis  of  her  maritime  power  ?  If  Holland 
has  followed  a  different  system  the  reason  is  plain.  Her  object  is  not  to 
exclude  rivals  from  her  own  navigation,  but  to  insinuate  herself  into  that  of 
other  nations. 

The  leading  objects  in  the  proposed  Treaty  with  G.  B.  are,  I.  a  direct  com 
merce  with  the  W.  Indies.  2,  the  carrying  trade  between  the  different  parts  of  her 
dominions.  3,  a  like  trade  between  these  &  other  parts  of  the  world.  In  return 
for  these  objects  we  have  nothing  to  offer  of  which  we  could  well  deprive  her, 
but  to  secure  to  her  subjects  an  entire  equality  of  privileges  with  our  own  citi 
zens.  With  regard  to  the  I.  object  it  may  be  observed,  that  both  the  temper 
&  the  interest  of  the  nation  leave  us  little  ground  to  apprehend  an  exclusion 


468  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1783 

national  question,  which  the  National  Council  ought  to  decide. 
He  was  ags.1  furloughing  the  men  because  they  would  carry  their 
arms  with  them.  He  said  we  were  at  peace,  &  complained  that 
some  could  not  separate  the  idea  of  a  Briton  from  that  of  cutting 
throats. 

Mr.  Ellsworth  enlarged  on'the  impropriety  of  submitting  to  the 
Commander  in  Chief  a  point  on  which  he  could  not  possess  com 
petent  materials  for  deciding.  We  ought  either  to  discharge  the 
men  engaged  for  the  war  or  to  furlough  them.  He  preferred  the 
former. 

Mr.  Mercer  descanted  on  the  insidiousness  of  G.  B.,  and  warmly 
opposed  the  idea  of  laying  ourselves  at  her  mercy  that  we  might 
save  fifty  thousand  dollars  ;  altho'  Congress  knew  they  were 
violating  the  Treaty  as  to  Negroes. 

from  it.  The  French  have  so  much  the  advantage  of  them  from  the  facility  of 
raising  food  as  well  as  the  other  produce  of  their  Islands,  that  the  English  will 
be  under  the  necessity  of  admitting  supplies  from  the  U.  S.  into  their  Islands, 
and  they  surely  will  prefer  paying  for  them  in  commodities  to  paying  for  them 
in  cash.  With  regard  to  the  2nd  &  3d  objects  it  may  be  observed  that  altho'  they 
present  great  advantages,  they  present  them  only  to  those  States  which  abound 
in  maritime  resources.  Lastly  with  regard  to  the  concession  to  be  made  on  the 
part  of  the  U.  S.,  it  may  be  observed  that  it  will  affect  chiefly  if  not  solely 
those  States  which  will  share  least  in  the  advantages  purchased  by  it.  So 
striking  indeed  does  this  contrast  appear  that  it  may  with  certainty  be  inferred 
that  If  G.  B.  were  negotiating  a  Treaty  with  the  former  States  only,  she  would 
reject  a  mutual  communication  of  the  privileges  of  natives  ;  nor  is  it  clear  that 
her  apprehensions  on  this  side  will  not  yet  lead  her  to  reject  such  a  stipulation 
with  the  whole. 

If  this  subject  should  be  taken  up  by  the  Legislature,  I  hope  that,  altho'  not 
a  member,  your  attention  &  aid  will  be  given  to  it.  If  it  sd  not  be  taken  up 
publicly  I  wish  for  your  own  private  sentiments  &  those  of  the  most  intelligent 
members  which  you  may  be  able  to  collect. 

We  have  no  European  intelligence.  Sr  G  Carleton  in  a  letter  to  Gel  W. 
avows  the  same  sentiments  as  were  expressed  in  the  conference  relative  to  the 
negroes,  but  repeats  his  caution  agst  their  being  understood  as  the  national 
construction  of  the  Treaty.  .  .  . 

In  reviewing  the  freedom  of  some  of  the  remarks  which  I  have  hazarded 
above,  I  am  almost  induced  to  recall  them  till  I  can  cover  them  with  cypher. 
As  there  is  little  danger  attending  the  mail  at  present  and  your  own  (illegible) 
will  take  care  of  such  as  may  be  improper  to  be  reverberated  to  this  place  I 
shall  upon  the  whole  let  them  stand.— Mad.  MSS. 


1783]  JAMES  MADISON.  469 

Mr.  Williamson  proposed  that  the  Soldiers  be  furloughed.  Mr. 
Carroll  seconded  him,  that  the  two  modes  of  furlough  &  discharge 
might  both  lye  on  the  table. 

By  general  consent  this  took  place. 

The  Report  as  to  confiscated  property,  on  the  Instructions  from 
Virga  and  Penn?,  was  taken  up,  &  agreed  to  be  recommitted,  to 
gether  with  a  motion  of  Mr.  Madison  to  provide  for  the  case  of 
Canadian  Refugees  &  for  settlement  of  accts  with  the  British,  and 
a  motion  of  Mr.  Hamilton  to  insert,  in  a  definitive  Treaty,  a 
mutual  stipulation  not  to  keep  a  naval  force  on  the  Lakes. 


WEDNESDAY  MAY  21.   THURSDAY  MAY  22. 

See  the  Secret  Journal  for  these  two  days. 

The  passage  relating  to  the  armed  neutrality  was  generally  con 
curred  in  for  the  reasons  which  it  expresses.1 

The  disagreements  on  the  questions  relating  to  a  Treaty  of 
Commerce  with  Russia  were  occasioned  chiefly  by  sympathies, 
particularly  in  the  Massachusetts  Delegation  with  Mr.  Dana  ;  and 
by  an  eye  in  the  navigating  &  Ship  building  States  to  the  Russian 
Articles  of  Iron  &  Hemp.  They  were  supported  by  S.  Carolina, 
who  calculated  on  a  Russian  market  for  her  Rice. 

1  Hamilton  made  the  motion,  seconded  by  Madison,  that  Dana  be  informed 
that  the  primary  object  of  his  mission  to  St.  Petersburgh  was  terminated,  and 
that  the  benefits  of  a  commercial  treaty  were  remote  and  without  present  induce 
ments,  that  if  any  such  treaty  should  be  made  it  should  be  of  brief  duration,  as 
experience  would  show  more  clearly  the  principles  upon  which  the  intercourse 
between  the  two  countries  should  be  conducted.  The  passage  relating  to  armed 
neutrality  was  as  follows  : 

<%  That  though  Congress  approve  the  principles  of  the  armed  neutrality, 
founded  on  the  liberal  basis  of  a  maintenance  of  the  rights  of  neutral  nations 
and  of  the  privileges  of  Commerce,  yet  they  are  unwilling,  at  this  juncture,  to 
become  a  party  to  a  confederacy  which  may  hereafter  too  far  complicate  the  in 
terests  of  the  United  States  with  the  politicks  of  Europe,  and  therefore,  if  such 
a  progress  is  not  yet  made  in  this  business  as  may  make  it  dishonorable  to 
recede,  it  is  their  desire,  that  no  further  measures  may  be  taken  at  present 
towards  the  admission  of  the  United  States  into  that  confederacy." — Secret 
Journals  of  Congress,  For.  Affs. ,  346. 


470  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1783 

FRIDAY    MAY    23. 

The  Report  from  M'  Hamilton,  Ghorham  and  Peters,  in  favor  of 
discharging  the  soldiers  enlisted  for  the  war,  was  supported  on 
the  ground  that  it  was  called  for  by  Economy  and  justified  by  the 
degree  of  certainty  that  the  war  would  not  be  renewed.  Those 
who  voted  for  furloughing  the  soldiers  wished  to  avoid  expence, 
and  at  the  same  time  to  be  not  wholly  unprepared  for  the  contin 
gent  failure  of  a  definitive  treaty  of  peace.  The  view  of  the  sub 
ject  taken  by  those  who  were  opposed  both  to  discharging  and 
furloughing,  were  explained  in  a  motion  by  Mr.  Mercer  seconded 
by  Mr.  Izard  to  assign  as  reasons,  first  that  S*  Guy  Carleton  had 
not  given  satisfactory  reasons  for  continuing  at  N.  York,  second, 
that  he  had  broken  the  Articles  of  the  provisional  Treaty  relative 
to  the  negroes,  by  sending  them  off. 

This  motion  appeared  exceptionable  to  several,  particularly  to 
Mr.  Hamilton  &  rather  than  it  should  be  entered  on  the  Journal 
by  yeas  and  nays,  it  was  agreed  that  the  whole  subject  should  lye 
over. 

The  Report  relative  to  the  Department  of  For.  Affairs  being 
taken  up  ;  Mr.  Carroll  seconded  by  Mr.  Williamson  moved  that 
no  public  Minister  should  be  employed  by  the  U.  S.  except  on  ex 
traordinary  occasions. 

In  support  of  the  proposition  it  was  observed  that  it  would  not 
only  be  economical,  but  would  withhold  our  distinguished  Citizens 
from  the  corrupting  scenes  at  foreign  Courts,  and  what  was  of 
more  consequence  would  prevent  the  residence  of  foreign  Minis 
ters  in  the  U.  S.,  whose  intrigues  &  examples  might  be  injurious 
both  to  the  Gov'  &  the  people. 

The  considerations  suggested  on  the  other  side  were  that  Dip 
lomatic  relations  made  part  of  the  established  policy  of  Modern 
Civilized  nations,  that  they  tended  to  prevent  hostile  collisions  by 
mutual  &  friendly  explanations  &  that  a  young  Republic  ought 
not  to  incur  the  odium  of  so  singular  &  as  it  might  be  thought 
disrespectful  an  innovation.  The  discussion  was  closed  by  an 
Adjournment  till  Monday. 


1783]  JAMES  MADISON.  471 


MONDAY    MAY    26. 

The  Resolutions  on  the  Journal  instructing  the  Ministers  in 
Europe  to  remonstrate  ag-*  the  carrying  off  the  Negroes  ;  also 
those  for  furloughing  the  troops  passed  unanimously. 


TUESDAY    27    MAY 

V  No  Congress. 
WEDNESDAY    28    MAY 


THURSDAY    MAY    29. 

The  report  of  the  Committee  concerning  Interest  on  British 
debts  was  committed,  after  some  discussion. 


FRIDAY    MAY    30. 

The  debates  on  the  Report  recommending  to  the  States  a  com 
pliance  with  the  4th  5  &  6th  of  the  provisional  Articles  were  re 
newed  ;  the  Report  being  finally  committed  nem.  con.  See 
Secret  Journal. 

The  Report,  including  the  objections  to  interest  on  British 
debts  ;  was  also  agreed  to  nem.  con.  ;  not  very  cordially  by  some 
who  were  indifferent  to  the  objects  ;  and  by  others  who  doubted 
the  mode  of  seeking  it  by  a  new  stipulation. 


MONDAY    &    TUESDAY    JUNE    2    &    3. 
See  Journal.1 

WEDNESDAY    JUNE    4. 

The  Report  of  the  Committee  for  giving  to  the  Army  certifi 
cates  for  land  was  taken  up.  After  some  discussion  of  the  subject, 
some  members  being  for  some  ags.1  making  the  certificates  trans 
ferable  it  was  agreed  that  the  Report  should  lie  on  the  table. 

1  Oliver  Pollock  was  commissioned  as  commercial  agent  to  the  Havana  and 
the  agent  of  marine  was  instructed  to  take  legal  measures  against  the  bonds  of 
privateers  for  abuses  committed  by  them. — Journals  of  Congress,  iv.,  226. 


472  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1783 

For  what  passed  in  relation  to  the  Cession  of  vacant  territory 
by  Virg*  see  the  Journal.1 

1  January  2,  1781,  Virginia  offered  a  cession  of  the  whole  territory  claimed  by 
her  northwest  of  the  Ohio  River,  on  condition  that  she  be  reimbursed  for  her 
expenses  in  conquering  and  defending  the  ceded  territory  ;  that  the  inhabitants 
be  protected  ;  that  Congress  fulfill  the  promises  Virginia  had  made  to  George 
Rogers  Clarke  and  his  officers  and  soldiers  of  grants  of  land  for  their  services  in 
reducing  the  British  posts  ;  that  further  grants  be  made,  if  necessary,  to  her 
continental  and  state  troops  ;  and  that  the  land  be  used  for  the  common  benefit. 
The  land  companies  arrayed  themselves  against  the  cession,  as  it  provided  that 
their  claims  should  be  considered  void.  November  3,  a  committee  of  Congress 
reported  that  the  lands,  pretended  to  be  ceded,  belonged  to  the  Six  Nations  of 
Indians,  and  were  under  the  government  of  New  York.  The  subject  came  up 
again  in  Congress  September  6,  1782,  and  on  October  29,  the  cession  of  all 
rights,  interests  and  claims  of  New  York  was  accepted.  Virginia's  cession  was 
accepted  September  13  substantially  as  originally  offered.  See  also  Rives's 
Madison,  i.,  445,  et  seq. 

Madison  anticipated  the  discussion  in  the  following  letter  of  May  20  to  Jefferson: 

"  For  the  tenor  of  the  conditions  on  which  Cong5  were  formerly  willing  to 
accept  the  Cession  of  Virga  ,  I  beg  leave  to  refer  to  their  resolutions  of  the 
6  of  Sepr  &  10  of  Octr  1780.  I  take  it  for  granted  you  have  the  Journals. 
The  expunging  of  the  article  relative  to  State  expenses  was  a  subject  of  no  less 
regret  with  me  than  it  is  with  you  &  for  the  same  reason,  but  I  acknowledge 
that  considering  the  probable  defect  of  vouchers  in  Virg*  and  the  ardor  with 
which  the  clause  was  supported  from  some  other  quarters,  mine  was  much 
diminished  in  the  course  of  the  discussion.  On  the  last  trial  there  were  but 
two  or  three  States  besides  Virg*  that  favored  it.  S.  Carolina's  opposition  to  it 
had  great  weight.  After  this  clause  was  expunged  it  was  thought  improper  to 
retain  the  connective  clause  as  Virg*  will  now  be  at  liberty  to  confine  her 
accession  to  the  revenue  part  of  the  plan,  without  enlarging  her  territorial 
Cession  or  being  deprived  of  the  opportunity  of  annexing  any  Condition  she 
may  think  fit.  The  connective  clause  however  could  not  have  been  carried  I 
believe  either  before  or  after  the  mutilation  of  the  plan.  Notwithstanding  this 
disappointment  I  adhere  to  my  wishes  not  only  that  the  revenue  may  be  estab 
lished,  but  that  the  federal  rule  of  dividing  the  burdens  may  be  changed, 
and  the  territorial  disputes  accommodated.  The  more  I  revolve  the  latter  sub 
ject,  the  less  inducement  I  can  discover  to  pertinacity  on  the  part  of  Virg?  and 
the  more  interesting  it  appears  to  the  Union. 

"  I  am  sorry  your  departure  from  Richmond  became  necessary  before  more  of 
the  members  were  assembled.  I  make  no  doubt  that  useful  impressions  have 
been  left  with  those  who  were  so  &  were  susceptible  of  them.  I  shall  keep  in 
mind  the  intimation  relative  to  Mr.  Short.  The  idea  of  adding  a  fraction  of  a 
year  to  my  Congressional  Service  is  totally  new,  and  even  if  it  s1?  prevail,  will 
not  as  far  as  I  can  see,  coincide  with  my  private  convenience." — Mad.  MSS. 


1783]  JAMES  MADISON. 


473 


Whilst  Mr.  Hamilton's  motion  relating  to  Mr.  Livingston,  Sec 
retary  of  For.  afP  was  before  the  House,  Mr.  Peters  moved,  in 
order  to  detain  Mr.  Livingston  in  office,  that  it  be  declared,  by 
the  seven  States  present  that  the  Salary  ought  to  be  augmented. 
To  this  it  was  objected  i.  that  it  would  be  an  assumption  of 
power  in  7  States  to  say,  what  9  States  ought  to  do.  2.  that  it 
might  ensnare  Mr.  Livingston.  3.  that  it  would  commit  the  pres 
ent,  who  ought  to  be  open  to  discussion  when  9  States  should  be 
on  the  floor.  The  motion  of  Mr.  Peters  being  withdrawn,  that  of 
Mr.  Hamilton  was  agreed  to. 


THURSDAY    JUNE    5, 
See  Journal.1 


FRIDAY    JUNE    6. 

The  Report  as  to  the  territorial  Cession  of  Virga  after  some 
uninteresting  debate  was  adjourned.2 

"  Resolved,  That  if  any  captain  or  commander  of  any  packet,  ship  of  war 
or  armed  vessel  in  the  service  of  the  United  States,  shall  load,  or  suffer  to  be 
laden  on  board  the  vessel  of  which  he  has  command,  any  goods  and  merchandise, 
without  express  order  or  permission  of  Congress  or  their  agent  of  marine,  he 
shall  forfeit  his  commission  for  such  offence." — Journals  of  Congress,  iv.,  227. 

2  Madison  was  in  the  meantime  becoming  highly  impatient  to  know  how  the 
plan  for  raising  revenue  was  being  received  in  Virginia.  He  wrote  to  Edmund 
Randolph,  May  27  : 

"  A  letter  rec4  yesterday  from  Mr  F.  Webb,  inclosing  bills  in  my  favor  for 
^"200  Virg*  currency  informed  me  of  the  successful  effort  of  your  friendship  for 
my  relief.  M*  Ambler  informed  me  that  your  attempt  was  for  ^"100  more,  but 
was  abridged  on  a  doubt  as  to  the  balance  due  to  me.  My  answer  to  him  by 
this  conveyance  will  shew  that  you  would  have  been  sufficiently  under  the 
mark. 

"  The  next  post  I  hope  will  bring  me  your  remarks  on  the  Budget  of  Con 
gress,  with  the  pulse  of  the  Assembly  with  regard  to  it.  The  example  of  Virga 
will  have  great  &  perhaps  decisive  influence  on  the  event  of  it.  In  Rhode 
Island  they  are  attacking  it  in  the  Newspapers  before  it  has  appeared.  But 
that  State  is  swayed  by  a  party  which  has  raised  &  connected  its  importance 
with  an  opposition  to  every  Cont1  measure.  The  bulk  of  the  people  are  taken 
in  by  a  belief  that,  if  no  general  impost  on  Trade  be  levied,  their  State  will  be 
able  to  tax  the  neighboring  States  at  pleasure.  Should  all  the  other  States  unite 


474  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1783 

MONDAY    JUNE    9TH. 

Not  States  enough  assembled  to  form  a  Congress.  Mr.  Clarke 
signified  to  those  present,  that  the  Delegates  of  N.  Jersey  being 
instructed  on  the  subject  of  the  Back  lands  he  should  communi 
cate  the  Report  thereon  to  his  Constituents. 


TUESDAY    JUNE    IO. 

The  Report  on  the  Cession  of  Virga  was  taken  up.  Mr.  Elseworth 
urged  the  expediency  of  deciding  immediately  on  the  Cession. 
Mr.  Hamilton  joined  him,  asserting  at  the  same  time  the  right  of 
the  U.  States.  He  moved  an  amendment  in  favor  of  private 
claims.  Mr.  Clarke  was  strenuous  for  the  Right  of  the  U.  S.,  and 
ags.1  waiting  longer,  (this  had  reference  to  the  absence  of  Maryland 
which  had  always  taken  a  deep  interest  in  the  question.)  Mr. 
Ghorham  supported  the  policy  of  acceding  to  the  Report.  Mr. 
Fitzsimmons  recommended  a  postponement  of  the  question,  ob 
serving  that  he  had  sent  a  copy  of  the  Report  to  the  Maryland 
Delegates.  The  President  was  for  a  postponement  till  the  sense 
of  N.  Jersey  be  known.  The  Delaware  Delegates  expecting  in 
structions  were  for  postponing  till  Monday  next.  It  was  agreed 
at  length  that  a  final  vote  should  not  be  taken  till  that  day.  Mr. 

heartily  in  the  plan,  I  do  not  think  any  single  State  will  take  upon  itself  the 
odium  &  the  consequences  of  persevering  in  a  veto  upon  it. 

"  I  wish  much  to  know  how  far  your  hope  was  well  founded  of  an  introduc 
tion  of  Mr.  Jefferson  into  the  Legislature.  The  hopes  of  some  I  find  extend  to 
his  Mission  to  Congress.  The  latter  would  be  exceedingly  fortunate  &,  if  his 
objections  are  not  insuperable  ought  &  I  trust  will  be  urged  upon  him  by 
his  friends.  I  have  been  also  indulging  a  hope  that  your  return  for  such  periods 
as  would  be  most  interesting,  &  would  least  interfere  with  the  exercise  of  your 
profession,  might  be  reconciled  to  your  views.  Unless  temperate  &  experienced 
members  come  in  for  the  ensuing  year,  I  foresee  that  the  exclusions  reqd  by  the 
Confederation  will  make  way  for  a  change  in  the  federal  Councils  not  favorable 
to  those  catholic  arrangements  on  which  the  harmony  &  stability  of  the  Union 
must  greatly  depend. 

"  We  have  reed,  no  accession  of  intelligence  either  as  to  the  progress  of  the 
definitive  Treaty,  of  the  bill  in  the  British  Parl'.  for  commerce  with  the  U.  S. 
or  of  the  negociations  among  the  hungry  suitors  for  the  loaves  &  fishes  of  the 
Administration." 


1783]  JAMES  MADISON.  475 

M.  yielding  to  the  sense  of  the  House,  but  warning  that  the 
opportunity  might  be  lost  by  the  rising  of  the  Legislature  of 
Virg? . 

Mr.  Hamilton  &  Mr.  Peters  with  permission,  moved  for  a  re 
commitment  of  the  Report,  in  order  to  provide  for  Crown  titles 
within  the  territory  reserved  to  the  State.  Mr.  Madison  objected 
to  the  motion,  since  an  amendment  might  be  prepared  during  the 
week  &  proposed  on  Monday  next.  This  was  acquiesced  in.  It 
was  agreed  that  the  President  might  informally  notify  private 
companies  &  others  as  well  as  the  Maryland  Delegates  of  the 
time  at  which  the  Report  would  be  taken  into  consideration. 

The  order  of  the  day  for  appointing  a  Secretary  of  Foreign 
Affairs  was  called  for,  &  none  having  been  put  in  nomination,  the 
order  was  postponed.  Mr.  Bland  then  nominated  Mr.  Arthur 
Lee.  Mr.  Ghorham  nominated  Mr.  Jefferson,  but  being  told  he 
would  not  accept,  then  named  Mr.  Tilghman.  Mr.  Higginson 
then  nominated  Mr.  Jonathan  Trumbull.  Mr.  Montgomery 
nominated  Mr.  George  Clymer.  It  was  understood  that  Gen1 
Schuyler  remained  in  nomination.1 

I  "  Mr.  Livingston  has  taken  his  final  leave  of  the  Department  of  Foreign 
Affairs.     He  would  have  remained,  if  such  an  augmentation  of  his  salary  had 
been  made  as  would  have  secured  him  against  future  expense.     But  besides  the 
disinclination  of  several  members  to  augment  salaries,  there  was  no  prospect  of 
a  competent  number  of  States  for  an  appropriation  of  money  until  he  must 
have  lost  the  option  of  Chancellorship  of  New  York.     No  successor  has  been 
yet  nominated,  although  the  day  fora  choice  has  passed.     I  am  utterly  at  a  loss 
to  guess  on  whom  the  choice  will  ultimately  fall.      Arthur  Lee  will  be  started, 
if  the  defect  of  a  respectable  competitor  should  be  likely  to  force  votes  upon 
him. 

II  The  general  arrangement  of  the  foreign  system  has  been  suspended  by  the 
thinness  of  Congress,  in  part,  and  partly  by  the  desire  of  further  information 
from  Europe.     I  fear  much  the  delay  will  be  exceedingly  protracted.     Nothing 
but  final  resignations  of  the  Minister  abroad,  and  the  arrival  of  Foreign  Min 
isters  here,  will  effectually  stimulate  Congress  into  activity  and  decision  on  the 
subject.     How  far,  and  at  what  time,  the  first  cause  will  operate  is  precarious. 
The  second  seems  less  so." — Madison  to  Jefferson,  June  10,  1783,  Madison 
Papers  (1840). 

On  the  same  day  he  wrote  to  Edmund  Randolph — 

"  We  have  rec"?  the  instruction  relative  to  comercial  Treaties.  The  principle 
on  which  it  is  founded  corresponds  precisely  with  my  idea.  But  I  know  not 
how  far  the  giving  an  opportunity  to  the  States  of  exercising  their  judgments 


476  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1783 

WEDNESDAY  JUNE    II.1 
See  Journals,  secret  and  public. 

THURSDAY  JUNE   12. 

The  Instruction  in  the  Secret  Journal  touching  the  principles 
&c  of  the  Neutral  Confederacy,  passed  unanimously. 

on  proposed  Treaties  will  correspond  in  all  cases  with  the  doctrine  of  the 
Confederation  which  provides  for  secrecy  in  some  such  cases.  The  deviation 
however  if  there  be  any  is  trivial,  and  not  being  an  intended  one  can  have  no 
ill  consequences.  No  progress  has  been  made  towards  a  Treaty  with  G.  B. 
owing  partly  to  a  desire  of  hearing  further  from  Europe  &  partly  to  the  paucity 
of  States  represented  in  Cong5  .  It  would  seem  that  the  plan  of  regulating  the 
Trade  with  America  by  a  Parliamentary  Act  has  been  exchanged  by  the  present 
Ministry  for  an  intended  Treaty  for  that  purpose.  Mr.  Laurens  was  asked  by 
Mr.  Fox  whether  the  American  Ministers  had  powers  for  a  commercial  Treaty. 
His  answer  was  that  he  believed  so  :  that  a  revocation  of  Mr.  Adams's  powers 
had  appeared  some  time  ago  in  print,  but  he  considered  the  publication  as 
spurious.  From  this  it  wd  seem  that  this  Act  of  Cong  •  had  never  been 
communicated  by  the  latter  to  his  colleagues.  He  lately  complained  of  the 
revocation  in  a  very  singular  letter  to  Congr.  I  consider  it  as  a  very  fortunate 
circumstance  that  this  business  is  still  within  our  controul,  especially  as  the 
policy  of  authorizing  conditional  Treaties  only  in  Europe  is  so  fully  espoused 
by  Virginia.  . 

"  The  offers  of  N.  Y.  &  Maryld  of  a  seat  for  Cong3  are  postponed  till  Oc1: 
next  in  order  to  give  time  for  other  offers  &  for  knowing  the  sense  of  the  States 
on  the  subject.  Copies  of  those  Acts  are  to  be  sent  to  the  Executives  of  each 
State.  .  .  . 

"  Congress  have  resumed  at  length  the  Cession  of  Virga-  the  old  obnoxious 
report  was  committed,  and  a  new  report  has  been  made  which  I  think  a  fit  basis 
for  a  compromise.  A  copy  of  it  is  inclosed  for  the  Govr- .  I  have  also  transcribed 
it  in  my  letter  to  Mr.  Jones.  As  it  tacitly  excludes  the  pretensions  of  the 
companies,  I  fear  obstacles  may  arise  in  Cong?  from  that  quarter.  Clarke  from 
N.  Jersey  informed  Cong5-  that  the  Delegates  from  that  State  being  fettered 
by  instructions,  must  communicate  the  plan  to  their  constituents.  If  no  other 
causes  of  delay  should  arise  the  thinness  of  Congs  at  present  will  prove  a  mate 
rial  one.  I  am  at  some  loss  for  ye  policy  of  the  companies  in  opposing  a 
compromise  with  Virga-  They  can  never  hope  for  a  specific  restitution  of  their 
claims,  they  can  never  even  hope  for  a  cession  of  the  country  between  the 
Alleghany  &  the  Ohio  by  Virg*,  as  little  can  they  hope  for  an  extension  of  a 

1  The  Secretary  of  War  was  authorized  to  furlough  certain  Pennsylvania, 
Delaware,  Maryland  and  Virginia  troops. 


1783]  JAMES  MADISON. 


477 


The  Resolution  as  reported  by  the  Committee,  being  in  a  posi 
tive  style,  and  eight  States  only  being  present,  the  question  oc 
curred  whether  nine  States  were  not  necessary.  To  avoid  the 
difficulty  a  negative  form  was  given  to  the  Resolution,  by  which 
the  preamble  became  somewhat  unsuitable.  It  was  suffered  to 
pass  however  rather  than  risk  the  experiment  of  further  alteration. 

FRIDAY  JUNE   13. 

The  mutinous  memorial  from  the  Sergeants  was  recd  &  read. 
It  excited  much  indignation  &  was  sent  to  the  Secretary  at  War. 

MONDAY     JUNE     1 6. 
No  Congress. 

TUESDAY    JUNE    17. 

The  day  was  employed  chiefly  in  considering  the  Report  on  the 
Journal  relative  to  the  Department  of  Finance.1  Some  thought 
it  ought  to  lie  on  the  files  ;  some  that  it  ought  to  receive  a  vote  of 
approbation,  and  that  the  Superintendent,  should,  for  the  period 
examined,  be  acquitted  of  further  responsibility.  Mr.  Gorham 
particularly  was  of  that  opinion.  Finally  the  Report  was  entered 
on  the  Journal  without  any  Act  of  Congress  thereon,  by  a  unani 
mous  concurrence. 

jurisdiction  of  Cong5  over  it  by  force.  I  should  suppose  therefore  that  it  wd 
be  their  truest  interest  to  promote  a  general  cession  of  the  vacant  Country  to 
Congress  and  in  case  the  titles  of  which  they  have  been  stripped  sd  be  deemed 
reasonable,  and  Cong5  sd  be  disposed  to  make  any  equitable  compensation, 
Virg?  wd  be  no  more  interested  in  opposing  it  than  other  States." —  Mad.  MSS. 
1  The  committee  commended  the  conduct  of  the  department  and  found  all 
public  monies  entrusted  to  continental  officers  duly  accounted  for,  but  that  the 
States  had  not  accounted  for  the  "specifics  by  them  respectively  supplied  for 
the  use  of  the  continent,"  and  that  a  number  of  people  who  had  been  entrusted 
with  public  money  neglected  or  refused  to  settle  their  accounts  and  could  not  be 
compelled  to  do  so,  because  of  the  want  of  necessary  laws  in  the  States.  They 
found  that  the  whole  sum  brought  into  the  public  treasury  from  May  14,  1781, 
to  January  i,  1783,  amounted  to  $2,726,304,  and  the  whole  expenditure 
$3,131,046,  the  expenditures  exceeding  the  receipts  in  1782  by  $404,713, 
"  which  was  supplied  by  a  circulation  in  the  notes  of  the  financier."  They 
were  ordered  to  consider  what  measures  might  be  necessary  to  compel  accounts 
being  rendered  by  delinquent  persons. — Journals  of  Congress,  iv.,  228-241. 


478  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1783 

WEDNESDAY    JUNE     1 8. 
Nothing  done.1 

1  "  The  definitive  Treaty  is  not  yet  on  this  side  the  waU  ,  nor  do  we  yet  hear 
what  stage  it  is  in  on  the  other  side.  Mr.  Dana  informs  us  in  a  letter  of  the  17 
of  Feby  that,  in  consequence  of  proper  encouragement  he  had  finally  announced 
himself  at  the  Court  of  St.  Petersb? ,  but  does  not  gratify  us  with  a  single  cir 
cumstance  that  ensued.  The  Gazette  of  this  morning  inclosed  contains  the 
latest  intelligence  from  the  British  Parliam1  which  I  have  seen. 

"  The  measure  of  furloughing  the  troops  enlisted  for  the  war  has  been  carried 
into  effect  with  the  main  army,  and  will  save  a  great  expense  to  the  public. 
The  prospect  which  it  presented  to  the  officers  who  were  to  retire  from  their 
subsistence  without  receiv^  the  means  of  subsistence  elsewhere  produced  a  very 
pathetic  representation  to  the  Commander  in  chief.  His  answer  by  rectifying 
some  errors  on  which  it  dwelt,  and  explicitly  giving  it  as  his  opinion  that  Con 
gress  had  now  done  every  thing  wch  could  be  expected  from  them  towards  ful 
filling  the  engagements  of  their  Country,  had  the  effect  to  which  it  was  entitled. 
The  troops  in  the  barracks  at  this  place,  emboldened  by  the  arrival  of  a  fur- 
loughed  Reg1  returning  to  Maryland,  sent  in  a  very  mutinous  remonstrance  to 
Congress,  signed  by  the  non-commissioned  officers  in  behalf  of  the  whole.  It 
painted  the  hardships  which  they  had  suffered  in  the  defence  of  their  Country 
&  the  duty  of  their  Country  to  reward  them,  demanding  a  satisfactory  answer 
the  afternoon  on  which  it  was  sent  in,  with  a  great  threat  of  otherwise  taking 
such  measures  as  would  right  themselves.  The  prudent  &  soothing  measures 
taken  by  the  SecY  of  War  &  Gen1  St.  Clair  have  I  believe  obviated  the  embar 
rassment. 

"  Another  embarrassment,  and  that  not  a  small  one  will  soon  be  laid  before 
them  by  a  Committee.  Gen1  Washington,  the  Sec^  of  War  and  all  the  profes 
sional  men  who  have  been  consulted,  report  that  at  least  3  or  4  Reg1.3  will  be 
essential  as  a  peace  establishm1  for  the  U.  States,  &  that  this  establishm1  ought 
to  be  a  Continental  one.  West  point,  the  frontier  posts  to  the  Westward,  and  a 
few  Garrisons  on  the  sea-shore,  are  conceived  by  them  to  be  indispensable.  Some 
naval  force  is  deemed  at  least  equally  so,  with  a  few  docks  &  protections  for 
them.  On  looking  into  the  Articles  of  Confederation,  the  military  power  of 
Congress,  in  time  of  peace,  appears  to  be  at  least  subject  to  be  called  in  ques 
tion.  If  Congress  put  a  construction  on  them  favorable  to  their  own  power,  or 
even  if  they  ask  the  States  to  sanction  the  exercise  of  the  power,  the  present 
paroxysm  of  jealousy  may  not  only  disappoint  them,  but  may  exert  itself  with 
more  fatal  effect  on  the  Revenue  propositions.  On  the  other  side  to  renounce 
such  a  construction,  and  refer  the  establishment  to  the  separate  &  internal  pro 
vision  of  the  States,  will  not  only  render  the  plan  of  defence  either  defective  in 
a  general  view  or  oppressive  to  particular  States,  but  may  hereafter  when  the 
tide  of  prejudice  may  be  flowing  in  a  contrary  direction,  expose  them  to  the  re 
proach  of  unnecessarily  throwing  away  a  power  necessary  for  the  good  of  the 
Union,  and  leaving  the  whole  at  the  mercy  of  a  single  State.  The  only  expedient 


1783]  JAMES  MADISON.  479 

THURSDAY    JUNE    19. 

A  motion  '  was  made  by  Mr.  Williamson  seconded  by  Mr. 
Bland,  to  recommend  to  the  States  to  make  it  a  part  of  the  Con 
federation,  that  whenever  a  fourteenth  State  should  be  added  to 
the  Union,  ten  votes  be  required  in  cases  now  requiring  nine.  It 
was  committed  to  Mr.  Williamson,  Mr.  Hamilton  &  Mr.  Madison. 
The  motion  had  reference  to  the  foreseen  creation  of  the  western 
part  of  N.  Carolina  into  a  separate  State. 

for  this  dilemma  seems  to  be  delay  ;  but  even  that  is  pregnant  with  difficul 
ties  equally  great ;  since  on  the  arrival  of  the  definitive  Treaty,  Cong3  must  in 
pursuance  of  such  a  neutral  plan  suffer  the  whole  military  establish™'  to  be  dis 
solved,  every  Garrisoned-post  to  be  evacuated,  and  every  strong  hold  to  be  dis 
mantled.  The  remaining  ships  of  war  too  must  be  sold,  and  no  preparatory 
steps  taken  for  future  emergencies  on  that  side. 

"  I  am  exceedingly  pleased  to  find  Mr.  Jefferson's  name  at  the  head  of  the 
new  Delegation.  I  hope  it  has  been  placed  there  with  his  knowledge  and 
acquiescence. 

"  The  order  of  the  day  for  electing  a  Sec^  of  F.  Affairs  was  called  for  on 
Tuesday  last,  but  no  nominations  having  been  then  made  the  business  was  put 
off  till  the  present  day.  The  nominations  since  made  are,  Mr.  A.  Lee  by  Mr. 
Bland  ;  Mr.  Jonathan  Trumbull,  Jur,  by  Mr.  Higginson  ;  Col :  Tilghman  by  Mr. 
Ghorham,  Mr.  George  Clymer  by  Mr.  Montgomery.  Gen1.  Schuyler  has  re 
mained  on  the  list  since  the  fall,  but  was  withdrawn  by  the  Delegates  of  N. 
Jersey  at  the  instance  of  Mr.  Hamilton.  Mr.  Jefferson  was  nominated  by  Mr. 
Ghorham  ;  but  withdrawn  also  on  intimation  that  he  would  not  undertake  the 
service." — Madison  to  Edmund  Randolph,  June  17,  1783. — Mad.  MSS. 

1  Motion  of  Mr.  Williamson  2de?  by  Mr.  Bland  June  19,  1783,  comited  to  Mr. 
Williamson,  Mr.  Hamilton  &  Mr.  Madison. 

Whereas  the  safety  and  peace  of  the  U.  S.  are  greatly  interested  in  the  N?  of 
States  that  may  be  req?  to  vote  on  Questions  of  a  particular  class  :  and  whereas 
it  is  provided  by  the  g'l?  article  of  the  Confederation  that  the  U  S  in  C  as?  shall 
never  engage  in  a  war  nor  grant  letters  of  marque  &  reprisal  in  time  of  peace, 
nor  enter  into  any  Treaties  or  Alliances  nor  coin  money,  nor  regulate  the  value 
thereof,  nor  ascertain  the  sums  &  expences  necessary  for  the  defence  &  welfare 
of  the  U.  S.  or  any  of  them,  nor  emit  bills  nor  borrow  money  on  the  Credit  of 
the  U.  S.  nor  appropriate  money  nor  agree  upon  the  N?  of  Vessels  of  War  to 
be  built  or  purchased  or  the  n?  of  land  or  Sea  forces  to  be  raised,  nor  app1.  a 
Comder  in  chief  of  the  army  or  Navy,  unless  nine  States  assent  to  the  same.  It 
is  also  provided  by  the  eleventh  Art :  That  no  Colony  except  Canada  shall  be 
admitted  into  the  Union  unless  such  admission  be  agreed  to  by  nine  States,  but 
no  provision  is  made  for  the  n?  of  States  that  may  be  req<?  to  agree  in  deter 
mining  such  questions  when  the  pres*.  n?  of  States  shall  have  been  increased  : 


480  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1783 

Information  was  rec?  by  Congress,  from  the  Executive  Council 
of  Pennsylvania,  that  80  Soldiers,  who  would  probably  be  fol 
lowed  by  the  discharged  soldiers  of  Armand's  Legion  were  on 
the  way  from  Lancaster  to  Philadelph*  in  spite  of  the  expostula 
tions  of  their  officers,  declaring  that  they  would  proceed  to  the 
seat  of  Congress  and  demand  justice,  and  intimating  designs 
ag5'  the  Bank.  This  information  was  committed  to  Mr.  Hamil 
ton,  Mr.  Peters,  and  Mr.  Ellsworth,  for  the  purpose  of  conferring 
with  the  Executive  of  Pennsylvania  and  taking  such  measures  as 
they  should  find  necessary.  The  Committee  after  so  conferring 
informed  Congress,  that  it  was  the  opinion  of  the  Executive  that 
the  Militia  of  Philadelpa  would  probably  not  be  willing  to  take 
arms  before  their  resentments  should  be  provoked  by  some  actual 
outrage  ;  that  it  would  hazard  the  authority  of  Gov'  to  make  the 
attempt,  &  that  it  would  be  necessary  to  let  the  soldiers  come 
into  the  city,  if  the  officers  who  had  gone  out  to  meet  them  could 
not  stop  them. 

At  this  information  Mr.  Izard  Mr.  Mercer  &  others  being 
much  displeased,  signified  that  if  the  City  would  not  support 
Congress,  it  was  high  time  to  remove  to  some  other  place.  Mr. 
Wilson  remarked  that  no  part  of  the  U.  States  was  better  dis 
posed  towards  Congr5  than  Pennsylvania,  where  the  prevailing 
sentiment  was,  that  Congress  had  done  every  thing  that  depended 
on  them.  After  some  conversation,  and  directing  Gen1  St.  Clair, 
who  \ad  gone  out  of  town,  to  be  sent  for,  and  it  appearing  that 
nothing  further  could  be  done  at  present,  Congress  adjourned.  The 
Secy  at  War  had  set  out  for  Virginia  yesterday.  It  was  proposed 
to  send  for  him,  but  declined  as  he  had  probably  gone  too  great  a 
distance,  and  Gen1  St.  Clair,  it  was  supposed,  would  answer. 

And  Whereas  the  determination  of  these  great  questions  by  9  States  alone  when 
the  origl  n?  may  be  considerably  increased  w?  be  a  sufficient  departure  from 
the  Spirit  ofthe  Confederation  &  might  prove  dangerous  to  the  Union,  There 
fore  Res'?  that  whenever  a  14  State  s<?  be  admit1?  into  y?  pres*  Union,  the  vote 
&  agre1.  of  10  S1.5  shall  become  necessY  for  determg  all  those  quest?  in  y.  Conf? 
of  U.  S.  w":h  are  now  deternV?  by  no  less  than  9. 

Res'?  that  y?  ass*  of  3  add1.  States  shall  be  necessY  in  determg  those  ques 
tions  for  every  4  add1.  Sts  Y*  may  be  adm1?  into  the  Union. 

Res?  that  y?  sev!  Sts  be  advised  to  authorise  their  respective  Delag?  to  sub 
scribe  &  ratify  the  above  Resolves  as  part  of  the  instrum1  of  Union.  [Note  in  MS.] 


1783]  JAMES  MADISON.  481 


FRIDAY    JUNE    2O. 

The  Soldiers  from  Lancaster  came  into  the  City  under  the 
guidance  of  sergeants.  They  professed  to  have  no  other  object 
than  to  obtain  a  settlement  of  Accounts,  which  they  supposed 
they  had  a  better  chance  for  at  Philadelphia  than  at  Lancaster. 
(See  the  Report  of  the  Committee  on  this  subject.) 

The  Report  of  the  Committee  (see  the  Journal)  on  the  terri 
torial  Cession  of  Virga  being  taken  up,  &  the  amendment  on  the 
Journal  proposed  by  Mr.  McHenry  &  Mr.  Clarke,  being  lost,1  Mr. 
Bedford  proposed  that  the  second  condition  of  the  Cession  be  so 
altered  as  to  read,  "  that  in  order  to  comply  with  the  said  Con 
dition,  so  far  as  the  same  is  comprised  within  the  Resolution  of 
Oc*  the  10,  1780,  on  that  subject,  Commissioners  as  proposed  by 
the  Committee,  be  appointed  &c  and  that  instead  of  "  for  the 
purposes  mentioned  in  the  said  Condition,"  be  substituted  "  agreea 
bly  to  that  Resolution."  In  support  of  this  alteration,  it  was 
urged  by  Mr.  McHenry,  Mr.  Bedford,  &  Mr.  Clarke  that  the 
terms  used  by  Virginia  were  too  comprehensive  &  indefinite.  In 
favor  of  the  Report  of  the  Committee,  it  was  contended  by  Mr. 
Ellsworth  that  the  alteration  was  unreasonable  inasmuch  as  Civil 
expenses  were  on  the  same  footing  of  Equity  as  Military  and 
that  a  compromise  was  the  object  of  the  Committee.  Sundry 
members  were  of  opinion  that  Civil  expences  were  comprised  in 
the  Resolution  of  October  the  10.  1780.  Mr.  Bland  &  Mr.  Mercer 
acceded  to  the  alteration  proposed.  Mr.  Madison  alone  dissented, 
and  therefore  did  not  insist  on  a  call  for  the  votes  of  the  States. 
Mr.  McHenry  moved  but  without  being  seconded  "  that  the  Com 
missioners  instead  of  deciding  finally  should  be  authorized  to 
report  to  Congress  only." 

In  the  course  of  the  debate  Mr.  Clarke  laid  before  Congress 
the  Remonstrance  of  New  Jersey  as  entered  on  the  Journal.2 

1  The  motion  was  "  that  all  reasonable  and  necessary  expenses,  incurred  in 
subduing  the  British  posts  at  the  Kaskaskies  and  St.  Vincents,  and  the  expense 
of  maintaining  garrisons  there,  or  to  the  northwest  of  the  river  Ohio,  since  the 
reduction  of  the  said  posts,  ought  to  be  allowed,  being  agreeable  to  the  afore 
said  act."     New  Jersey,  Pennsylvania  and  Delaware  voted  aye. — Journals  of 
Congress,  iv.,  230. 

2  The  remonstrance  expressed  surprise  at  the  matter  coming  up  for  considera- 


VOL.  i. —  31. 


482  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1783 

As  the  Report  had  been  postponed  at  the  instance  of  the  Presi 
dent  &  other  Delegates  of  N.  Jersey,  in  order  to  obtain  this 
answer  from  their  Constituents,  and  as  the  Remonstrance  was 
dated  on  the  14*  of  June,  and  was  confessed  privately  by  Mr. 
,  to  have  been  in  possession  of  the  Delegates  on  Mon 
day  last,  an  unfairness  was  complained  of.  They  supposed  that 
if  it  had  been  laid  before  Congress  sooner  the  copy  which  would 
have  been  sent  by  the  Virga  Delegates  might  hasten  the  opening 
of  the  Land  Office  of  that  State.  Mr.  Clarke  said  there  were  still 
good  prospects,  and  he  did  not  doubt  that  the  time  would  yet 
come  when  Congress  would  draw  a  line  limiting  the  States  to  the 
westward  &  say  thus  far  shall  ye  go  &  no  further. 

Mr.  Bedford  moved  that  with  respect  to  the  4^  &  5*  Conditions 
of  the  Cessions,  "it  be  declared,  that  Clark  &  his  men,  &  the 
Virginia  Line,  be  allowed  the  same  bounty  beyond  the  Ohio  as 
was  allowed  by  the  U.  S.  to  the  same  Ranks."  This  motion  was 

seconded  by ;  Congress  adjourned  without  debating 

it  ;  there  being  seven  States  only  present  and  the  spirit  of 
compromise  decreasing. 

From  several  circumstances  there  was  reason  to  believe  that  R. 
Island,  N.  Jersey,  Pennsylvania  &  Delaware,  if  not  Maryland  also 
retained  latent  views  of  confining  Virginia  to  the  Alleghany 
Mountains. 

Notice  was  taken  by  Mr.  Madison  of  the  error  in  the  Remon 
strance,  which  recites  "  that  Congress  had  declared  the  Cession 
of  Virginia  to  be  a  partial  one." 


SATURDAY    JUNE    21     1783. 

The  mutinous  soldiers  presented  themselves,  drawn  up  in  the 
street  before  the  State  House,  where  Congress  had  assembled. 

tion  and  called  attention  to  the  previously  expressed  claim  of  New  Jersey  to  its 
full  proportion  of  all  vacant  territory.  "  We  cannot  be  silent,"  it  said,  "  while 
viewing  one  state  aggrandizing  herself  by  the  unjust  detention  of  that  property, 
which  has  been  procured  by  the  common  blood  and  treasure  of  the  whole, 
and  which  on  every  principle  of  reason  and  justice,  is  vested  in  Con 
gress  for  the  use  and  general  benefit  of  the  union  they  represent."  It  was 
urged  that  the  cession  be  not  accepted,  but  that  Congress  press  upon  Virginia 
"  to  make  a  more  liberal  surrender  of  that  territory  of  which  they  claim  so 
boundless  a  proportion." — Journals  of  Congress,  iv.,  231. 


1783]  JAMES  MADISON.  483 

The  executive  Council  of  the  State  sitting  under  the  same  roof, 
was  called  on  for  the  proper  interposition.  President  Dickinson 
came  in,  and  explained  the  difficulty  under  actual  circumstances, 
of  bringing  out  the  militia  of  the  place  for  the  suppression  of  the 
mutiny.  He  thought  that  without  some  outrages  on  persons  or 
property,  the  militia  could  not  be  relied  on.  Gen1  St.  Clair  then 
in  Philad*  was  sent  for,  and  desired  to  use  his  interposition,  in 
order  to  prevail  on  the  troops  to  return  to  the  Barracks.  His 
report  gave  no  encouragement. 

In  this  posture  of  things,  it  was  proposed  by  Mr.  Izard  that 
Cong5  shd  adjourn.  It  was  proposed  by  Mr.  Hamilton,  that  Gen1 
St.  Clair  in  concert  with  the  Executive  Council  of  the  State 
should  take  order  for  terminating  the  mutiny.  Mr.  Reed  moved 
that  the  Gen1  shd  endeavour  to  withdraw  the  troops  by  assuring 
them  of  the  disposition  of  Cong?  to  do  them  justice.  It  was 
finally  agreed  that  Cong?  shd  remain  till  the  usual  hour  of  adjourn 
ment,  but  without  taking  any  step  in  relation  to  the  alledged 
grievances  of  the  Soldiers,  or  any  other  business  whatever.  In 
the  meantime  the  Soldiers  remained  in  their  position,  without 
offering  any  violence,  individuals  only  occasionally  uttering 
offensive  words  and  wantonly  pointed  their  Muskets  to  the 
Widows  of  the  Hall  of  Congress.  No  danger  from  premedi 
tated  violence  was  apprehended,  But  it  was  observed  that  spirit 
uous  drink  from  the  tippling  houses  adjoining  began  to  be 
liberally  served  out  to  the  Soldiers,  and  might  lead  to  hasty 
excesses.  None  were  committed  however,  and  about  3  O'C.,  the 
usual  hour  Cong-  adjourned  ;  the  Soldiers,  tho  in  some  instances 
offering  a  mock  obstruction,  permitting  the  members  to  pass 
thro  their  ranks.  They  soon  afterwards  retired  themselves  to 
the  Barracks. 

In  the  Evening  Congress  re-assembled  and  passed  the  resolu 
tions  on  the  Journal,  authorizing  a  Committee  to  confer  anew  with 
the  Executive  of  the  State  and  in  case  no  satisfactory  grounds 
shd  appear  for  expecting  prompt  and  adequate  exertions  for  sup 
pressing  the  mutiny  &  supporting  the  Public  authority,  authorizing 
the  President,  with  the  advice  of  the  Committee,  to  summon  the 
members  to  meet  at  Trenton  or  Princeton  in  New  Jersey. 

The  conference  with   the  Executive  produced  nothing  but  a 


484  WRITINGS  OF  MADISON.  [1783 

repetition  of  doubts  concerning  the  disposition  of  the  militia  to  act 
unless  some  actual  outrage  were  offered  to  persons  or  property. 
It  was  even  doubted  whether  a  repetition  of  the  insult  to  Congress 
would  be  a  sufficient  provocation. 

During  the  deliberations  of  the  Executive,  and  the  suspense  of 
the  Committee,  Reports  from  the  Barracks  were  in  constant 
vibration.  At  one  moment  the  Mutineers  were  penitent  &  prepar 
ing  submissions  ;  the  next  they  were  meditating  more  violent 
measures.1  Sometimes  the  bank  was  their  object ;  then  the 
seizure  of  the  members  of  Congress  with  whom  they  imagined  an 
indemnity  for  their  offence  might  be  stipulated.  On  Tuesday 
about  2  O'Clock,  the  efforts  of  the  State  authority  being  despaired 
of,  &  the  Reports  from  the  Barracks  being  unfavorable,  the 
Committee  advised  the  President  to  summon  Congress  to  meet  at 
Princeton  which  he  did  verbally  as  to  the  members  present,  leav 
ing  behind  him  a  general  Proclamation  for  the  Press. 

After  the  departure  of  Cong?,  the  Mutineers  submitted,  and 
most  of  them  accepted  furloughs  under  the  Resolution  of  Con 
gress,  on  that  subject.  At  the  time  of  submission  they  betrayed 
their  leaders  the  chief  of  whom  proved  to  be  a  Mr.  Carberry  a 
deranged  officer,  and  a  Mr.  Sullivan  a  Lieutenant  of  Horse  ;  both 
of  whom  made  their  escape.  Some  of  the  most  active  of  the 
sergeants  also  ran  off. 

1  "  Their  grievances,  all  terminate  as  you  may  suppose,  in  the  want  of  their 
pay  which  Cong5  are  unable  to  give  them  ;  and  the  information  we  received 
from  the  States  is  far  from  opening  any  fresh  sources  for  that  purpose.  Indeed 
the  prospect  on  the  side  of  the  latter  compared  with  the  symptoms  beginning  to 
appear  on  the  side  of  the  army  is  to  the  last  degree  afflicting  to  those  who  love 
their  country  and  aim  at  its  prosperity.  If  I  had  leisure  to  use  a  Cypher,  I 
would  dilate  much  upon  the  present  state  of  our  Affairs  ;  which  as  it  is  I  must 
defer  to  another  occasion. 

I  was  prepared  by  Mr.  Jones's  late  letters  for  the  fate  to  which  the  Budge 
Cong5  has  been  consigned,  but  the  circumstances  under  which  it  arrived  h 
gave  peculiar  pungency  to  the  information.  I  wish  that  those  who  ab 
Cong5,  and  baffle  their  measures,  may  as  much  promote  the  public  good  as  they 
profess  to  intend.  I  am  sure  they  will  not  do  it  more  effectually  than  is  in 
tended  by  some  at  least,  of  those  who  promote  the  measure  of  Congress." 
Madison  to  Edmund  Pendleton  June  24,  1783. — Mad.  MSS. 

END   OF  VOL.   I. 


\ 


FT- 


RETURN     CIRCULATION  DEPARTMENT 

TO—  *>      202  Main  Library 

LOAN  PERIOD  1 
HOME  USE 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

ALL  BOOKS  MAY  BE  RECALLED  AFTER  7  DAYS 

1  -month  loans  may  be  renewed  by  calling  642-3405 

6-month  loans  may  be  recharged  by  bringing  books  to  Circulation  Desk 

Renewals  and  recharges  may  be  made  4  days  prior  to  due  date 

DUE  AS  STAMPED  BELOW 


APR  1  0  1986 

RKCIRC  MAR  II198 

> 

JAN  14  1987 

AUTO.  DISC. 

OCT  2  0  WflR 

OCT  06  1992 

AITODISCCIRC  Ut 

-  21  V2 

JUN  16]993 

nt 

AY  uo  ^w 

r\rr  9.t<-  1QQ5 
""JIST 

RE°         WQA 

|/,^i\   * 

^4:  

C|      ,W-  , 

FORM  NO.  DD6,  60m,  3/80          BERKELEY,  CA  94720 


®s 


university  of  California 
Berkeley 


Sl  U; -4  YD A-Oi 


